THE 
POLITICAL WRITINGS 

OF 

O L D - S O U T H, 

No. L 

ON THE BRITISH TREATY, 






X H'E fignature of Old-South may appear a little fmgular to thofe 
who are not acquainted v/ith the proceedings of the town of Bof- 
ton, aflembled at this ancient edifice on the queflion of the treaty. 
At a previous meeting, the treaty was univerfally difapproved, 
and a petition forwarded to the Prefident on the fubjedl. It was 
therein declared to be injurious to the intereft of the country, and 
deftrudive to our commerce. Many weighty objedions were 
made to its ratification, and after the fuUeft invefligation of the 
principles of the report, it was ordered to be fent to the Prefident 
by the Seledmen. 

About three weeks afterwards, a petition was handed about by- 
particular individuals, to be figned by the citizens, urging our Re- 
prefentatives to make the necefTary appropriations for the fulfil- 
ment of the treaty. This meafure was confidered as counteract- 
ing the former declaration of the town in their corporate capacity ; 
and as undue means v/ere ufed to obtain fubfcribers, another meet- 
ing was called to take the fenfe of the citizens on the fubjecft. 
During the debates, the fame objedtions were ftated as at the for- 
mer meeting, and the injurious confequences of this inftrument 
were ftill held forth in oppofition to its ratification, and appropria- 
tions. The pointed reflections then made on the oppofers, are 
frefh in the minds of thofe who attended, and though the vote was 
•arried againit them, yet the confequent difadvantages we expsri- 
B 



lO On the rr'iUsh Treaty. No. I. 

ence, are proofs of the propriety of the objecllons then offered. 
To commemorate this important lera, the fignature of OJd-South is 
now taken. 

As the oppofers of the treaty were at that period the objedls 
of the moll fevere, and ungenerous abufe and cenfure ; and as their 
principles were reprobated with all the venom of calumny and de- 
famation, it is but proper to turn the minds of the citizens, into 
that channel of reflexion, as will lead them to judge, " V/hether the ' 
fenUments of the. oppofers, or thofe of the advocates, <rvere mofl congenial to 
the interejls of the country : Whether the prediccions of the follacy of 
Britilh integrity, in protecting our commerce and refpe<5ling our 
neutrality ; in their profefhons of friendlhip, and their cordiality 
to cur feamen, have not in almoft every inftance been realized : 
And whether we have not proofs as clear as holy Writ to vindicate 
the ailcrtions then made, that the benefits anticipated by the trc^aty 
Avould foon become as dekiUve, as the *' bafelefs fabric of a vifion." 

Let the orators who then pidured In the moft glowing ftraiiis 
the bleiUngs v\'e v/ere to enjoy under the mild operation of this in- 
ftrument, now enumerate the manifold advantages we experience. 
Let them lay their finger cii the document, which gives that am- 
ple indemnification to our merchants, for captured property, which 
they lO pleafmgly dcfcribed. Let them relate t • e Iionorary marks 
of refpedt paid to the American fiag. Let them contrail the late 
•orders of the Eritifh government, with their rhapfody on Biitifh 
amity, and reciprocal attachments. Let them oppofe the whip- 
pings, and inrults to our feamen, with their pleaimg recitals of 
good fellowlhip between Britifli and American tars. Let them 
difplay the ports of Jamaica, Nev.^-Providence, &c. with the ex- 
panded wings of the American eagle, pourtrayed as covering the 
ocean in every quarter of the maritime glebe. Or let them con- 
folidate the blefiings in the modefl demands on the country for the 
paym.ent of mercantile debts, and the execution of the unfortunate 
Robbins.— -Thefe are fubjedts, on which we wifh to be informed, in 
order to judge with accuracy between the friends and oppofexs of 
the treaty. 

The political controverfy in this country has been carried on 
with a^ degree of perfonal inveteracy, unbecoming the character ei- 
ther of gentlemen or citizens. Particularly fmce the adoption of 
the treaty, every indecent term of reproach has been given to thofe 



">« 



j^o. I. On th Br'iihh Treaty: ^ m 

who were in the oppofirioii". Bifofgahi'zefg"," tMtOT si" eiYeiiiies* f6 
their country, jacobins, aie epithets which have been ufed againft 
men, whole charaders in every point of view have itocd at leaft on 
a par with their calumniators, and in mod inftances fuperior. 
But we truft, however, that the time is faft approaching, when po- 
litical merit will be duly appreciated ; as events will foon decide, 
how far the fentiments of individuals have been favorable or unfav- 
orable to the happiiiefs, intereft, and independence"^ of the country. 
Our political fimation cannot long remain a fpeculative queftion \ 
it has amved to ihat crifis, which muft difclof? the actions of men, 
and flamp on their meafures the indelible marks of right or zvrong, 
in characters too legible to be concealed, and too deeply engraved 
to be erafed ; each individual will ftand cenfured or approved, ac- 
cording to the part which he has taken, and judgment will be 
pafTed upon them, not under the influence of party fpirit, but un- 
der that impreilion which arifes from deliberation and refledicn. 
This is the teft to which every honed man is willing to fubmit his 
conduct, and though he may have borne the contumely of his en- 
emies with a filent indignation, yet he muft feel a ronfolaticn, that 
the period muft foon arrive, when adions and principles, inftead of 
calumny and reproach, will be admitted as the evidences of his in- 
■tegrity. Art and intrigue, threats and defamation, will no longer 
be wielded as the menacing weapons to deprive a tradefman of his 
employment ; nor the horrors of a diftrefied family be ufed as argu* 
ments to oblige a citizen to vote and act contrary to. his fentiments. 
Thank God ! this day of political perfecution is near over ; info* 
ience begins to lower his creft, and though here and there w-e fee 
its fhadovvT, with fome traits of its former arrogance, yet its fallow 
countenance befpeaks the feeblenefs of its future operations. With 
great propriety we can exclaim v/ith the Prophet, as it applies tQ 
the circumftances of many, who grew fat and kicked, " How has 
the gold become dim, and how has the moft fine gold change^. 
Their prophets have prophefied falfely^ and their priejls bear rule 
by their means — and my people love to haij& it fof but what will ye 
do in the end thereof .^" 



1^ On the British Treaty, No. II. 



«a> 



No. 11. 

ON THE BRITISH TREATY. 

X HE tranfadions of this town, on the fubjedl of the treaty, 
were fo unprecedented, that a mere relation of them at this diftant 
period, cannot but carry convidion of the impropriety of our 
condu(fl. 

Notwithflanding the legal meafure originally adopted by the 
town, in bearing their teftimony againft the treaty, yet a number 
of perfons formed themfelves into a " felf-created committee," and 
early in the morning patroled the ftreets, and by unjuftifiable means 
obtained a large number of fubfcribers, in favour of immediate ap- 
propriations being made to carry the fame into operation. Inftead 
of calling upon their fellow-citizens in a legal toiun-meefing, they 
took the advantage of the fears and apprehenfions of individuals, 
and thereby increafed their fubfcription-paper, not by the deliberate 
determination of the inhabitants, but by th2it perfonal in^uence, which 
their pre-eminent fituation gave them over the judgment of thofe 
to whom they applied. 

On a queftion fo important, and on which the town had previ- 
oufly adled, it was incumbent on thofe gentlemen of the committee, 
to call another meeting of the inhabitants, that the fubjedl might 
Jbe candidly debated and maturely confidered : — That the town in 
Its corporate capacity might hear the arguments in favour, and in op- 
pofition to the meafure : — That each man might be able to judge 
and adl, according to the weight of reafoning offered on both 
fides : — That free difcuffion, inftead of threats and menaces, fhould 
be the criterion on which the mind fhould decide. This mode of 
condud would have been fair and candid, and no reflections could 
afterwards have been thrown on any one, whatever might have 
been tlie iffue of the bufinefs. It would have fhewn a difpofitlon 
for reconciliation, and given an opportunity for each citizen to 
ftate his obje<5lions. 

It may here be anfwered, that a town-meeting was called, and 
that the fubjed was debated in a legal afTembly of the citizens. — 
Bu5, after the committee had accomplifhed their ohjeB, by obtain- 
ing twelve or thirteen hundred fubfcribers, the public mind had by 



J^o. 11. On the British Treaty, jj 

this meafure been fo i^iv pre-engaged y that It placed the bufmefs be- 
fore the town, In a very difFerent politlon, than if fuch a proce* 
^ure had not taken place. After men had figned to a paper In 
favour of the treaty, it was too great a challenge on their pride, to 
expe(5t that they would renounce In public, what they bad thus done 
in private. This whole tranfa(ftion was, if I may ufe the expref- 
lion, forejialkdy previous to the town-meeting being called ; and 
the advocates for the treaty evidently felt their fecurity In carrying 
their vote, from the peculiar condudl which they affumed on this 
occafion. The debates were carried on, w^ith that hauteur of felf- 
confidence, as fully evinced, that they hww what would be the final 
ifTue of the queflicn. Clamour, and other indecencies, fo far 
drowned the voice of the oppofers of the treaty, that even the 
thunder of a Stentor, would have been as feeble In the tumult, as 
the whifpers of an infant. From thefe circumilances, therefore, the 
town-meeting v/as rendered entirely ufelefs, as it refpet^led an unht-r 
affed in'vejiigatton of the fubjedl on which they had affembled ; and the 
■whole tranfadlon muft, on cool rejleBton, be confidered (as it relates 
tofome) as the efforts of an overbearing party, to counteraft, by 
undue means, the legal meafures of the town at their previous 
meeting. 

It may be obferved by fome, that It is unnecefTary at this dIA 
tance of time, to recount the doings of individuals on this occa- 
sion, as what they then did, cannot wow be remedied. But, when 
■we refled, how far political characters have been eftimated, by 
their opinions on this queftion ; what abufive fcurrility has been 
inceffantly heaped upon thofe, w^ho dared to fpeak their fentiments, 
-—It may not be Improper to mention thefe things, hy <way of remem- 
Irance, in order to fhew, that however party spirit might at 
that period gain fuch an afcendancy, as to injure the reputation of 
individuals, yet, that the event has proved their opponents to be 
in the wrong. The apprehenfions of the inutility of this inftru- 
ment, and the diftruft of its beneficial operation, were the princi- 
pal caufes which originated the oppofition to Its adoption. The 
venerable Samuel Adams declared In his fpeech to the legiflature 
of MalTachufetts, that " It was pregnant with evils ;" and Prefi- 
^ent Washington faid alfo, that " it was pregnant with events." 
The former with a prophetic fplrit, dreaded its confequences, an4 
the latter hefitated as to its falutary effedls. Such were the cha= 



14 ^^ *-^^ B7itlsh Treaty, No. II. 

ra6i:ers, that halted, and paufed over this important inftrument ; 
how ungenerous then has been the abufe which thofe have receiv- 
ed, who expreffed their doubts, when fuch fages were thus 
agitated ? 

The prefent fituation in which we are placed, is a ftrong evi- 
dence, that the beneiits anticipated from the treaty are vain and 
'delufive. The commiffioners on the part of the United States 
have feceded from the claims of the Britifh. This is a proof the 
demands muft have been fo unreafonable that Meffrs. Fitz Sim- 
mons and SiTGREAVEs could not jUiLify themfelves in acceding to 
them. Notwithftanding tliefe gentlemen were warm advocates in 
its favour, yet on an attempt to liquidate the fyftem of fettlement, 
they are obliged to relinquifh the bufmefs. Notwithftanding the 
government have made all their necelTary appropriations, and fub- 
mitted the whole tranfadion to the friends of the treaty , yet when they 
come to ad: on the fubjeft, the impropriety of the claims and the 
extent of the demands, are fo glaringly improper, they are forced 
to fufpend the negociation. If thefe gentlemen are confounded 
(who are fo favorably inclined towards the treaty) what muft we 
think of the nature of the claims ? If they could not tranfaft the 
bufinefs, who among us can expect to do it ? If the Britifh com- 
miilioners will perfilT: in oppofition to thefe gentlemen, to whom 
will they condefcend to comply ? The obje<5lions by thefe gentle- 
men muft be of the greateft magnitude, otherwife they luouldnot ven^ 
ture to derange and fufpend fo important a bufmefs. The treaty is 
now placed on their fhoulders, as it has gone through every de- 
partment of government, and it reils r/ith them to bring it to a 
clofe. They mull have ftrong reafons why they have feceded ; 
the property of the merchants is fufpended on their decifion ; mil- 
lions now lay in the Britifh courts, waiting the fulfilment of our 
treaty. Amidft fach anxious expe<5iatlons, our ccmmilTioners muft 
be led by arguments the moft cogent, to break off from this nego- 
ciaticn. We muft conclude, when fuch men hefitate, that " the 
treaty is pregnant with evils," and that they dread its confequences. 
No imall confideration could fuffer them to delay a moment ; but 
to fecede and difperfe, carries in it an appearance of the moft 
alarming nature ; or atleaft, in the words of General Washing- 
ton, " it is pregnant with events." , ' 
V/hat then, fellow-citizens, ihall we fay to thefe things ? After 



No. III. On the I) angers of passi'oe Ohedtence, i^ 

every exertion made by its advocates — after Mr. Pickering was 
ib ftrenuous for Its ratification, as to declare that all was " throw'n 
into the wind," if it was not effected — after the violent meafures pcir- 
fued to intimidate all who were in the oppofition-— after the " felf- 
created committee'' in Boflon, had ranfacked, early in the mornings 
every part of the town, and dillurbed the pious citizens in their 
family devotions — after the abufe of MelTrs. Gallatin, Living- 
ston and others, for prefuming to offer a reafon againft it— after 
all the huzzas and exulta;tion on fucceeding in this bufinefs, — is it 
not ftrange that when it was left to MefTrs. Fitz summons and Sit- 
greaves, (two of its moft ftrenuous advocates) the whole fhould 
be " thrown into the wind," by them, and that they are the per- 
fons to difcover its fallacy and deception ? 

This is a moft curious circumftance. What muft the " felf- 
created committee" in Bofton think of this ? If they were fo irritat- 
ed at a fev/ obfervations againft the treaty, what muft be their 
opinion of MefTrs. Sitgreaves and Fitzsimmons ? Thefe gentle- 
men have ftruck radically at the buftnefs ; they have forgot your 
zeal In making the appropriations, and if one of tlie oppofers had 
told you in town-meeting, that the treaty would be fufpended in its 
operation, fy Its friends ^ you would have redoubled your clamours 
in hifling him from the fancflum fanclcrum of the Old South, 

Not to purfue, for the prefent, this fubjevfl any further, we can- 
not but fiatter ourfelves, that the charaders of men will be duly 
appreciated, and that Congrefs in their next fefTion will call on our 
commiflioners/or the reafons of their feceding. It Is a queftlon too 
interefting' in its nature to be confined within the breafts of Mefli-s. 
Fitzsimmons and Sitgreaves. If government have done their 
duty, and the " felf-created comipittee" in Bofton have done their 
duty, why is the bufmefs of the treaty fufpended ? The wifdom of 
the executive, aided by the refolution of the legiflature, we truft, 
will reconcile thefe feeming contradictions. 

No. III. 

ON THE DANGERS OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE. 

X HE pride of every freeman muft recoil at the difgraceful ways 
and means, taken by tbofe who have the effrontery to claim the ex^ 



t6 On the Dangers of passive Ooedtence. No. II tf 

elulive title of federalifts, to obtain profelytcs to their meafures ; 
dnd the infamous arts pradlifed by the tools of this party, cannot 
but excite the deteftation of every man, who duly elllmates the 
charafter and dignity of an independent citizen. 

Paffive obedience, not only in principle, but in praflice, Is the 
teft by which the patronage of thefe perfons is to be gained ; and 
without the rnoft hurhiliating fublerviency tb all their plans, no 
man is fecure againft the utmoft extent of their perfecution and de- 
tradion. Knowing the bafeiiefs of their views, they are afiaid to 
truft to the deliberate and unbiaffed judginent cf the public, but 
depending altogether on deception, they take every method to 
check an inveftigation of their conduct, and by terror and threats 
accomplifh thofe purpofes, which otlierwife would be ftifled in 
embryo. 

This Is a pl^turefque defcripLion of a party, \tho have beeii af- 
iiduous in controling the public mind. They have, for a num- 
ber of years paft, been adlive in bearing down every man, who 
dared to ad or even think contrary to their opinion. Every vile 
calumny has been propagated again ft characters, whofe indepen- 
dence of mind would not fuffer themfelves to become the dupes of 
a junto, whofe only claim to be obeyed, confifted in the perempto- 
ry irifolence of their demands, and the audacious arrogance with 
which they profecuted their meafures. 

In a government like our own, It Is but fair and reafonable 
that every citizen fhould be entitled to acl and think independent 
of the influence of a ^^ felf-created^^ body of dilators. But unfor- 
tunately the times have produced a fet of men, who prefume to 
take a rank above the common level of the people, and becaufe 
they have acquired, by fpeculation, ufury, and other accidental cir- 
eum/lances, a larger proportion of property than many of their 
neighbours, they think they have a right to infringe on the privi- 
leges of thofe, whom they ignominioufly defignate as the loiver clajs 
of the community. 

This ariftocratical junto cannot however obtain that rever- 
ence of character which they are aiming to acquire. The good 
fenfe of the citizens will ever appreciate their worth, as the means 
by which fome of them have rifen to their prefent elevation, are in 
fo many inftances derogatory to their reputatioiij that even the 



No. III. On the Danger^ of passive Obedience, t^ 

brilliancy of their outfide deportment, cannot conceal the black- 
nefs of their inward depravity. 

For the moft part, the meafures of this pretended federal corps 
are matured within a " fmall party," emphatically ftiled the 
Essex Junto ; and after they have paffed the ordeal of thefe choice 
fpiritSi are brought forward with as much folemnity as a young 
child to be chriftened. The plans thus adjuiled by this primary 
affembly, are laid before another order, (promifeuoufly aifembled 
in a well noted place of refort) for their lenedidion, and from thence 
are tranfmitted through various channels, confifting of runners, 
dependants, fycophants, and hirelings, till at length the whole fu- 
perftrudture rifes into view, with as much facility as the machinery 
of an Harlequin exhibition. The diferent fchemes adopted to ef- 
fed their purpofes are worthy notice : one man is threatened, and 
another coaxed — one is promifed a 'vajl employment in his bufmefs, 
v/hile another is told that he will be deprived of the little he has al- 
ready got — -fome are placed on the vlfionary lift of preferment, and 
the high founding titles of Colonel, Captain, Lieutenant, and En- 
fign, are fufEciently enchanting to fecure a great number on this 
alluring profpe(fl:. Every wheel is fet in motion, and even the infig- 
nificant, childifii bauble of a cockade^ -ns exhibited as a token of fer- 
vile fubmiflion to all the dogmatical mandates, and grofs impofi- 
tions, which this fupercilious junto are pleafed to enjoin. No de- 
pendance however is to be placed on tlieir a/Turances ; for, after they 
have anfwered their purpofes, they leave their votaries a prey to 
chagrin and difappointmenta Neither are they more faithful to 
each other, for if any accident, aiifmg either from an unfortunate 
fpeculation or mercantile tranfadtion, creates the leaft fufpicion, 
they purfue each other with the moft unrelenting feverity. 

Thus, during the controverfy on the treaty, every artful 
means was praftifed to intimidate the honeft tradefmen. Some of 
this party had the impudence to threaten an induftrious citizen 
with a deprivation of his whole bufmefs. Every little contemptible 
art was pradlifed to obtain fignatures to many of their fubfcrip- 
tion papers. Boys in their no7i-age, and old men in their dotage, were 
forced to enrol their names, to fwell the lift of fubfcribers. They 
even deceived the Prefident and Congrefs, in the number exhibited 
«n their fcroU ; for inilead cf free and independent citizens, a 
C ■ , 



l8 On the Dangers of pas-s'ive Oleclience, No. III. 

great part were obliged to fubmit to the impofitlon, from an ap* 
prehenfion of a ftarving family, rather than from a difpofition in 
favour of a paper the contents of which they held in the utmcft ab- 
horrence. The names of this Committee, (fuch as ufed unfair 
means to obtain fignatures) ought to be knov/n to the public, and 
read yearly in our town-meeting, to imprefs on the minds of the 
people the dangerous tendency of a felf-created junto, in impofing 
on the fears of the citizens, and in attempting to deceive, by falfe 
reprefentations, the conftituted authorities of the United States. 

The moft virulent abufe was conftantly offered in the papers 
under this influence, to all fuch perfons as reftifed to comply with 
their arrogant requifition ; and every one was treated with the 
moil pointed indignity, who dared to exprefs a fentiment m 
oppofition to their fyftem' of terror. 

In juftice, however, to a: few who a<5^ed in this bufmefs, we are 
willing to exercife a candour, in believing they undertook it from 
the pureft motives, though without maturely confidering the 
importance of the fubje6l. The difference between fuch characters, 
and the highfylng Terrori/ls, is eafily diftinguilliable, and charity 
draws a veil over their conduft. But, it may with truth be faid, 
that in no inftance, was the honour of the town, and the liberties of 
the citizens more grofsly violated than in this tranfaclion. 

However unpleafmg the recoil edtion of paft events maybe, yet, 
when we reflect on the nature and tendency of fuch unjuflifiable me- 
thods, to control the unwary and terrify the timid — how deftrudlive 
to the unbiaffed exercife of freedom and deliberation, when the mid- 
dling claifes of citizens are expofed to the perfonal applica-tion of 
men, whofe pecuniary tnjluence clogs every avenue of inveftigation— 
when poverty is made an argument to enforce a compliance with 
their demands, what more effedlual fyflem can be adopted to del^ 
troy that independent fpirit, which is the bafis of a republican 
government ? If this mode of condu(5l is permitted with impunity, 
inftead of that dignified deportment, which ever chara6terifes the 
tradefmen of this metropolis, we have reafon to fear that this val- 
uable body of citizens will foon be placed in that degraded fitua- 
tion, as to obliterate every trait of their former refpeftability. 

L.et us then, fellow-citizens, hereafter be jealous ofthefe viola- 
tors of our freedom, and watch with hawk-eyed penetration their 
"uuire movements, left;! under themafk of exclusive fej;^eralism> 






No. IV. Monarchy and RepiilUcamfm, t^ 

they may fubftantiate a fyftem which may give ihejyi caufe of ex- 
ultation, and you of grief, " at a future day." 

May heaven " infatuate and defeat their councils, abate their 
pride, afTuage their malice, and confound their devices I'* 



No. IV» 

MONARCHY AND REPUBLICANISM,. 

X HE prefent conteft in Europe is not merely as it refpeS:s 
France and the combined powers, but as it relates to the great prin- 
ciples of Monarchy and Republicanifm throughout the world. — = 
This has been openly avowed by the Britifh miniftry in the Houfe 
of Commons. The reftoration of the monarchy of France, and 
the fubverfion of their prefent republican government, are the ob- 
jects contemplated by the Britiih government in their prefent oper- 
ations. It is therefore a nvar of principle, on the ifTue of which de- 
pends the happinefs and freedom of mankind, as founded en this 
bafis. 

This being granted, we cannot but view with indignation the 
man who affeds a total indifference as to the ultimate decifion on 
fo important a queftion. It has of late become very fafliionable 
to reprobate both France and Britain, particularly among thofe 
who ftile themfelves Moderates, How often do we hear fuch cha- 
racters exclaim, " Let the contending powers Jight on., it is of no confe- 
quence to America ivhich of them pro^ves vidoriousJ* This is a fatal 
miftake — it is of importance to the United States whether the prin- 
ciples of Monarchy fhould prevail over thofe of Republicanifm, as 
the future profperity of this country is involved in the controverfy. 
If the republic of France fhould be fub verted, can it be fuppofed 
that the republic of America would long furvive the cataftrophe ? If 
England conceives it neceffary to exterminate in France a fyftem of 
government founded on the bafis of republicanifm, is it probable 
they would view the fame principles prevailing In America, without 
jealoufy and diftruft ? If they have involved themfelves in a debt of 
millions to carry on a monarchic crufade in Europe, can we fuppofe 
they would fet down quietly and obferve with an eye of cojnplav 



td Monarchy and Repuhllcamfm, No. IV, 

cency, the rlfing glory of the American Republic ? If it is a war of 
principle, will they fuifer the leaft fpark of Republicanifm to re- 
main unextinguifhed ; or rather, after having annihilated the flame 
in Europe, will they not exert their invigorated energies to oblit- 
erate every trait in America, Vv^hich bears its image or fuperfcrip- 
tion ? Would the Monarch of France and the King of England 
ever be reconciled to the prefent eftablifhment of our government^ 
when the principles of our revolution had roufed the fubje^ls of 
the former to dethrone his predecejfor^ and obliged the latter to ac- 
knowledge our fcvereignty and independence ? Depend on it, 
America will be viewed as the hot-bed of sedition, and 
the combined Monarchs would confider their v/ork but half com- 
pleted, while they fuffered the feeds to ^ourifh within the climate 
of the United States. The obligation under -which Britain would 
lay France, (if Monarchy fiiould again be reftored) would ever 
make her fubfervient to the views of England, and the hatred of 
Britain would be profecuted agalnfi us, with the additional weight 
of France to haften our deftruftion. The power of the Britilh gov- 
ernment would be encreafed in proportion to the ftrength of 
France, and America would be obliged to ftand alone in oppofi- 
tion to their combined efforts. France, inllead of fupporting our 
independence, would become an ally with Britain to annihilate it. 

By obferving the various publications in this country, during 
the European controverfy, it is clear that many perfons among our- 
felves have anticipated tht fuccejfes of the coalition as introduftoiy to 
a monarchical and ariftccratical fyfterA in America. For thefe 
purpofes the " Difcourfes on Davila'* feem fully calculated. The 
pageantry of Royalty has been held up with a reverence, folely 
intended to recommend this form to our approbation. Numerous 
writers have openly advocated this mode of government, and 
many individuals, without hefitation, have avowed their fenti- 
ments in favor of its adoption. The newfpapers under the direc- 
tion of this party, have been more affiduous to propagate the fuc- 
cefTes of the combined powers, than even the Royal Gazette of 
London ; and the obfervations which accom.panied their " glori- 
ous news" were generally fraught with invecftives againft Repub- 
licanifm and encomiums on Monarchy. It muft be evident, by 
retracing the publications which have appeared within twelve 
months pad, that the expe<5lations of a certain junto in this country 



No,. IV.. Monarchy and Repuhllcanifm, 21 

were highly elated at the profpecl of a total annihilation of 
Repiiblicanifm in Europe, and fondly anticipated its fall within 
the United States. Though fome of them have not had the 
temerity to declare openly in favor of a King and NohiUty, yet they 
have been defn-ous fo to extend the powers of the Executive, and 
.contract thofe of the Leglilative, that the difference between the 
Britifh government and our own would be only nominal. 

From all thefe circumftances the conclufion is fairly dra^^^^, 
that the principle of Monarchy and RepuUlcanifm is involved In the 
pontroverfy between France and the combined powers. Where 
then is the American who can view with indifference the ultimate 
declfion of fo interefting a queftioji ? Can thofe who fought and 
bled to acquire thofe ineflimable privileges, which are the bafis of 
a Republican Conilitution, behold with frigid apathy the contend- 
ing armies in Europe, or exprefs an unconceiTied ** Impartiality^* 
whether victory is more propitious to one fide than to the other \ 
Would it be pleafmg to obferve the ftandard of Monarchy erected 
on tlie ruins of the Baft He, and millions of unhappy vi(5tims falling 
facrlfices to the vengeance of an incenfed defpot, and a numerous 
body of enraged nobility and bloody priefts ? After contending 
againft the combined exertions of nearly all Europe ; after dif- 
playlng the m.oft brilliant exploits of heroifm and bravery, againft 
the mercenary banditti of BritifK hirelings, is It poffible that^any 
American can feel a lukewarm indifference, whether the barbarous 
Suwarrow or the humane Bonaparte fhould reap the laurels of 
the controverfy ? whether MafTena fliould grace the triumphs of 
this favage, or lead him, bound in chains, as a fpe^lacle of horror 
and deteftation I 

Yes, fellow-citizens, there are fome who call themfelves Amer^ 
icansy who have anticipated the pleafing idea that Bonaparte 
would ere long be in irons, and Suwarrow drove in a triumphal 
car through the flreets of Paris. How often have our papers 
been difp-raced with euloff ies on this bead of prey. Even the feftive 
board has refounded In approving plaudits at the name of a mour 
fter, whofe charader is flained with the blood of helplefs matrons 
and weeping infants. The ghofts of murdered innocents, it 
might have been expe<5led on fuch occafions, virould have ftalke4 
before the inhuman wretch who applauded this afTafun, and dafhed 
tl::e glafs from the trembling hand of him, who thus dared to pro- 



22 On IVashingtcn^ s Legacy* No. V. 

fane their memory and fmile over their tombs. But however 
difcordant it may be to the feelings of the human heart, to obferve 
even a bacchanalian in his cups giving fuch evidences of depravity, 
yet the pain is increafed tenfold in obferving the fair daughters of 
America admitting the name of this demoniac to defignate any 
ornament of their attire. The name of SUW ARROW, is more 
naturally attached to a dagger and a poignard, than to a lady's 
head-drefs. It nriay alfo be a defirable toad within a banditti of 
robbers ; and the hall of Pandsemonium ( during the caroufals of 
the infernals) might with propriety refound with the name of a 
wretch, whofe wickednefs gives him a claim to difpute precedency 
even with BELZEBUB. Civilization is become too refined to 
venerate any circle, that admits this bead of prey among the char- 
afters they celebrate. 

It is natural, fellow-citizens, that the enemies of our revolution 
fhould mourn at the vidlories of the French republic. The old 
fpirit of '75 ftill corrodes their bofoms ; and they yet feel that 
refentment againft the name of a Frenchman, which boiled in their 
breads when they were fighting with Wafhington againft the 
armies of Britain. Thefe men, would then have dabbed the im- 
mortal Wafhington with as much fatisfadlion as they would now 
facrifice Bonaparte. Monarchy is their objedl, and whoever dands 
in the path which leads to the goal, mud expedt the utmod ven- 
geance of their difpleafure. Thank heaven, the fnare is broken, 
and we have efcaped ! 



No. V. 

ON Washington's legacy. 

JlT is remarkable, that the " legacy" (fo called) of Gen. Wash- 
ington, diould be recommended to the perufal of the citizens, by 
thofe who adt fo contrary to the advice contained in that publi- 
cation, and who advocate meafures in dired oppofition to the prin- 
ciples v/hich he recommends. 

The prominent features of this farewel Addrefs, are confpic- 
uous in three important points— id, UNION of the vStates. This 



fjo. V. On Washington's Legacy, 25 

is confidered by him fo efTential that he thus exprcfTes hiindTelf j 
** We have reafon to diftruft the patriotifm of thofe, who in any 
quarter may endeavour to iveaken its bands." The fecond is, his 
difapprobation of MILITARY ESTABLISHMENTS, which, 
he declares, " under any form of government, are inaufpicious to 
liberty, and are to be regarded as particularly hoftile to republican lib' 
ertyr The 3d is, ECONOMY IN PUBLIC EXPENDI- , 
TURES ; " not throv-ang upon pofterity the burthen which we 
ourfelves ought to bear." Thefe are the cardinal points, on which 
our deceafed friend emphatically places the happinefs, prcfperity, 
and independence of the United States. 

In order, therefore, to fhew the propriety of the medium through 
which the " legacy of Gen, Washington" is recommended, we ar@ 
led to examine the fentiments inculcated by thofe, who now invoke 
the citizens to a confideration of the fubject. For a number of 
years pad, the writers in thofe papers have continued in one 
conftant ftrain of inveclive againft fome of the mofl important 
States in the Union. Every term of reproach, every epithet of 
abhorrence, every fpecies of calumny and detraction, have been 
heaped upon them. In many of thofe papers (efpecially in Con- 
necticut) the queftion of feparation between the Northern and 
Southern States has been ferioufly and vehemently agitated. The 
great coalition of the federal government has been indecently com- 
pared to " a fow with a litter of pigs," and the fovereignty of each 
individual State has been confidered as a monster, which ought to 
be execrated. The people, in their ele<5live capacity, have been 
burlefqued, as an uninformed, ignorant banditti, and tlieir votes 
ftigmatized with the odious appellation of " dirty pieces of paper." 
The fubverfion of our Conftitution has been contemplated by an He- 
reditary Prefident and Senate, and the UNION of the States has been 
threatened by proportions from men high in office, to alter the fun- 
damental principles of the federal governm.ent. Sentiments of this 
nature have been induftrioufly propagated by fome, who now 
recommend to our perufal the Legacy of our deceafed Washing- 
ton ; and, while they pretend to revere his memory and follow his 
precepts, are endeavouring to accomplifn meafures to convulfe and 
agonize the union of the American Confederation. How inconfift- 
cnt then is the conduct of fuch perfons, with the advice given in 
the addrefs ?«-This party have ever been defirous to fesk fhelter 



5^4 ^« Wasljitigton' s Legacy. No, V.' 

under the wing of General Wafliington, and on all occafions are 
inaking an inlidious ufe of his fame to accompllHi their purpofes; 
They pretend to be his friends ; but while they affecfl a friendfhip 
for him, tliey are afTiduous to counteract every beneficent fyftem 
which he recommends. Union of ths States was with liim ati 
obje(5t of the highefl magnitude : but difunion, and even fepara- 
t-ion, would be the refult of their projects. He confiders the dig- 
nity of the States as harmonizing in their mdi'vulual capacity ; while 
thofe perfons view them as a menial group, defcriptive only by 
the fordid fimile of a " litter of pigs.'* Can fuch people be con- 
fidered in unifon with Wafnington ? 

As a further proof of the difpofition of this party, in oppofi- 
tion to the Union of the States, is the abufe we daily obferve in 
|)articula;r papers offered to the flates of Pennfylvania, Virginia 
and Kentucky. The indecent reHe<^ions fo coriftantly- bellowed 
en them,yor an cxerclfe of their oiun fovereigntyy are calculated to en- 
gender a fpirit of animofity, highly prejudicial to that *' Union'* 
recommended by General Wafnington. Can the fpirit of patrio- 
tifm influence thofe, who are endeavouring to excite the moft ma- 
lignant paffions and thereby raife a jealoufy and dillruft between 
the refpedtive flates ?— -Such perfons have had the audacity to fiig- 
matize the majority of the people of thofe governments, as difor- 
ganizers, enemies to order, and a banditti of unprincipled foreign- 
ers. This kind of language is folely calculated, to deflroy every 
principle of cordiality, and, no doubt, is Intended by a Britifh fac- 
tion to diiTolve that amity fo efTential to the happinefs and prof- 
perity of the United States. Governor M'Kean and Governor 
Monroe, have been treated with the utmofl fcurrility ; every infa- 
mous epithet has been ufed, to injure and depreciate their reputa- 
tion. Thefe refpe<5lable States have been held up as the hot-bed of 
fedition, and v/e daily fee the gro/Tefl refle6lions upon the civil and 
moral charadler of their fupreme magiflrates. — What can be the 
lefult of all this virulence and defamation ? Will it not bring 
on public and private animofity ? Will It not weaken that 
** UNION," which General Wafliington confiders as the bands of 
our flrength and fecurity ? — We muft certainly admit thefe States 
to equal rights with ourfelves ; how irritating then muft it be to the 
citizens, to find themfelves calumniated as the moft deteftable of 
mankind, becaufs they have chof^ju to cxerclfe their privileges in 



]sJo. V. On Washington's Legacy, ip 

the choice of a Governor ? We have never found them cenfurlng m 
for our choice ; and none but thofe, who conftitute a d'iforganl%'ing 
party (falfely ftyHng themfelves federalifts) would now have the ef- 
frontery to propagate their indecencies, unlefs with a view, to ef- 
feft the wicked and deteftable purpofes of difTolving the Union, 
and counteracting the obje»5l, fo feriouily contemplated in the lega- 
cy of the beloved Wafhington. 

Fellow-Citizens — in all my former publications, I have en- 
deavoured to lay before you facts, in order that you may draw 
fair conclufions. Impofition has too long been a weapon, fuccefs- 
fully wielded by thofe, who are emphatically defignated as afaBlon, 
adling under the immediate control of a Junto. Such perfons 
are now fhedding their crocodile tears over the tomb of Wafhing- 
ton. They are lavifti in their encomiums on his virtues and patrl- 
otifm ; they are recommending his legacy to be read fo loud, as 
that thofe on the houfe top may hear it. But in order to try their ' 
falthy by their works, examine critically their condu(5t, and you will 
foon difcover the hollow voice of di Simulation, and fraud. While 
Wafhington cries " UNION," they are vociferous for cViJTenJion, 
While he endeavours to draw the bands of friendfhip clofer, they 
are affiduous to diffolve every link which connects the federal 
chain. While Wafhington recommends peace at home, they are 
kindling the flame of inteftine difcord, and doing all in their power 
to create an animofity little fhort of a civil war, between the north- 
ern and fouthern States. The meafures taken by them, may, 
fooner than we are aware, produce the dreaded evil. Can we ex- 
pea that Pennfylvania, Virginia, and Kentucky will calmly obferve 
the indignities offered to them ? Will they bear with complacency 
the fcurrilous language, and odious epithets, applied to their legal 
proceedings, in many of our papers ? Will not fuch reiterated 
abufe ferve to alienate every affedlonate attachment, and in time 
produce that rancour of dlfpofition, which threatens the moft ferl- 
ous confequences ? Such an event would be pieafmg to this invet- 
erate fai5lion, as they view themfelves reduced to the laft ilage of 
defperation ; and, as they find that the European controverfy is like- 
ly to terminate in favour of republicanlfm, their lafl refcurce is, to 
fow diffenfion between the refpedive States. Abufe and fcurrility 
are their weapons of warfare, and fcreened by a hypocintical avow- 



i6 On Washington's Legacy. ' No. VI. 

al of their attachment to the deceafed Wafhington, they prowl 
like wolves in fheep's clothing, to take an advantage of every oc- 
currence that arifes. How many of thefe modern patriots, who 
now difplay their infignia of grief for the death of the hero of 
Mount Vernon, v^^ould, in the days of our revolutionary troubles, 
have rejoiced to fee him agonizing on the heights of Bunker-Hill, 
and expiring in the arms of Warren ? 

Recapitulation and refleflion are flrong antidotes to their 
treachery. 

Let us then, fellow-citizens, while reading the " Legacy of 
V/afhington," confider it as an inftrument of denunciation againfl 
tlie arts and flratagems of thefe pretended eulogizers of his mem- 
ory. They are attempting to make ufe of his name to deftroy 
every republican principle which he advocated. They are defi- 
rous, under the appellation of V/afhington's friends, to unite us 
with that nation, in oppofition to which, our lately departed hero, 
by the command of Congrefs, arrayed the armies of America. 

If Britain had fucceeded, the amiable citizen, whom we now 
deplore, inftead of being refpedably depofited on the Ihores of the 
Potomack, would have been elevated (in company with the pro- 
fcribed Hancock and Adams) as an obje<5l of derifion within the 
purlieus of Temple Bar. Let us contemplate his virtues at the 
trying period of our revolution, and let us imprefs this truth on the 
RISING GENERATION, that the man who w^iflies to ally us with Bri- 
tain, cannot be a friend to Waihington. We never can efteem 
thofe, who aimed a dagger at his breaft. 

May the tomb of this beloved Patriot be fprinkled with the 
tears of the virtuous Americans, and may it never be polluted 
by thofe, who would willingly have fhed his blood at the times 

which " TRIED MEN*S SOULS"! 

The Other points enumerated will be confidered in future 
papers. 



No. VI. 



ON Washington's legacy. 



I 



LLUSTRIOUS WASHINGTON ! the Republican Citu 
2ENI of America celebrate thy virtues, not In ftrains of hypocritical 



\ 



No. VI. On Wash'mgton's Legacy, 2^ 

adulation, nor in the humble attitude of venal fycophants, but we 
eulogize thy memory in thofe fublime accents of veneration which 
are becoming freemen, when commemorating the glorious actions 
of their departed patriots. While performing this duty, we do not 
call to our aid a group of menial flatterers, whofe diilimulation 
cannot reflect any honour on thy character ; for as thou acquiredft 
thy reputation in the days which " tried men's fouls," and in oppth- 
Jltion to their male'volencey we difown their perfidious friendfliip, and 
claim the exclujive privilege of exprefljng the agonies of our forrow ; 
and with the folemnity of real mourning moil: fincerely weep over 
thy grave. When the enemies of the American revolution ex- 
ultingly anticipated thy fall, and rejoiced at thofe difafters which 
like daggers goaded thy bofom ; when the faithful band of Amer^ 
lean Soldiers, in concert with the troops of an allied nation, were 
fuffering thofe hardfnips and toils which peculiarly attended the 
American camp ; when our cities were in flames, and the diilrefT- 
ed inhabitants drove from their dwellings ; when every face turn- 
ed pale, and " every man's hand was upon his thigh ;" at thefe ex- 
cruciating periods of public calamity, the citizens who now lament 
thy exit were anxioufly folicitous for thy fafety, and with fervent 
devotion offered up their prayers to heaven, for the confummation 
oi thy glory y and iht peace, happinefs and independence of our coun- 
try. While thus extolling thy pre-eminent virtues, we cannot but 
entwine the laurel on thy brow, and tears of grief which now 
flow on this forrowful occafion, are thofe fpontaneous effufions of 
the heart, which will forever embalm thy memory, and tranfmit 
thy name in honourable remembrance to future generations. 

I fliall now, fellow-citizens, as propofed in my laft, purfue the 
fubjed, by confidering the other Important point contained In the 
** Legacy" of our deceafed friend. " Overgrown Militart 
Establishments (he fays) under any form of government, are in* 
aufpicious to liberty, and are to be regarded as particularly 
hostile to Republican Liberty." The principles of General 
Washington on the various fubje(5ts enumerated in his addrefs, 
are fo diametrically oppofed to the conduct of many who now 
recommend it to public perufal, that we candidly fuppofe they are 
convinced of their former error, and are now willing to make an 
atonement for their numberlefs faults, by becoming profelytes to his 
ientiments. Military eftablilhments have often been advocated in 



•^8 On Washington's Legacy. No. VI. 

the very papers which now eulogize this performance. They have 
gone fo far as to hold them efTential to the fecurity of Republican 
Liberty. How are we then loft in wonder, when this fage patriot 
is reprobating military eftablifhments in the moft pointed terms, to 
hear men, who pretend to extol his political talents, recommend- 
ing for our adoption, fuch pernicious inftitutions ? — His expreffions 
are as ftrong as words can render them. He defcribes thefe 
eftablifhments as inaufpicious to every form of government, but 
emphatically declares them fo to " republican liberty." Thefe 
were the fublime fentiments of our beloved Washington — fenti- 
ments which ought to be wrote in letters of gold, and placed in 
every public department of the federal and ftate governments — - 
fentiments which do honour to the man who has filled the office 
of fupreme executive in a free, fovereign, and independent Repub- 
lic — fentiments which ihould be taught to our children, and be- 
come leffons within our colleges, academies, public fchools, and 
every feminary of education. They are fo fublime, that even our 
.pulpits fhould refound with thofe pathetic ftrains. After this ex- 
alted declaration, where is the man who pretends to revere the 
precepts of Washington, or confiders his addrefs as the legacy of 
a dying friend, who can come forward in fupport of an eftabliftiment 
DENOUNCED by him, as fubverftve of the happinefs and freedom of 
his country ? 

lUuftrious fhade ! may thy warning voice be heard from thy 
grave, and may the fatal tendency of mercenary military eftablifh- 
ments be as deeply impreiTed on our minds, as thy innumerable 
virtues are on the tablet of our hearts. And as thou obtainedft 
thy glorious and honorable reputation in defence of a republican ffl em 
of government, in oppcfition to a monarchical, may tlie citizens of 
America ever exprefs their confidence in thy friendfhip, and their 
.gratitude for thy inflexibility, by deprecating eftablifhments which 
you have exprefsly declared are " inaufpicious to liberty." 

The dreaded confequences of Standing Armies are too deeply 
im.preffed on the minds of our fellow citizens, to require the la- 
bours of declamation to enforce an abhorrence to their introduc- 
tion. The wounds are fcarcely clofed which were infli<5led by the 
foldiery of Britain, and the fighs of the widow, and. the tears 
of the fatherlefs are ft ill exprelTive of their baneful tendency during 
»their refidence in America. Hancock, Warren, Thacher, &c. in 



No. VI. On Washington's Legacy, 29 

their orations on the fiftli of March, have depidlured the conflagra- 
tions, maflacres, depredations, and violence committed in all ages 
by a mercenary military force, and have defcribed it as a fure pre- 
curfor to the extermination of every veftige which adorns and dig- 
nifies human nature in a ftate of fociety. — -They declared " that 
it was the moil fuccefsful engine ever wielded by tyrants, and that 
it was impoffible the kings of England fhould acquire fuch exorbi- 
tant power, had they not a ftanding army to enforce their com- 
mands — and that, with the ofEcers of this army, they had bribed 
men to facrifice the rights of their country." — Such are tlie opin- 
ions of the patriots of our country ; and yet we daily fee in our 
public papers advocates for meafures which tend to the introduc- 
tion of this MONSTER, " whofe fupport is plunder, whofe nutriment 
is carnage, and whofe paftime is to inflidl human wretchednefs." 
I afk you, my fellow-citizens, whofe habitations have been con- 
fumed by the ftanding armies of George the 3d, and whofe lives 
have been jeopardied by the mandates of an infulting leader of a 
ftill more infuriated band of foldiery, whether you can now view 
a military eftablifhment with cordial complacency ? I appeal to 
you, who have experienced " Britifh generofity in nakednefs and 
hunger,'* their freedom, in guard-fhips, " and their tendeniefs in 
ftripes, and at the end of their fabres.'* Speak, fellow-citizens, 
fuch of you as felt the vengeance of this fyftem of terror, and were 
anxioufly folicitous for the event, while fome mifcreant refugees were 
even hardening the heart of the Britifh Pharoah, and urging him 
during our revolutionary warfare, " to make peace with Amer- 
icans only at the point of the bayonet." If there are any who 
favour the doctrine of ftanding armies, I will reply to them, not 
only in the words of Washington, " that they are inaufpicious to 
liberty," but enforce even this cautionary fentiment in the lan- 
guage of the immortal Vv^arren, " Our fathers look from their 
celeftial feats with fmiling approbation on their fons, who boldly 
ftand forth in tlie caufe of freedom — but ftemly frown upon the 
inhuman mifcreant, who, to fecure the haves and Jijhes to himfelf, 
would breed a ferpent to deftroy his children." Principles are 
permanent, time cannot make that wrong which was originally 
right, and however an' EfTex fa<5lion, a felf-ereated junto (falfely 
ftyling themfelvcs federal), a Peter Porcupine, a group of mercenary 
editors, apoftate whigs, and a remnant of old and young tories 



30 On Washington's Legacy, No. VI. 

may wifii for the eflabllfhment of a {landing army, yet we truft, 
that the patriotifm of the Legiflative and Executive authorities of 
the United States will annihilate in embryo, every eftablifhment 
which " is hoftile to republican liberty." As friends to the belov- 
ed Washington, they will never render permanent thofe inftitu- 
tions, which, " U7ider any form of government,''* he declares to be 
** inaufpicious to the rights of the citizens.'' While we read " his 
Legacy,'* thus denouncing military eftabliiliments, every drum we 
hear beat, and every cannon we hear fired from a mercenary 
corps, we muft confider as his voice fpeaking from his tomb, to 
check the evil from increafing. In addition to his authortiy, we 
can alfo quote the Prefident of the United States, who in the rap- 
turous ftrain of ejaculation, *' thanked heaven that in America 
there was no standing army." 

" What our enemies fo ardently wifh, mull be our bane : what 
they dread muft be its antidote." — Our enemies are defirous for 
a permanent military eftablifhment, but Waftiington fays nay, as it 
it deftruclive to Republican Liberty » Hancock, Warren, and 
Thacher entered their folemn proteft againft the meafure ; " from 
fmall beginnings (fays the latter) and under fpecious pretences, princes 
will raife a ftanding military force, the moft fuccefsful engine ever 
yet wielded ^by the hand of lawlefs domination.'* From fuch au- 
thorities, compofed of worthies both in Church and State, we have 
reafon to dread the monster as " concealing a dagger," under 
whatever form he prefents himfelf. Let us ever be aware, " that 
the tig&r crouches before he leaps." Military eftablifhments are 
too terrific to raife their broad creft on their firft introdudion, but 
they imperceptibly inftil their poifon, till at length they bring on 
the political ruin of mankind, as univerfal as the moral depravity 
by Satan in the garden of Eden. The advocates of the meafure 
foothe us by faying, " we fhall not furely die :" but depend upon 
it, if we partake of its pernicious fruit, we involve ourfelves and 
pofterity in remedilefs ruin. 



No. VII. On Washington's Legacy* • , 31 



No. VII. 
ON Washington's legacy. 

XLCONOMY in public Expenditures, is another ftrong trait in the 
advifory addrefs of the departed Wafiiington — " not throwing 
upon pofterity the burthen which we ourfelves ought to bear." 

It has often been urged by the friends of monarchy, that a 
public debt is a public blefling. Upon this principle it has al- 
ways been an objefl in this form of government, to encreafe the 
patronage of the Executive, by creating an artificial fpecies of 
property, and thereby eftablifhing in the hands of a few, a ftrong 
monied intereft in the community, which on all occafions ft'and 
ready to fupport every minifterial meafure, however injurious t» 
the general happinefs of the people. This policy has been affidu- 
oufly purfued by the Britifh nation, and from the multiplicity of 
defcriptive evidences of public debt, it has become a fcience fo 
intricate in its various labyrinths, that a man in England is oblig- 
ed to have recourfe to a: ftock-jobbing negociator, to know the 
value of the refpe<5live denomination of funds. By this infamous 
pra(5lice, the value of property is as intricate, to be accfirately af- 
certained, as a que ft ion in law, and a few fharpers within the ftock 
exchange, (after pradifmg a few legerdemain tricks under the ap- 
pellation of bulls and bears,) fettle the value of every fpecies of 
paper currency throughout the kingdom. Neither is there any 
appeal from their decifion ; as a leading ftockbroker is as peremp- 
tory in fixing the public eftimation of 3 per cent. 6 per cent, 
confols, &c. as the Chief Judge of the Court of King's Bench in de- 
termining a judicial controverfy. Every man in the kingdom, who 
holds any paper evidences of public debt, muft fubmit to the arbi- 
trary verdiifl of a licenfed body of fharpers, w^ho regularly affem- 
ble between the hours of one and three, to fix the value of hun- 
dreds of millions of property, difperfed over the whole nation in 
the poffeflion of individuals. The fyftem of finance has become 
fo fublimated in England, that it is principally conduced under 
the control of the miniftry. Stocks rife and fall as direfled from 
the office of the Premier — ^when they are low, the miniftry buy in, 
and when they are high, the miniftry fell out. Confequently on 



53 Cn Washington's Legacy, No. VII, 



:> 



the report of bad news, the government take the advantage of the 
public diilruft, and enable their purchafers to lay in a confiderable 
ftock, in order to furnifh themfelves with the means to profecute 
meafures to carry on tlieir furtlier projects. In fliort, the funds 
of England are nothing but a pantomimic exhibition- — it is a kind 
of magic, which tliofe behind the curtain are playing upon the 
credulity and fears of the people ; the propria perfona are a band 
of chofen Ifraelites, the real defcendants from the money-changers 
in Jerufalem, who of old were driven out of the Temple ; the 
Britifh minifter is the manager, and the whole fcenery is under his 
dire(5l:ion ; the audience are a group of dupes, who view with 
am^azement the dexterous workings of the machinery, and laugh 
and flare at the raree-{hov/s which arife amidft the gambols of 
Harlequin, in the charadler of bank directors. Thus will they 
continue to amufe the public, till the drama clofes, the curtain 
drops, and the whole farce concludes with exeunt omnes ; the play 
will be hifTed, and the a<5tors driven from the flage. 

Notwithftanding this immenfe bubble originates from an imag- 
inary property, created from a paper fyftem [xht principal of which 
is never contemplated to be paid), yet the taxes for the difcharge 
of the intereft are ponderous grievances, which fall annually with 
an increafnig prefTure upon the moft induilrious part of the peo- 
ple. The farmer, merchant, tradefman, manufacturer, and la- 
bourer are all fubje«5t to the heavieft impofitions to maintain in 
idlenefs a fet of ftock jobbers, who (in league with the miniftry) 
are contriving to increafe the public debt by a fliam appearance of 
voluntary loans. The pretended national refources in reality are 
nothing more than a body of ufurious Jews and fwindling ftock- 
jobbers depofitlng in the treafary their old notes, and taking a new 
emiffion, with additional douceurs, in confideration for their d'lfinter- 
ejied patriotifm. The riches of the Britifh nation are entirely ideal, 
and the whole art of public credit confifts in the ingenuity of the 
juggle in fliifting the denomination of paper. The tricks on 
Tower-Hill, and thofe at the office of the exchequer, are nearly- 
parallel ; as the man who fwallows pins, ribbons, and fire-brands, 
to amufe the rabble and pick their pockets, accomplifhes his won- 
derful projeds equally as fatisfactory to the gaping croud, as the 
Premier in creating new debts to pay old ones, or raifing the na- 
tional credit by thQ fmking fund. 



No. VII. On WashingtotCs Legacy, q9 

Aware of this deftrudive and deceptive fyftem, which involves 
a community in general diflrefs, our deceafed Washington im- 
prefTes on the public mind the neceffity of economy, *' not throwing 
on pofterity a burtlien which we ourfelves ought to bear.'* The 
debt of the United States, during our revolutionary war, unavoid- 
ably threw upon us a weight which requires a large proportion of 
our refources honorably to difcharge« - Even this burthen ought to 
be fo far lellened, as not to bear too hard upon pofterity. But the 
immenfe debts fince contracted have become a ponderous load, 
which may hereafter involve future generations in perplexity and 
trouble. The fyftem, adopted by the United States, has intro- 
duced a kind of financering policy in a great degree fimilar to th^^t 
pradtifed in England. It was fo managed, that the moft undeferv- 
ing citizens acquired the principal part of the property which 
originally belonged to the American veteran army. The intri- 
cacy of the fyftem gave the whole advantage to a combined clan 
of harpies, and while the decrepid foldier was feebly halting from 
door to door, and exchanging his hard-earned notes for the crumbs 
which fell from the rich man's table, a fet of fharpers fprang into 
exiftence, and by ftratagem and deception at length refufcitated 
the expiring property from 2/6 to lof. Though at the prefent 
period it may be proper to throw a veil over this part of our con- 
dufl, yet the immenfe debt fmce contracted, and the exceffive ex- 
penfes and official commlftions attached to particular departm.ents, 
come within the advice recommended by General Wafnington, 
** not to throw a burthen on pofterity." 

The amount of debt now exifting, and for which funds muft be 
eftabliftied to dlfcharge the intereft, ought to be accurately laid 
before the public, in order that every citizen may know the real 
ftate of expenditures, and the refources from whence they are to 
be cancelled. This is an important fubjeft for confideration. By 
this ftatement, we can judge of our ability to fupport a navy, and 
army. It may be flattering to our pride to talk of twenty or thir- 
ty jQiips of the line, and to contemplate a ftanding army ; but, we 
(hould firft fit down and count the cost, before we profecute 
the meafure. It may be pleafmg to a number of families to have 
their children provided for in the army and navy. It may gratify 
the vanity of thofe, who, from indolence, are unwilling to labour in 

their occupation, to be clothed and fed by the public bounty. 
E . 



34- ^« Washtrtgtcn* s Legacy, No. VIT* 

Sudh perrons may feel elated, when enjoying the luxuries o.f life at 
the expenfe of the community ; but the queftion naturally retunis> 
Are we not, by profecuting this fyftem, countera6ting the advice 
of Wafnington, " by throwing upon pofterity the burthen which 
we ourfelves ought to bear" ? Would it be fatisfaftory to pofterity, 
when they find the weight of taxes increafmg, to- be told that we 
had raifed, during a time of peace and when the militia were In 
the moft refpedable fituation, a flanding body of troops ? Or 
"U'ould it be any apology if we fhould relate to them how many 
individuals, who had become deftitute of other means of fupport, 
were clothed in fine linen and fared fumptuoufly every day I 
Thefe narrations may noiv be agreeable and pleafant to thofe who 
enjoy the bleffings of fuch eftablifhments ; but a heavy tax-bill, 
to pay the reckoning, would be viewed with an ill grace, and 
probably lead pofterity ta cenjm-e rather than applaud their prede- 
ceffors. Pofterity will be able to judge of men and meafures 
through an accurate medium. Charafters will be dignified, not 
with the falfe giofs of flattery, but upon the fubftantial ground of 
merit. How far the actions of men have been meritorious will at 
thofe periods fully appear, and the voice of fycophancy and venal 
adoration will be filenced by deliberate reflexion and mature rea- 
fon- Time Is the ordeal through w^hich all chara6lers pafs : 
though flow it is fure ; and the man, who places his fame within 
the page of hiftory, muft ftand only as a candidate^ till every part 
of his conduce has revolved round Its axis. 

The fublime fentiments of Wafliington, In his farewel addrefsy 
by recommending " unmi^^ and " economy^'' and reprobating 
** military ejlahl'ifiments^^ are evidences of paternal aff'edllon, 
which highly recommend him to the love and veneration of his 
fellow-citizens. His Legacy, under thefe refpedive heads, con- 
tains fuch an ample field for the exercife of every patriotic virtue, 
that, while we reverence h'u character, we cannot but anathematize 
a faflion who are endeavouring to difmi'ite the States — are in favour 
of a STANDING ARMY — and, by their extravagance in all public 
expenditures, are defirous " /o throiu a burthen on pojlerltyy* fiml- 
lar to the deftru(fllve fyftem of taxation which hangs like a mill- 
ftone round the necks of the unhappy Irifli, and the induftrious. 
part of the Britifli nation. May God Almighty imprefs on the 
minds of ** the people^c lefe important truths ! 



No. VIIL On Mr. Jmes*s Oration. ^ ^^ 



No VIIL 

ON MR. AMEs's 'ORATION. 

J\S Waftilngton is now configned to the folemn manfions of the 
dead, with all thofe honours which his pre-eminent virtues de- 
manded, and the public mind is reftored to its primitive calmnefs 
and compofure ; even under this heavy difpenfation of Providence, 
a few reflexions on the Eulogies which have been pronounced on 
his charadter, it is prefumed, will not be confidered as unworthy 
notice. 

The firft which claims our attention is delivered by Mr. Ames« 
This gentleman was appointed by the LegiJIature of Mafachu/etts, 
** to commemorate the fublime virtues of that eminent defender, 
guardian, and father of his countr}'-, that b«nefa<5tor of mankind. 
General George Wafhingtoru'* Before fo refpedtable an audi- 
ence, on fo fublime and exten/ive a fubjedl, and before a govern- 
ment which had fofenfibly felt (during our revolutionary war) the 
falutary influence of his military prowefs, we could not have exped- 
ed that the Orator would have attempted to weaken the reputation 
of the Hero of Mount Vernon in the charader of a foldier, by 
faying, that " great Generals have arifen in all ages of the world, 
and perhaps moji in thofe of defpotlfin and darknefs — In times of 
^violence and convulfion^ they rife, by the force of the whirlwind, high 
enough to ride in it, and diredt tlie ftorm — Like meteors, they 
glare in the black clouds with fplendor, that, while it dazzles and 
terrifies^ makes nothing vifible, but the darknefs.'' How far the 
Orator means to apply thefe fentiments to General Wafhington, 
when at the head of the American army, he has not chofen par- 
ticularly to mention. 

The following quotations, however, will fhew how far Mr. 
Ames meant to eulogize the chara^fler of Wafhington, as com- 
mander in chief of the American army. After fpeaking of the 
French revolutiony he fays, " But it is only the influence of that event 
on America, and on the meafures of the Prefident, that belongs to my 
fubjea" — and while he fpeaks with the utmoft indifference on the 
character of a ^^ great Generalt^ he immediately extols him " as a 
Chief Maglftratey who appears like the pole ftar in a clear iky, ta 



^6 ^n Mr. Ameses Oration, No. VIII. 

dlre(?l the fkilful ftatefman — His Prefidency will form an epoch, and 
be diftinguiflied as the Age of Wajhinglon.^^ Mr. Ames from thefe 
obfervations, endeavours to lower the military chara<5ler of Wafh- 
ington, and attempts to exhibit the brilliancy of his reputation in 
his civil capacity. But where is the American, who has the feelings 
af '75, that would wifh to eclipfe his glory and honour, during 
. the trying period of our revolution ? 

If this was not his intention, why does he introduce the dlf- 
4gufting idea, that, " in times of violent convuljions, and in ages 
of defpotlfm and darknefs, great Generals uie. by the force of the 
whirlwind, high enough to ride in it, and dire<5l the ftorm'^ ? Is 
this obfervation any way analogous to Wafhington ? Was it an 
age of " defpotlfm and darknefs" when the Americans were con- 
tending againft Great-Britain for their rights and liberties ? Did 
Wafhington ride in the ftorm of " violence 2ind. convulfon^^ % or like a 
" meteor glare on the black clouds with a fplendour, that while 
he da%'ded and terrified, made nothing vifible but darknefs ? If he 
did not, why does Mr. Ames, in an Eulogy commemorating his 
fubllme virtues as a " General," throw this dark pi(5lure into view, 
and exclaim with a peculiar rhapfody, " that however tlie military 
fame of Wafhington may excite the tuonder of mankind, it is chiefly 
by his civil maglflracy that his example will Inflrud: them P" Are then 
the fublime virtues of Wafhington, as difplayed during the diftreff^ 
ing periods of our revolution, to be fo far undervalued, as only 
to excite the " wonder of mankind ;" while his civil maglflracy " is 
held up as the only example to irflruEi them /"' In his military char- 
adler, was he only to be ^* viewed as a dazzling, terrifying mete- 
or ;" while his civil condiiB was the medium through which " his 
example was to inflrua them P'' Was not his " example inftrudling,'* 
when he led the American army through the various difficulties 
and perplexities with which they were furrounded ? Were not 
his firmnefs, intrepidity and patriotifm worthy of imitation, while 
contending for the liberties of his fellow-citizens ? and vras not his 
perfeverance, amid the innumerable diflrefTes he had to encounter, 
an example to InflruB us, againft. the wiles and flratagems of Britain ? 
In this exalted ftation as Commander in chief of the American army, in 
oppofition to Britain, the illuftrious Wafhington appears pre-eminent 
—-while under the dire6lion of a patriotic band of worthies, afTem- 
bled in Congrefs, (when an Hancock prefided, and a Samuel Adams 



No. VIII. ' On Mr, Ameses Oration, 37 

was a member) he flione confpicuous as the " defender of his 
country." In this character, Wafhington will ever receive the 
applaufe of the virtuous citizens, and they will reverence his name 
while the horrors of Britlfo tyranny are impreffed on the minds of 
Americans. The tear of moft grateful aifedion will be fhed on 
the remembrance of his virtues at the times " which tried men's 
fouls." The republican Americans recolle<ft him in the field of bat- 
tle, furrounded with the myrmidons of Britain, They view him, 
with his heroic (though injured) army^ befet on all fides with Brit- 
ens, Hejftans, and Tories, They now recount his deeds of valour, 
and Inftruffl their liftening children in thofe " examples" which he 
fet them to oppofe the defpotifm and artful defigns of their former 
foes. Thefe are the ftrong traits which they will ever confider 
within their plan to dilate on his charader. 

Though it may be for the intereft of fome, to obliterate from 
the American page the military fame of Wafhington, yet every true 
American will confider him during our revolution, " like the pole 
liar in the clear fky to dire<5l the fkilful ftatefman" : Like a fun 
that difpelled tlie black clouds of Britlfh Tyranny, and with its 
lullre terrified every lurking knave, who was planning in daik- 
nefs to deftroy his country. 

As a proof of the propriety of my obfervatlons, the orator even 
In his relation of the American war, pafTes over it with this flight 
remark : — That " neither the ohjeEl, or limits of his plan, would 
permit him to dilate on the military events of the revolutionary 
war.*' The oljeB of Mr. Ames was not (by his own confefiion) 
to diftinguifh General Wafhington in the glorious achievements of 
our revolution. The brilliancy of his charadler, in this fituation, 
v^'as not within the " plan" of his eulogy. The fublime virtues of 
Wafhington, which rivet him in the hearts of his fellow-citizens, 
during our contefi; with Britain, are fo feebly Imprefi'ed on the 
mind of Mr. Ames, that he feems to apologise for mentioning them, 
as being detached from the great " object" he had in commem^^ 
orating his reputation. Is it poffible, that fuch a pointed farr 
cafm could be delivered before the legrflature of Mafiachufetts ? 
The patriots, who, at thofe times, were in our State legijlature, knov/ 
too well the dlfireffed ftate of our country. They remember with 
bleeding hearts, when they and Wafhington were mutually engaged 
in the violent confii(5t for Amxcrica and liberty ! could it then be 



38 On Mr, Ameses Oration, Ko. VIII. 

fuppofed, that within fo few years, the virtues of this great General 
in his moft diflrefTed fituation, would not be " within the ohje8 of 
a plan" contemplated by an orator chofen to eulogize his diftin- 
guifhed talents ? 

What was the poHtical charaifler of Mr. Ames during our 
revolution, is not now a fubjed: of inveftigation ; but this is cer- 
tain, that every friend to England, would not confider it " an 
objeB within their plan'' to exhibit the full luftre of Wafhington 
while at war with Britain. They would tread lightly over this 
ground, and though common modefty might lead them to fpeak 
of the revolution, yet they would traverfe the path with as much 
velocity, as the duke of York while retrograding from his purfuers, 

Thefe obfervations are not Intended to be uncandidly fevere ; 
but the defign of this eulogy is too flrongly marked not to excite 
a jealoufy, that the charafler of Walhington, in- his revolutionary 
capacity, was but a fecondary " obje(ft" with the orator. Inftead 
of dilating on this fubjedl, he turns his oration into a philippic 
againft the French revolution, and almoll lofes the hero of his 
panegyric, in his anethemas againft that nation. A ftranger 
would fuppofe, that he was appointed to calumniate the French, 
inftead of eulogizing Wafhington ; for he declares, " his thoughts 
teena with a deep abhorrence of that revolution." What connec- 
tion had this fubjecH: with the character of Wafhington ? Or rather, 
how could a man prefume to celebrate the virtues of Wafhington, 
who approved, by his letters to that government, of the " rife and 
progrefs'' of their revolution----who ftiled them " a ivonderful people,'* 
" a magnanimous nation'^ ; while he himfelf openly profefles the 
utmoft abhorrence of their whole condud ? If General Wafhing- 
ton was right, Mr. Ames is wrong : for the former declared, in 
the mofl folemn manner, his approbation of the revolution, and 
requefled to draw clofer the bands of friendlhip ; while the latter, 
abhors with the utmoft deteftatlon every principle of it, and fur- 
ther fays, that " it was hoftlle to all peace, or order in fociety." 

This however is a fad, that general Waflilngton, in his letter 
to that government by Mr. Monroe, has eulogized the French 
revolution in its rife and progrefs, beyond any man that ever 
wrote or fpoke on the fubject. Judge then, fellow-citizens, be-. 
tween the opinion of General GEORGE WASHINGTON, late 
Frefident of the United States (the fplendour of whofc nsme en- 



No. IX* Or: Mr, Ames's OrHttort, 39 

lightens the world)—- and, FIflier Ames, Efq* a pra<^itiones' of 
law. 

The foregoing remarks are only as they refped principle, but 
the following quotation is a fpecimen of his compofition : — 

" / diO not know that / ought, but / sm fure, that / do, pre- 
fer thofe republics to the dozing flavery of the modern Greece,'* &c. 
Here is a difplay of egotifm, which a modeft autlior ought to blufh 
at. But an impropriety of compofition is more excufeable than 
an impropriety of principle ; it Is not, therefore, of any import- 
ance to try him in the crucible of criticifm. 



No. IX. 

ON MRd AMEs's ORATION<f 

AV ASHINGlr6N ! thou Illuftrioirs fhade ! pardon the attempt 
to arreft thy " military fame' ^ from the afperfions of thofe, who pre- 
fumptuoufly rank themfelves among thy exclufive friends. The 
republican citizens retrace, with enthufiaftic affeflion, thofe periods 
when thou and thy patriotic companions were encountering the 
hoftile inroads of a hoft of Britons, and their fanguinary coadju- 
tors — when every man's face turned pale, and every man's hand 
was on his thigh — when the flames of our conflagrated cities v/ere 
afcending to Heaven, and " garments roU'd in blood" were dif- 
played as the trophies of a defolating foldiery — when frantic 
mothers were bewailing the maflacre of their children, and Weep- 
ing daughters were affembled to mourn over the mangled corfes 
of their expiring parents — when the citizens of Bofton, Charlef- 
town, &c. were drove from their habitations, and fought refuge 
from the perfecution of a mercenary banditti — when the Inhab- 
itants ef America were fuiferlng under the fevere tortures of Brit- 
yh inhumanity, and their guard-fliips were appropriated as the 
llaughter-houfe from whofe " bourne no prifoner returned." At 
this Important crifis, how did we hail you as the " defender of our 
country" ! At thy name every heart leaped for joy, amid the 
moft trying fcenes of our revolution. With the higheft tranfport, 
the real Jons of America nonu enumerate the fublime virtues which 
accomplilhed the arduous work of American indepehixence. 



On Mr, j4tnes^s Oration, No. tX, 

^ But, illuftrious (hade ! how would you have flood appalled, If, 
m thofe Interefting periods, fome prophetic voice had arrefted you 
in the following accents : — Wafhington ! thy " military fame may 
excite the 'tuonder of mankind^ but it is chiefly by thy civil magtflracy 
that thine example will inflruB thenC — " Great generals have 
arifen in all ages of the world, and perhaps mojl in thofe of defpotlfm 
and darknefs^^ — " In times of convulfion and 'violence they rife, by the 
force of the whirlwind, high enough to ride in i/, and dired the ftorm 
—Like METEORS, they glare on the black clouds with fplendour, 
that, while It dazzles and terrifies, makes nothing vifible but dark" 
tiefs — The fame of heroes is indeed growing vulgar : they mul- 
tiply in every large war : they fland In hiftory, and thicken In 
their ranks, alraoft as undiflingmjhed as their own foldlers." 

On hearing fuch language, even If It had been fpoken by the 
Guardian Angel of America, would you not have exclaimed : — 
Gracious God ! is it poffible that my " military fame'^ fhould be 
thus degraded ? After all the toils, dangers, and hardfliips which 
I have encountered, to eftablifh the peace, liberty, and Indepen- 
dence of my country — after quitting my happy domeftic retreat on 
the fummit of Mount Vernon — after all the wearlfome nights 
which I experienced, during the long revolutionary conflict, — are 
all thefe facrlfices to be eftimated at fo low a rate as only to " ex- 
cite the wonder of mankind ?" Are the American army, and the 
hoft of " great Generals" now contending with me in the caufe of 
their country, to be confidered " like meteors, which glare on the 
black clouds with fplendour, and make nothing vifible but dark- 
nefs ?" Can it he pojfihle that the " fame of thefe heroes will grow 
vulgar^^ ; or " ft and in hiftory almoft as undiftingiii/hed as their fol- 
diers ?" — This would have been the follloquy of Wafhington, had 
he been called to contemplate afubjedt in which he and his army 
had been thus Implicated. 

It Is probable, that Mr. Ames may think that this is too high- 
wrought a defcrlption of his oration. But, In confidering this fub- 
jecft, I do not mean to take a latitude beyond what a fair conftruc- 
tion of " his plan and dejign^^ will admit. I 'do not however, in 
thefe obfervations, mean to draw " a pi6lure, flat as the canvas" ; 
or eredt " a ftatue, cold as the marble on which It Is reprefented" ; 
neither ** cold, alas," as his eulogy is exprefllve of the magnanimity 
and virtues of Wallungton. But as Mr. Ames's oration is extol- 



s 



Ko. IXo On Mr, Ameses Oration^ ^| 

Jed by fome, who loere inimical to our revolution, as the moft exalted 
panegyric that has been delivered on the hero of Mount Vernon, 
it is proper to try the performance by that touchftone which affec- 
ted the minds of the American citizens, " at the times which tried 
men's fouls." 

It muft be acknowledged as a conceded principle, that when a 
Irian is eulogizing a hero, without fignalizing one fmgle achieve- 
ment performed by him, but on the contrary brings into view 
fuch reflexions as derogate from the mofl prominent ftation which 
the perfon fuftained, inftead of exalting, he lowers the reputation 
he pretends to commemorate. The character of Wafliington 
as a General, muft be allowed to ftand pre-eminently confpicuous ; 
it therefore muft be tlie higheft abfurdity in Mr. Ames, as an eulo" 
gift, to throw a veil over this part of his condu6!, by comparing 
" great generals to a meteor," or that they make " nothing vifible 
but the darknefs." But the abfurdity is ten-fold increafed when he 
declares, that fuch " perhaps have arifen moji in times of defpotifmJ* 
It behoves him then to point out a. greater general than Wafliington. 
If he does not, we muft conclude, that he means to infmuate that 
the American revolution was an age of defpotlfm, and that the 
great generals engaged in it made nothing vifible but their 
darknefsi ^^" 

However, not to dwell longer on this part of his oration, we 
will examine how far his eulogy goes towards exalting the char* 
ader of Wafliington, on that point in which he is explicit. Mr. 
Ames recommends chiefly his cWil maglftracy, and particularly re- 
fers to the French revolution. It may be thought a redundancy, to 
mention again this part of his oration, but it is fo material to fliew 
the impropriety of his pretended eulogy, that I cannot but contraft 
a little further his fentiments on the French republic, with thofe of 
Wafliington — more efpecially as he recommends his example on 
that event, as worthy of imitation. The following fublime fenti- 
ments were penned by Wafliington, and under his own fignature 
were fent to the National Convention, in the year 1796. So recent 
a difplay of fraternity muft confound Mr. Ames, if he means to 
hold to his prefent declaration, " that the French revolution has 
httxi, from thejirjl, hoftile to all right and juftice, to all peace and 
order in fociety, and that its very exl/lence has been a ftate of war- 
F 



^ 



On Mr, Ameses Oration. No. iXv 



^are agamft the civilized world, and mod of all againft free and 
orderly repuhlics" This is the modejl opinion of Mr. Ames on the 
French revolution. Let us now fee what were the fentiments of 
Wafhington on this nation thus reprobated by our orator. His 
letter to the prefident of the National Convention is fraught with 
the following affefltionate declarations : — 

" Born, fir, in a land of liberty ; having early learned its value ; 
having engaged in a perilous confAci to defend it ; havin*, in a 
word, devoted the beft years of my life to fecure it a permanent 
tjlahlijhment in my own country : my anxious recolledlions, my fym- 
pathetic feelings., and my befi luijloesy are irrefiflihly excited, whenfo- 
ever, in any country, I fee an opprejfed nation unfurl the banners of 
freedom. Sut above all, the events of the French revolution have 
produced the deepefl folicitude, as well' as the higoefl admiration^ 
To call your nation bravey were to pronounce but common 
praife — Wonderful People 1 ages to come will read with aftoii- 
iihment the hiftory of your brilliant exploits, 

" In delivering to you thefe fentiments, I exprefs not only my 
cnvnfeelingSy but those of my fellow-citizens, in relation to 
the commencement, the progrefs, and the ijfue of the French revolution. 
And they will cordially join with me in pureft wifhes to the Su- 
preme Being, that the citizens of our sister republic, our 
magnanimous allies, may foon enjoy, in peace, that Liberty 
which they have purchafed at fo great a price, and all the happi- 
nefs which liberty can beftow. 

** I receive, fir, with lively fenfibility the fymbol of the triumphs 
and of the enfranchifement of your nation, the colours op 
France, which you have now prefented to the United States.^. 
The tranfafdon will be announced to Congrefs ; and the colours 
will be depofited with thofe archives of the United States, which 
are at once the evidences^ and" the memorial of their fi-eedom and 
independence — may they be perpetual / and may the friendfhip of 
the two Republics be commenfurate 'with their exiftence /" 

Such are the ftrains in which Wafhington addreflco the French 
Convention. Here, then, the contraft is ftriking : the mind of 
Mr. Ames teems wnth abhorrence, the foul of Wafhington expands 
with cordiality. " Horror gathers like a froft" round the heart 
of the former, whiliT: friendfhip drops like dew from the lips of the 
atter. Mr. Aines fpums them from his embraces as a crocodile? 



J^o. Xo Qn Mr, Ameses OratioK, ^^ 

but Walliington enfolds them in his arms as afjleir republic. One 
would tear afunder the flag of the Republic, v/hile the other eare- 
£ull7 depofits it within our choiceft archives. Judge then, fellow- 
citizens, whether Mr^ Ames is not an apoftate from the man he 
means to eulogize. 

A continuance of pbfervations, on Mr. Ames's oration, may 
become tedious to my fellow-citizens ; but as he has, by forae 
ftrange fatality, become the champion of what are falfely called 
federal meafures, the importance annexed to his fentiments are no 
otherwife worthy attention than to flrip from him a mafk under 
which many have deceived the puMic. His oration might fumifli 
materials for a volume, rather than a newfpaper ; but, in my next, 
I fhall confine myfelf to that apparent difafFedtion, which he fhews 
towards the condu(5t of Prefident Adams,in his late miflion to France. 

The many tropes, and figures, of " light-houfes," " meteors," 
** ftars," " black clouds," " giants," " whales," " caverns," " fcor- 
pions," " fire," " froft," " volcanoes," " whirlwinds," " pole ftars,'* 
** milky way," &c. &c. are highly expreffive of the immenfity of 
his " teeming mind." He hatches metaphors like young chick- 
ens, and interfperfes them into his performance with as much fa- 
cility as a hen gathereth her brood under her wings. 



No. X. 

ON MR. AMEs's ORATION, 

iVl-R. Ames in his anfwer to the Legiflature candidly confefTes, 
** in fubmitting his performance to publication, he expofes its 
mperfeSionsJ^^ If he was thus confcious to himfelf, that his oration 
would not bear the eye of criticifm, it is remarkable that his diffi- 
dence had not excited a little more modefty, and dilated a lan- 
guage more congenial to the humiliation of his own feelings. 

When an orator acknowledges " his extreme vvai^t of leifure, 
during the preparation" of his performance, it is reafonable to 
expect that a flrain of caution and moderation would prevail ia 
every paragraph ; more efpecially, when fpeaking before a delib- 
erative body, confining of the Executive and Legiflative of the 
Commonwealth of MafTachufetts. In the prefence of fo auguft ^ 



44 ^« ^f"' ^nies^s Oration. No. Xc 

aflembly, {entiments, and even words fliould be weighed v/ith the 
piceft accuracy, and particularly on a fubje<5t in v/hich the fublime 
virtues of a Wafhington are the fubjefls for conteinplation. It is 
but a poor excufe for a man to plead the " want of leifure," when 
he is honoured by the Legiflature of a government to eulogize a 
charadler, " which is hung up in hiftory as confpicuoufly as if it 
jfparkled in one of the conftellations of the fky." 

However, not to prefs Mr. Ames too clofe on his apology, it 
feems that he did not feel quite fo diffident as his anfwer to the 
Legiflature implies. If he was apprehenfive of " its imperfeBions^^ 
why did he wifh, " not to be confidered merely in the midft of the 
citizens of this town, or even of the ftate" ? ** In idea, he gath- 
ered round him the nations." " In the vaft and venerable con- 
gregation of the patriots of all countries, and of all enlightened 
men." He further fays : *' I would, if 1 could, raife my voice, 
and fpeak to mankind in a flrain worthy of my audience, and ele- 
vated as my fubjed." If Mr. Ames v/as confcious of " the im- 
perfedions" of his oration, why was he defirous to gather round 
him fuch an immenfe concourfe ? It is rather lingular, that he 
fhould wifh to expofe his " 'vnperfeBlons^^ to all the world ; to 
the whole congregation of patriots of all nations, and to all man- 
kind : and this he was willing to do, " in a flrain worthy of his 
audience, and elevated as his fabjed." As a friend to Mr. Ames, 
I cannot think he would be defirous to proclaim his " imperfections^^ 
fo univerfally ; but would rather fuppofe, that his apology to the 
Legiflature arofe from a convidlion of the indecency of his re- 
marks after the delfvery, than from any previous reflections. It is 
probable, that fome hint had been given him, as to the deficiency, 
both in the compnjrtion and fentlment ; and his owm ingenuity had 
fuggefled a palliative, in the hacknied apology of " want of 
leifure." 

I fhould not be fo particular in obferving fuch minute parts of 
this oration, if the reputation of Mr. Ames had not have been held 
up by fome as the Demoflhenes of America* I believe the Grecian 
orator never prefumed to addrefs his fellow-citizens on the mofl 
fublime fubjedls, and then attempt to fcreen his defeats by declar- 
ing his "want of leifare." Such kind of fubterfuge might anfwer 
m common cafes, and among idle fchool boys ; but if the Atheni° 
sn orator had been chofen by the Areopagus, to pronounce an eii= 



Ho. X. On Mr, Ames'^s Oration, 4.^ 

logy on the moft celebrated characler of that age, he would not 
have fuffered his literary fame to be tarnifhed, by admitthig an 
** imperfedlon" on fo important a fubjevt ; neither v\'ould he have 
fuggefted an idea, that *' want of leifure" fhould be confidered as 
an excufe for the numerous defers in his performance. Demofl- 
henes v/ould not have flumbered over the tomb of Wafaington. 
His mind would have been fo deeply imprelTed with the fublimity 
of the fiibjed, that even during his controverfy with Efchines, he 
would have found leifure to commemorate the magnanimity of a 
hero like that of Mount Vernon. 

But, if Mr. Ames had not leifure to celebrate the virtues of 
Walhington, it appears he had full tim.e to reprobate the French 
revolution : — " His mind teemed with a deep abhorrence of it." 
Inftead of contemplating, in its utmoft magnitude, the hero of his 
eulogy, his mind was abforbed in deteftation of France. It is a 
pity he had not informed the Legiflature of the jR:ate of his mind ; 
and declined an acceptance of fo important a duty. This would 
have been much more refpedtful than to apologize for the " imper- 
Jed'ions'^ of his oration, or to crave an indulgence from the want of 
leifure. 

I fhall now, as was propofed in my lafl, endeavour to fhew the 
apparent difaffedion Mr. Ames exprefles towards the late appoint- 
ment of Commiffioners to France. His violent paroxifms againft 
the French revolution, and againft the goveniment of that coun- 
try, are ftrong marks of an indecent cenlure on the Prefident of 
the United States. To fay the leaft, it was an indecent refle<5lion 
on his attempt to reftore harmony between the two Republics, 
The deluge of abufe heaped upon them, muft have a tendency to 
Tviden the breach between France and America, more efpecially 
as this oration is publifhed under the fandion of the Legiilature of 
MafTachufetts. What muft be the opinion of the French govern- 
ment of our fmcerity, w^hen they find fuch a toirent of calumny 
throwTi upon them, even at the time we are making overtures for. 
accommodation ? How can Mr. Ames juftify his condudl, ii:\ 
thus ftigm.atizing with every epithet of odium, a nation with whom 
the Prefident is in ferious negociation ? While the Prefident has 
declared that he had received the moft fatisfadtory afTurances of 
the difpofition of the French government to receive our commif- 
fioners, is it npt the highell arrogance in Mr. Ames, to reprobate 



4^ Gil Mr. Ameses Oration, No. X» 

(in a haf.y performance) the revolution, *' as hoftile to all right and 
juftice, to all peace and order," and that ** its very exlflence has 
been a ftate of warfare againft the civilized world'^ ? Does he 
mean to infmuate, that the Prefident is defirous to renew a connec- 
tion with a people thus deditute of ever}' amiable qualification, 
and that he is only fporting with our future welfare in attempting 
a reconciliation ? Such kind of language befpeaks a difrefpe<fl to 
the meafures of the Prefident, which is not becoming a man who, 
by fpecial appointment, was pledging the fentiments of the Exec- 
utive and Legiflative of one of the largeft ftates in the Union- 
By what authority did he prefume to bring into view the nation 
of France, when the vote of the Senate and Houfe of Reprefent- 
atives never contemplated fuch a fubjeft ? It was the moft unpar- 
alleled effrontery in him, to take this opportunity to vent his in- 
ve(5lives ; and, under pietence of commemorating the virtues of 
Waftiington, to afperfe a nation, within whofe territory the Prefi- 
dent had juft fent his commiflioners. Mufi not this oration be 
confidered as an infidious counterpart to the pacific fyftem adopt- 
ed by the Prefident, and, in fome degree, intended to defeat the 
purpofes for which it originated ? I would not be unchar- 
charitable towards Mr. Ames, but it is a fact, that the Prefident 
has met with obftacles in the bufmefs of negociation. A junto 
3.re oppofed to him for this part of his g:ondu6t ; and every bafe 
means is taken to thwart, and defeat an amicable termination of 
this embalry. A war fadlion are bufy to increafe the diffenfions ; 
to prevent a reiiewal of friendfhip and intercourfe ; to force the 
two Republics to open hoftilities ; to create a war with France, and 
to form an alliance with Britain. All the tools of this fadion 
are induftrious in their various departments to accomplifh thefe 
purpofes, and while fome are employed to calumniate tliat nation 
by tlieir writings, others are as equally induftrious to difaffedl the 
public mind by detraftion and falfehoods. A war junto are now 
doubly active fmce the profpe(3: brightens for amity and good fel- 
iowfhip between France and the United States. They are afraid 
that their fchemes for a (landing army, and other deteftable plans 
which they had anticipated, will be fruftrated ; and, as fuch prof* 
pedis decreafe, they become mxore vigilant to effedl their projects 
by fraud and ftratagem. Such perfons are totally inattentive to 
the intereft of the merchant, farmer, or tradefman. TJiey do not; 



^lo'. Xo' Oii Mr. Ameses Oration. « 4^ 

conflder the embarraffed ftate of our commerce, and the iminenfe 
injury to our trade, by the prefent ftoppage of intercourfe with 
France : fuch commercial confiderations do not attraft their no- 
tice. The great objed with them is to obtain a war eftablifh- 
ment— -and, under this patronage, to riot in luxury amid the gen- 
eral diftrefs, and impoverifnment of the country ; to live on the 
toils and fatigues of the induftrious '^ to mcreafe the public bur- 
thens ; augment LAND-TAXES ; and, after throwing the com- 
munity into convulfions, to employ a STANDING ARMY to 
force the people into a compliance with their arbitrary mandateSo 
Such, for the moft part, are the men oppofed to Mr. Gerry, as 
governour of this Commonwealth j— -he is for Peace, but they ar^ 
for tVar. 

Such reiTedions ire not imaginary, they appear too ferious t6 
fce doubted. If this was not the cafe, why do we find partrculat 
perfons fo anxioufly defirons to prevent an amicable negociation 
with France ? Why do we find them ufmg the moft irritating 
and abufive language towards them at this important juncture ? 
If thefe perfons were difpofed for peace, is it probable they would 
ftudy fuch numberlefs epithets to provoke the refentment and ex- 
cite the jealoufy of the French government ? Or would they em- 
brace every opportunity to vent their malice and chagrin at the 
condud of the Prefident, for commencing the prefent negociation ? 
Impoffible, that men who were ferioufly in favour of peace, ftiould 
in all their a(5lions and condud exprefs fo contrary a difpofition. 

The Britifh faction are now reduced to their ne plus ultra. They 
know that the bufmefs between the two Republics is in a train for 
an amicable fettlement. They are convinced if this fhould take 
place, that a Britifh influence v/ould be weakened in this country. 
The Old Tories, and men of monarchical principles, are pleafed 
while the controverfy fubfifts between France and the United 
States, and they exultingly anticipate the period when the fwords 
of the Americans will be drawn againft France, and their arms 
extended to embrace Britain. 

Gracious heaven ! can there be men who call themfelves citi- 
zens of the United States, ftill attached to a conne<aion with Britain, 
and defirous of a war with France ? Let fuch perfons read the 
cruelties of the Britifh during our revolution — let them read the 
korrid mafTacres of their fellow ciuzens — let them revert to thofe 



4S On Mr. Ameses Oration* No. Xli 

periods when Britons and Heffians were prowling through our 
defencelefs towns, and marking their footfteps witli the blood of 
the innocent inhabitants ; let them aflc themfeives this ferious 
queftion, whether they can place any confidence in the friendfhip 
of a nation, which has purfued every fyftem of teiTor to accom° 
plifh their purpofes ? Ye advocates foi England, talk no more 
about Religion — -were not the facred temples of the Almighty, 
appropriated by them to the vileft purpofes ? Even the venerable 
jfandluary, where the pious Prince and Sewall wept over their au- 
dience, was converted to an e<:iuefl:rian theatre — where the faints 
affembled, there the unhallowed footfteps of a blafphemous banditti 
marked their outrageous depredationa. 

Thefe remarks may appear foreign to Ohfervaflons on Mr. Ames's 
Oration — but, when we obferve a difpofition in any man to coun- 
tera(ft, ly Indecent reflexions on the French nation^ the amicable nego- 
ciation now pending, it naturally excites fentiments of the fore- 
going nature. If Mr. Ames was a friend to peace, would it not 
have been prudent to fupprefs the indignation of his mind witll 
refped to France ? Why Ihould he vent his calumny at this crifis, 
when every effort is making to clofe the breach which has unfor- 
tunately taken place ? If the Prelident is willing to heal the 
Wound, why fhould he apply any corrofive to irritate and inflam^e 
it ? Would a friend to the Preiident attempt to open new nvoundsy 
when he is ufmg meafures to clofe the old ? Could v/e expert this 
from Mr. Ames, whofe pathetic fpeech in Congrefs againjl a ivar 
^ith Britain, contrafled Indians, tomahav\^ks, and fcalping-knivesj 
with peace, liberty, and fafety \ 

The obfervations made by a v/riter with the fignature of 
« NEW SOUTH," I fhall confider at " my leifure:' They ap- 
pear too trifling to draw me afide from a few more obfervations on 
Mr. Ames's oration ; after I have gone through, I fhall clip the 
wings of this new fledged rara avis. 



No. XI. 

ON MR. AMES's ORATION. 

XX Propriety of language, and a dignity of deportment, are two ef- 
fential qualities of an orator, It is derogatory to a public fpeaker to 



No. XI. On Mr, Ames*s Oration. ^^ 

life opprobrious epithets, or to take an advantage, from tlie exclufire 
privilege of his fituation, to abufe nations or even individuals. It 
difcovers a fordid difpofition to improve an opportunity (when 
interruption would be deemed an indecency) to calumniate thofe, 
who cannot anfwer for themfelves ; and when a man arrogantly 
afTumes this mode to vent his inve(5tives, it difplays a flrong mark 
of the m.alignancy of his heart. 

Mr. Ames, when placed within the fanBtifn fan^orum of the Old 
South, arrayed in his fable habiliments, felt that kind of fecurity, 
which has too often been improved within the facred defk, to ad- 
vance principles, and enforce dogmas analogous to the feelings 
and perfonai refentment of the fpeaker. Thus elated, he knew 
that whatever he might fay, would not expofe him to an immediate 
explanation ; and, under this impreffion, he felt a confidence in 
wifliing to " g-ather round him the nations" ; and with a fupercili- 
ous afiurance, was anxious to " raife his voice to a ftrain which 
could be heard by all mankind." 

But to check the flight of this enraptured entliufiaft, let us fup- 
pofe him placed within the hearing of the army of France ; would he 
dared to have vociferated " that the French revolution has been, 
from thefirfl^ hoftile to all right and juftice, to all peace and order 
in fociety, and that its very exlftence has been a ftate of warfare 
againft the civilized world" ? It is a difgrace for a perfon to fay 
that he.y,nd ^ man's back, that he is afraid to fay to his face. Mr. 
Ames, though vaunting in a pulpit that he wifhed to be " heard 
by all mankind," would have exhibited a ftrong defcription of the 
tremor of Belfhazzar, if Bonaparte had at that moment been an- 
nounced, as one of his audience. On fuch an event, he would 
have been a curious phenomenon in the hiftory of Quixotifm, to 
obferve the change between the bombaftic fulminations of an ora- 
tor, when he confidered his antagoniil at three tlioufand miles dif^ 
tance, and the placid drains- of complacency when he expedted to 
confront him on his defcent from the roftrum. 

Mr. Ames, in his reply to the Legiilature, acknowledges his 
oration to be a hajiy performance, and that he had not leifure to 
confider the fubjedl ; from thence we are to conclude, that he 
thought but little about ivhat he iv as faying, or who he ivas ahifing. 
His oration was «v kind of medical regimen, which i^vypA to eTap- 
G 



50 ' On Mr. Jme.i's Ofat'tdn, No. XI. 

orate the eiFufions of his " teeming mind" ; and his epithets, 
tropes and figures, hke mercurial pills, ferved the valuable purpofe 
of dtfcharglng the'fpleen and chagrin which for a long time had 
laid indigefted within him. As thofe humours are now worked 
off, we hope he feels more compofed and tranquil. 

The French revolution is a fubject worthy the contemplation 
of a philofophcr. It is an epoch, which no hiflory can parallel, 
TinA when a political character prefumes to fpeak upon it, he un- 
dervsltres his reputation by bringing into view the ' muily docu- 
ments' of hiPtorical tradition. Where h the hiflory that keeps 
pace in analogy with its rapid progrefs ? It outftrips every flow, 
tedious procefs of fontier examples, and ftands pre-eminent among 
thofe wonders which at once confound and aftonilh mankind. 
Bonaparte, in com.parifon with Csfar, Alexander, and the long lift 
of military charaders which fwell the page of hjftory, iz like the fun 
in its meridian fplendour diffufmg its rays among the inferior planets 
of the natural fyftem. Such men are only viewed at a dillance, like 
the Georg'ium Sidus, through a telefcope ; but Bonaparte is a lumi- 
nary which difplays its radiance not only within its ov/n orbit, but 
illumines the extcnfive hemifpheres of Europe, Afia, and America. 
He (lands a monument of the particular attention of heaven ; for, 
amidil the immenfity of dangers by which he has been furrounded, 
he has never received a wound to flop for a moment the career of 
his' glory. He has fuffered innumerable deaths by his enemies, 
but he' has rifen from' the grave v/ith a tenfold increafe of military 
fame. If the crocodiles have fwallowed him, they have been obli- 
ged to difgorge their luxurious repaft with an additional retinue to 
proclaim his re -entrance into life, and with frefh laurels to adorn 
the brow of their engulphed hero The combined powers of Eu- 
rope have alternately been obliged to fubmit to the invincibility of 
this " v/onderful people" ; and w£ may daily expe6l to hear that 
the Emperor, with his prowling bead of prey, Suv/arrow, are fup- 
pliants for their mercy^ Britain may poffibly have the honour of 
being the laft to acknowledge their fovereignty ; but the energy of 
the prefent government will probably force her to a compliance, in 
©rder to prevent the inroads of a ^^ confervatlve power^* (direcfled by 
Bonaparte) to check the lawlefs domination of this tyrannical na- 
tion. The letter of Conful Bonaparte to the King may be the pre- 
curfor of fuch an «veiit. 



No. XI. On Mr. Ames's Oration, 5 1 

The French revolution thus foars beyond the idle titrle-^attie of 
ft few fuperficial, local politicians in this country. The flioit*- 
fi?hted policy of a funding fyilem- — the menial fycophancy of a 
Britifh alliance— the trifling confiderations of pecuniary appolntr 
me&ts, the paltry efforts of a felf-created aridocracy in America, 
are all loft in the great plan of the French revolution. The ex- 
penfive monarchical, ariftocratical, and prieftly modes of their for^ 
mer government are completely annihilated, or at leaft are placed 
in that diredion as muft eventually deftroy the pernicious princi- 
ciples which for centuries have been the fcourge of that nation, 
-The government is now free from the voracious demands of 
bankrupts ; who, in fome republics, are confidered 3-S national pau^ 
pers, to be provided for by cojnmiiTions in the army and navy. 
The levee of a Queen was a greater burden to the people of France 
than the whole expenditure of their prefent civil eftablilhment. 

To judge of the French devolution, we muft recur to their for- 
mer fituatlon under the monarchy : and when Mr. Ames talks 
about French jacobinifm, " as infpiring a fanaticifm that was intol- 
erant and contagious," he ought to have brought into view the 
gloomy receffes of the Bastile ! the defpotlfm and extravagance 
of the monarchy, and the the horrid impofitions of the Popifh hi- 
erarchy. This fpirit of jacobinifm, which he reprobates, was necef- 
fary to counteradl the Immenfe preiTure upon the liberties and pro- 
perty of the citizens, and became the only efficacious mediunvto 
oppofe tlie tyrannical meafures of their former government. 

This jacobinifm was fimilar to the fpirit which animated Wafh« 
ington, Hancock, Adams, and the hoft of piitriots during the 
American revolution ; and had Great-Britain accompllpied her 
wricked purpofes, thefe heroes would have been ftlgmatlzed as jaco- 
bins and fufFered the penalty of rebels. The t^rm jacobin is of mod- 
ern coinage, but its real fignification (as applied by thofe falfely ftyl- 
ed federallfts) is comprized in the oU-faJhioned word. Rebel. The 
tories would have been equally as induftrious, during our revolution, 
to ftamp the epithet j^<:o^m upon Ccngrefs, the American army, with 
the arch-jacobin Walhlngton at their head, as they now are to give 
tJiis appellation to the leading characters in the French nation. 
The traitor Hutchlnfon, if the term jacobin had been then in 
vogue would have been conftantly dinging in the ear of his Majefty, 
that •< jacpbinifm had become io Amenc;^ rather % kO^t than a 



51 On Mr, Ameses Oration* - No. XI. 

party" ; " infpiring a fanaticifm that was equally intolerant and 
contagious." The Englifh papers would have been conftantly 
teeming with this opprobrious epithet. Lord North would have 
re-echoed in the Britifh Parliament, " the contagion of the jacobin 
faftion," and every confpicuous charafter in the United States 
would have been reprobated as the fomenter of infurreftion, and 
promulgator of diforganizing principles. 

Every attempt to reftore the liberties of mankind, or to check 
the progrefs of arbitrary power, is now ftyled jacobinifm. If the 
people of Ireland make any exertions to maintain their rights, or 
oppofe the cruelties of a mercenary foldiery, they are marked out 
as the objedls of miniflerial vengeance under this defignation. If 
the French people efpoufe their liberties, againft the outrages of a 
monarchy, nobility, and priefthood, the weapons wielded in oppo- 
fition to them are the proftituted epithets of diforganizers, anarch- 
ifts, and jacobins. 

If Mr^ Ames means to be confidered as the defender of the 
old fjjiem of France, under which the tortures of the Baftile were 
exercifed- — the extravagant expenditures of the crown — the vaf- 
falage of the citizens, under the impofitions of a numerous body 
of nobility — and their ignorance arifmg from the abfurdities intro- 
duced by a phalanx of veracious priefts : If he is the advocate for 
thefe eftablifhments, let him flep forward in a manly avowal of his 
principles, rather than by an infidlous refledlion on thofe patriotic 
efforts which have been made to reftore the equal rights of the 
citizens. 

Mr. Ames, while reprobating France as purfuing a Jacobinical 
fyftem, has the audacity to affert, that the fame deftrudive fenti- 
ments are prevailing in this country. An oppofitkn to the Federal 
Conjlitut'wn is generally defined to conftitute the chara(51er of a 
jacobin. Upon this ground, I am willing to meet Mr. Ames ; 
and am ready to place the ftigma upon that body of men, among 
whom the greateft attempts have been made to deftroy thofe rcpuh^ 
I'lcan prlncipks^ on which this Conftituticn is founded. 

From what quarter has 2.Jtanding army been advocated ? From 
whence is it, that the economical fyftem has been fo far fuperfed- 
ed, that the impoft and excife have not been equal to the exigences 
"of our government ? From v/hence have land taxes arifen — - 
ftairp duties-«-bank eflablilhments— -with a numerous train of ex- 



^o» XI. On Mr. Ames's Oration. 



53 



^enfive official appointments, which have encteafed the national 
debt to its prefent magnitude I Who were the men in favour of 
a treaty, which will probably deceive the merchant, and expofe 
the farmer to a demand of feveral millions l Who are now defir- 
OU3 to counterad: the amicable negociation now pending in France \ 
Are thofe the men whom Mr. Ames would defignate as the friends 
to our Republican Confiitution ? or would he reprefent their oppofers 
as a jacobin fa(3:ion ? Have not this latter clafs of citizens beew con- 
ftantly uiging economical meafures ; and in all their proceedings, 
both in and out of Congrefs, have they ^ot been affiducus to pre- 
vent the pernicious tendency of extravagant expenfes ? The de- 
bates in Congrefs are evidences of their exertions to maintain the 
purity of the Republican fyftem, to reftore the friendiliip of France, 
and a defire to retrench the expenditures of the government within 
the real abilities of the people to difcharge them. I may venture 
to fay, if thefe traits conftitute a Jacobin, that a large proportion 
of the real citizens are of this defcription. 

But, to come clofer towards Mr. Ames, as it relates to the 
Confiitution, and the difpofition of certain individuals to alter its 
republican properties, I would aik him (and he is requejled to anfwer) 
whether he is not the author of the following remark^ in Mifs 
Hannah Adams's hiftory of New-England ? If he is, let the cit- 
izens judge who are the men, that are defirous to change the elTen- 
tial principles of the Federal Conftitution. — Who are the men, 
that are anxious to fubvert the ftate fovereignties, and to eflablifh 
a complete confolidation — -and provided jacobinifm is defined to 
be, an attempt to change our prefent Conjlitution, the queftion is, whe- 
ther men of this ftamp are not deferving the obnoxious epithet. 

The remarks, referred to, ftand tlius in page 496 of the above- 
mentioned hiftory : — 

*' The withholding of a complete negative from the Prefident, the 
interference of the Senate In appointments to office, the mode of their 
ekdion by the refpeBive flates, the Want o£ permanency in that body, 
fufficient for their felfprefervation againft the paroxifm of fudden 
democratic intemperance which have generally denied to republics 
the enjoyment of both tranquillity and longevity, and above all, . 
the dilcordant and feemingly anarchical conflict of national and 
flate fovereignties, the imperium in imperio, are yet confidered by many 
as deviations from a correS political theory. 



}> 



54 ^« -^''» Amcs*s Oration. No. XI. 

In this propofition, an " unchecked, unbalanced'* Prefident,. 
and an hereditary Senate, are contemplated — an uncontroled ap- 
pointment of offices by the Executive, and an annihilation of the 
ftate governments, are all ccnfidered as effential to form a " cor- 
real political theory. '^ — Can any man who advocates fach a plan 
be ftyled a Federalift ? Can he be called a friend to the exifting 
Conftitutlon ? Are not all the Republican and Federal traits of our 
government exploded, fhould fuch amendments be introduced ? 
Could a mode ft man prefume to reprobate others for attempting 
to fubvert the Conftitution, if he himfelf propofed a change which 
ftruck fo radically at its vital principles \ 

It has ever been the policy of monarchifts and ariflocrats to 
cfFed their purpofes by certain cant terms, which they circulate 
With peculiar facility, as defcriptive of their own fentiments and 
tnofe of their opponents — Federal and Anti-Federal have been ufed 
by them with remarkable fuccefs to favour their deiigns. While 
fuch perfons ftyle themfelves Federali/ls, they have in moll inftances 
been endeavouring to confoUdate, not only the Federal government 
in the hands of the Executive, but have been equally anxious to 
annihilate the fovereignty of the refpe^live States. Inftead of 
calling them^felves Federaljfisf they are more properly ftyled Con- 
Jolidationijls. The Anti-^Federalifts (fo called) are in fadl the Real 
Federalijlsi as they have on all occasions endeavoured to keep the 
powers of the Executive, Legiflative, and Judicial, as feparate as 
they are contemplated in the letter and fpirit of the Conflitution. 
Under the term Federalifm, many projedls have been accompliflied, 
and armed with this deceptive appellation, thefe real Anti-Federal' 
yis have aifumed the exclufive title di fupporters of the Federal Con- 
Jlltulion, They have fo artfully played their tricks, that, like jug- 
glers, they have thrown a mift over the public m.Ind, folely calcu- 
lated to miflead every man who is not aware of the deception. 

But, fellow-citizens, the paiTage quoted from Mifs Adams's hif- 
tory, came from a man who was *' high in office," and calls him- 
felf a FedcraUft. Hov/ far it is confonant with thofe Republican 
principles maintained in our ftate Conventions, is left to the candid 
confideration of every impartial citizen. If fuch a fyftem fhould 
be adopted, what features of the prefent Conftitution would be 
preferved ? It would be fo radical a change, that fcarce one 
veftigs would remain of its prefent theory | and yet thofe very 



No. XII. Remarks on New-South, ^^ 

perfoixs who are trying to bring the Federal Conftltutlon into this 
diftorted form, have the effrontery to ftigmatize their antagonifts 
as Jacob'msy and fubverters of the exifting government. 

Upon the whole, while reviewing Mr. Ames's oration, it ap- 
pears intended rather as a philippic on political charadters both in 
France and America, than an Eulogy en General Wafhington. It 
carries an infidious reflection on the late condud of the Prefident 
- — it is bombaftic in diflion, but " flat as the canvas" in fenti- 
ment — it is erouded with fi(5lion, tropes, and figures, which are 
abfurd in their application — it is fcurrilous and abufive, and def- 
titute of thofe effential qualities which conftitute the fcholar, or 
dellgnate the politician. 



No. XIL 

A FEW CANDID REMARKS ON " NEW-SOUTH.'* 

X HE principal obje«5l contemplated in the obfervations on Mr. 
Ames's oration was, that it had more the appearance of a philippic 
tigainjl FrantCf than an Eulogy on Wajloington. A writer who ftyles 
himfelf " Netu-South" has denied the pofition, and attempts to 
prove, by inferting a paragraph of about twenty lines, (from an 
oration of 31 pages,) that Mr. Ames had done full juftice to the 
** military charaBer''^ of Wafhington. 

This author, however, has placed the controverfy in fo perplex- 
ed a point of view, before the public, that we are at a lofs to know 
who or what he means to vindicate. He fets out in a violent paf- 
fjon to reprobate the idea, that Mr. Ames is deficient in refpedl to 
the Hero of Mount Vernon ; but, like all other over-heated en- 
thufiafts, he foon forgets his fubjed:. He begins with General 
Washington, and ends with Lav/yer Jmes....hQ ftyles his oration 
as the " greatefl effort of genius and talent" ; and that even the 
" honied eloquence of a Kirkland" is not to be compared with it. 
" The liquid periods of the counfellor^^^ he fays, " cannot fail of re- 
ceiving the homage of tap:* In the midft of his rhapfody, he 
leaves Wafliington " in the cold ground," and thus proceeds to 
eulogize the feraphic Ames : " His eloquence will form an epoch 
in our country, and be diilinguiftied as the age of Ames : /U- 



56 Remarks en New-South, No. XII. 

rsady it aflumes its high place in the regions of oratory ; like the 
milky ivayy it whitens along its alloted portion of the hsmifphere ; 
our future rhetoricians will furvej, through the telejlope of biography y 
the fpace where fo many beauties blend their rays, and delight to 
feparats .them into groups and diftindt figures. The firft of fpeak- 
ers may fafely conlign his fame to this monument of his powers, for 
it will live among the remoteft days of Columbian liberty and 
hiippinefs, and mingle its author's mild glory with Wafhington's." 
The above is a fpecim.en of the fublime, which would add laurels 
to the brow of a Sheridan. 

It is a pity that New-South had not confulted with Mr. Ames, 
previous to his publication, in order that they might have agreed 
betv/een themfelves as to the fubjeft of eulogy- — for, as it now 
ftands, tliey are fo at variance that it is difficult to reconcile them. 
One fays, that it is the " age of Wafhington'^ ; and the other, that 
it is the " age of Ames." One declares, that " two Wafhingtons 
cannot come in one age" ; and the other fays, equally as peremp- 
torily, that two exill at one period. New-South has taken the cli- 
max of Wafhington's charader, and applied it to Mr. Ames. In- 
ftead of contemplating Wafhington, in the fablim.e regions of blifs 
and glory, we are led through the " milky way" to explore the af- 
cent of Mr. Ames, " in his alloted portion of the hemifphere." 
We are called on to furvey, through the telefcope of biography, in 
the regions of oratory, a variety of beauties, rays, groups, and 
figures, whilfe " the firft of fpeakers configns his fame to the monu- 
ment of his powers, and mingles his mild glory with Wafhing- 
ton's." I muft plainly confefs, that this fublime pathos foars vaft- 
ly beyond my comprehenfion ; but fuppofe it is meant to convey 
an idea, that the fplendour of Mr. Ames (after pafllng through 
the regions of the milky way) will fo mingle itfelf with the glory of 
Waiiiington that it will be difficult to diilinguifh them. 

-If tliis is the real meaning, New-South has in every particular 
taken all the exclufive honour conferred on Wafliington, and plac- 
ed it on Mr. Ames. If he thus mingles his glory with Wafhington, 
his name muft be equally " hung up in hiftory as confpicuoufly as if 
it fparkled in one of the conftellations of the fl^y." When Mr. Ames 
pays the debt of nature, fome orator " muft pronounce for pofterity, 
now dumb, that eulogium, which they will delight to echo ten ages 
hence, when we are dumb," He alfo is feen " like a ftar to cheer. 



No. XII. Remarks on New -South, ^^ 

to guide, and to fave'' ; he alfo appears " like a light-houfe, that 
gleams upon the furrounding darknefs with inextlnguifliable 

fplendour." 

In fhort, Neiv-South has eulogized Mr. Ames, far beyond what 
this orator has expreffed towards General Wafliington. Every 
trait of his charader is depictured in the moft pleafmg colours, and 
difplayed in the moft melting ftrains. He does not bring into 
view, as analogous to any office he fuftaincd, " volcanoes," " black 
clouds," " whirlwinds," &c. ; but the fofteft language is intro- 
duced, fuch as " honied eloquence," " liquid periods," and " mil- 
ky v/ay." While " great Generals, like meteors, dazzle and terri- 
fy," Mr. Ames (hines with luftre in " the regions of oratory, and 
whitens along his alloted portion of the hemifphere." New-South 
exhibits the portrait of WaOiington " as flat as the canvas ;" while 
he foars among the ftars with a " biographical telefcope" in one 
hand, and the trumpet of fame in the other, defer ying the rapid 
progrefs of Mr. Ames, and proclaiming his approach at " the 

MONUMENT OF HIS POWERS." 

" The monument of his powers'*'' I This muft be acknowledged 
as the utmoft extent of human invention. To arrive at the fpot 
where this monument is to be erected, he wafts Mr. Ames " through 
the regions of oratory" ; through " the milky way" ; through 
hemifpheres unknown ; and, after hurrying him through fuch a 
variety of climates, and exalting him to fuch a point of elevation, 
he at length places him in that fpace of exiftence " where beauties 
blend their rays, and delight to feparate in groups and figures" ! 
Thefe are rhapfodies which befpeak the great mind, and a moft 
luxuriant fancy ; and we cannot but follow in idea, the biograph- 
er, with his telefcope, prowling through <* the milky way," " whi- 
tening in his progrefs their alloted portions of the hemifphere." 
This is bathos II 

It is not my intention to treat this fubjedl too ludicroufly, but 
as New-South has come forward in vindication of Mr. Ames, if 
he will accurately determine, whether it is the ** age of Wafhing- 
ton," or the age of Ames, I ftiall then be able to reply to his in- 
genious performance. But while the epoch hangs thus doubtful, 
it is needlefs to enter into the controverfy ; and if he and Mr. 
Ames will fettle this point betv/een themfelves, I fhall readily pur- 
H 



58 On Laco and his Satellites, No. XII L 

fue an mveftigation of the fubjeft. It Is peculiarly unfortunate for 
New-South to ftumble at the threfhold ; for the fadt is, he is lyiore 
at variance with Mr. Ames, than he is with me ; and the difpute 
really lays between themfelves. If Mr. Ames is right, in faying 
that " this is the age of Wafhington," certainly New-South is 
wrong, in faying that " it is the age of Ames" — and fo vice verfa. 
As this is a very important point, in which I do not choofe to 
meddle, I fhall wait with the utmoft patience, till I am informed 
how they have determined the queftion. Till then, adieu. 

No. XIII. 

ON LACO AND HIS SATELLITES. 

To the Author of *' The Jejferfomad'^^ hi the CentineL 

Tt 
HE mode in which I have handled this fubjecl, may appear- a 
little fmgular to you and your party ; but, before I clofe, I believe 
you will find, that the controverfy is well underflood, and a pro- 
per application will be made as to your charges againjl Mr. 'Jefferfon, 
— As you are confidered as a branch from this deteftable junto, I 
Ihall in fome future numbers treat you with \^2X famil'iarity which 
your officioufnefs deferves. The EfTex junto have had fuch an ex- 
orbitant influence within the government of the United States for 
many years paft, that it is neceflary to appropriate a few publica- 
tions to expofe the fecret defigns and infidious views of this fra- 
ternity. In the firfl place, I believe it can be clearly proved that 
every embarraffrnent, under which the country labours, arifes from 
them — that all the virulence of parties originated through this peftif- 
erous medium — -that all the deception which has been pradlfed, in- 
cluding tuh plots., Ocean majfacresy Illuminate &c. originated from 
this artful, felf-aggrandlzing faction. This junto have, from the 
firft eflabllftiment of the Conftitutlon, been a6live to eifcift their 
plans, and for this purpofe have Inlifted Into their fervice a few 
tlme-fervlng clergymen, aided by a phalanx of fycophants, office feek- 
ers, and war contractors, and thus embodied have watched every 
favourable opportunity \o forward their deftruflive projects. 

The vpjlart hirelings of this junto have often been challenged to 
appear before the public with their real names ; but like afTaffins 
they have attempted to abufe the charader of Mr. Jefierfon in pri- 



No. XIII. On Laco and his SatcUttes* 59 

vate caucufTes, and under the Ihade of evening have fculked within 
the walls of Vila's hall to vent their bafe infmuations againft tlie 
MAN, whofe pen difplayed not only the fpir'tt of America, bnt 
ftamped a literary fame on her character. When fuch piifillan- 
imous beings affume a licence, under the darknefs of night, to vil- 
lify the luminary of American Independence, they fhrink into 
tlie fame contempt, as if a glo-iu 'worm fhould exhibit his taudry 
wings to eclipfe the radiency of the fun in his meridian fplendor. 

Another infect, of the fame defcription, has had the effrontery 
to talk about " making peace with France at the point of the bay- 
onet." Such infignificant chatterers may be indulged with fuch 
hyperbole ; for fliould France contend with this country, fuch lil- 
liputians would efcape their notice, as it would be degrading for 
Bonaparte to exhibit them on the point of his bayonet. A flea 
in the paw of a lion would be but 3. poor compliment to the hero- 
ifm of the foverelgn of the foreft ; an infed of this fize would 
not arreil the notice of a man, v/ho has contended over the Alps 
with the veterans of Auftrla. 

During our controverfy with France, we have had the bombaf- 
tic effufions of warfare from thofe who would fly (fhould the con- 
teft become ferlous) to the utmoft boundaries of creation, rather 
than confront the enemy in the field of battle ; or if they fhould 
be met with, by accident, the magnanimity of the French foldiery 
would pafs them in purfuit of an enemy worthy of their conqueft. 

To revert more particularly to the apparent caufe of our diffi- 
culties with France, it is proper to obferve, that the Britijh treaty is 
the oflienfible objedt of controverfy. This inftrument was in the 
firft infl:ance unanimoufly reprobated, and though Laco was at the 
firfl: town-meeting in Bofton, furrounded with his fateUites, yet not 
a word efcaped him or them in favour of its ratification. It was 
unanimoufly reprobated by the citizens, as injurious and ruinous to 
the commercial intereft of the United States. Their filence can 
eafily be accounted for, as the plan for adopting this Britifli fyfl:em 
had not, at that time, be matured by the firjl conful of this junto ; 
his fatellites were then waiting orders, and after they had received 
their peremptory mandates, inftead of acting an honourable part 
to countera6l the proceedings of the town, they held dufecret meetings 
and ifTued a clandejline fuhfcr'iptwn-paper among the unwary citizens, 
t9 requelt the neceffary appropriations. Every infignificant tool 



6o On Laco and his Satellites* No. XIII. 

of the junto was fet in motion, and the flreets of Bofton were befet 
in every corner by a fub-committee to intimidate the unfufpecling 
tradefman to give his fignature in favour of a treaty which he had 
previoufly condemned in town-meeting, and which it is faid throws 
a debt or demand of twenty-one millions of dollars upon the citi- 
zens of the United States. An inftrument, which may be con- 
/idered as the fource of all our difficulties between England and 
France, as it furnifhes the former with a plea to take our vefiels, 
and the latter a plaufible pretence to treat us with indignity.-— 
During this tranfadion, many had the effrontery to threaten the 
induftrious tradefman with the lofs of bufmefs, in cafe he refufed 
figning ; fome of them however might at that time have confider- 
ed party zeal as profiabky while the arrogance of others admits cf no 
apology. Mr. Hamilton, it is faid, was the firft man who had the 
boldnefs publicly to advocate the adoption of the treaty, and when 
his partizans found he was fuccefsful in New-York, they affumed 
their wonted courage in other parts of the United States, and at 
length by threats and deception gained over a large proportion of 
the citizens. 

I am v/illing to allow, that many who were active on this occa- 
fion, are not, ftridlly fpeaking, of the EiTex junto. But the bold^ 
nefs and audacity of thefe perfons have deceived many honeft, 
well-difpofed individuals. The infolence, however, of thofe who 
threatened the tradefmen with lofs of work, ought never to be for- 
given, as it fhews the depravity of their mind, and the bafencfs of 
their condufl — a purfe-proud ra)retch, who by accident has rifen 
vaftly beyond his expeftations, when he attempts to deprive a 
tradefman of his liberty, fhould be ever viewed with that indigna- 
tion v/hich his impudence and ignorance merit. Should the body 
of tradefmen be controled by fuch upjiart lordlings, they are un- 
worthy the name of freemen. 

The Britifn treaty was confidered by the junto as the ne plus 
ultra ; without this could be ratified, they knew that the contro- 
-verfy between France and America would be eafily fettled. Their 
plans were fo deep, they found it neceflary that an inftrument of 
this baneful nature was effential to their purpofes. They knew if 
they could entrap us with Britain, within the chains of a treaty, 
that it would give them an afcendancy in cafe any overtures 
fnould hereafter be made with France to fettle exifting difficulties. 



No. XIII. Qn Laco and his Satellites, 6i 

They were well av/are, that the articles of this compad, involved 
many important points, and fhould we attempt to make a treaty 
with France, that our previous contra8s nvith Britain would embar- 
rafs us. All thefe particulars were underftood by the junto, and 
therefore, after the ratification, every effort was made to irritate 
and calumniate the French. The Englifh were held up as our 
only friends, and the French as the only nation againfl; whom our 
refentment fhould be diretfted. Cockades were difplayed as the 
counterfign of French extermination. A well kno^^^l blufterer in 
Boflon, under the patronage of this popular phrenzy, was inflated 
with a temporary courage to pull from the hat of an itivalid Frenchman 
the tri-coloured cockade : — this hero felt "an aiTurance, under the 
mania of the moment, to difgrace the town of Boflon in fuffering 
his infolence to go unpunifned. Every indecency was offered to a 
citizen who had fpirit andkrefolution to withfland the general 
outrage on private judgment. During the paroxyfm of the public 
mind, -the junto took courage to denounce individuals. Many 
public papers were devoted to their feivice. They even had the 
impudence to mention who fhould be difplaced from office ; and 
previous to the removal of MefTrs. Gardner and Whipple of Portf- 
mouth, the fuggeflion appeared in one of thofe papers. — During 
this public infatuation, and under the influence of the junto, how 
many refpedlable men were removed from office ? In the arrange- 
ment of the army, carried on by the EfTex junto, how many vete- 
rans have been neglefted ? and how many have been commifHoned 
whofe fervices are not known in the hiflory of thofe times which 
*' tried men's fouls" ? In mort, under the guidance of a junto, it is 
fufpected the American government has been thrown into the moft 
diftorted pofition. The enemies of our revolution have in many 
inflances rifen to the higheft degree of eminence, while the old 
foldier has been left to confole himfelf with the pirofpecfl of better 
times. How many red plumes have been difplayed in the hats of 
thofe who have no claim on our affeftion or gratitude ! 

This junto, we hope, has progrefTed to its utmofl latitude. The 
Prefident has at length found out their nefarious defigns. He be- 
gins to difcountenance their plans, and we trufl is defirous to 
begin a fyflem upon thofe principles which immortalized the 
*' profcribed patriots, Adams and Hancock." We trufl in God, 
the dengns of the Eifex junto are too well known for them ever 



€2 IVjAg and Tory, Ko. XIV. 

again to renew their iniquitous meafures, and while we commif- 
erate the man who has been deceived by their mifchievous defigns, 
we cannot but revere the political charafler of Mr. JefFerfon, who 
was never duped by them. He always was aware of their inten- 
tions, and has uniformly been oppofed to theii njeafures- He rofe 
fuperior to their plans, and has not now the mortification to ac- 
knowledge that he was in any inftance influenced by them. Hap? 

py would it have been for this country, if every man had been as 
difcerning to avoid the machinations of a junto, who have brought 
this country to the brink of ruin. He who forefees evil, is worthy 
the confidence of an enlightened people. 



No. XIV, 

WHIG AND TORY. 
To the Author of " 773^ Jefferfon'tad" in the Centinel. 

xjlS you are but a " twig of the branch,'* fprouting from the 
root of the Essex Junto, and trying to recommend yourfelf to 
the notice of this detellable fraternity by abufe and fcurrility, it Is 
proper to give you a trait of thofe charadters which are defignated 
under this appellation. Your folly and ignorance are exhibited in 
fuch glowing colours, that it appears cruel to add to the deformity 
of your portrait, by difplaying to the public the real charadters of 
thofe, under whofe patronage you are calumniating the patriotic 
Jefferfoii. A virtuous deift is preferable to a man who profejfes 
Chrlfllanity and violates its principles. Mr. JefFerfon has endeav- 
oured to emancipate the citizens of Virginia from the thraldom of 
a religious teft ; to give to Baptifls, Quakers, and every other fedt, 
the freedom of confcience ; — and, whilft they acl conformable to 
the Conflitution and the laws, their tenets, he candidly fuppofes, 
will not ** pick our pockets, nor break our legs.'* This doctrine 
is agreeable to the principles of the Federal Conflitution, and to 
thofe of a large majority of the States, 

At this enlightened period, when the dogmas of illiberal zealots 
are fo univerfally reprobated, it is difgraceful for the people of the 
United States to cenfure the catjlolic fentiments of Mr. JefFerfon i 



No. XlV. Wng and Tory, C^ 

or to hold him up as an obje(5l of reproach, for endeavouring to 
check the violence of religious perfecution. As it relates to the op- 
preffive laws of Virginia, at the time he vnrote his obfervations, Mr. 
Jefferfon ftands in the fame point of view as Luther in oppofition to 
the tyranny of the Church of Rome — as Barclay, in vindication of 
the Quakers — as Mayhew and Chauncy, in vindicating the DilTen- 
ters- — as Backus, Stillman, Baldwin, &c. in fupport of the privi- 
leges of the Baptifts. In fhort, he is the vindicator of the rights of 
confcience, in oppofition to all thofe baneful Tefls which have been 
impofed on mankind. Inftead of being ftigmatized with the epi- 
thets of Atheift, and Deift, he is entitled to the refpedl of every 
citizen, let his religious opinions be what they may ; and he has, as 
fully, and faithfully declared the rights of confcience, as he has the 
juftnefs of American independence. He ever ought to be 
equally revered, by all religious fedlaries, for his cathoUcifm, as he 
is by the friends of the American revolution for his republi- 
canism^ The bafenefs of a junto, in abufmg this man, is the 
firongeft evidence of their villany. 

I fhall now proceed by obferving, that the EfTex Junto always 
had a peculiar faculty in conne6ling names with things. During 
the witchcraft influence, every perfon fele<5ted for public vengeance 
by the junto, was hunted down under the appellation of ivitch. 
The WIZARDS of that day were as affiduous to raife a popular 
clamour againfl an innocent old v/oman, as they now are to excite 
an indignation againft all thofe who are oppofed to their political 
confpiracies. The term jacobin, they foolifhly think, is as favoura- 
ble to their political projects, as that of tuitc/j was to their religious 
fanaticifm. The bafenefs of their defigns never could depend on 
an invefligation of principles ; but they always took fandluary un- 
der certain words, which operated like magic to effect their diaboli- 
cal purpofes. If Laco had been on the ftage, in the* time of 
witchcraft, his demure deportment, and monkifh aufterity would 
have qualified him for the grand Sanhedrim of judicial inqul- 
fition ; and if a faultering old woman had been affrighted in his 
prefence, or thrown into hyflerics by his difgufling countenance, 
he would have thought it the higheft difplay of his official integ- 
rity to condemn her to the flake, or the gallows, for h&r con- 
Yulfions. 



^4 ^% and Tory. No. XIV. 

Your frequently ufmg the word jacohiny in your publications, is 
a clear evidence that you belong to that ignominious party, em- 
phatically ftyled the E/Tex Junto, or more properly an Amerlca7i 
Britijh faStion — For this fraternity does not folely refide in Effex, 
but it is a poifonous weed which has propagated itfelf throughout 
the United States. The root is planted in New-York, and the 
branches overfpread America, and contaminate by their peftiferous 
exhalations a 'few individuals in every city and town throughout 
the Union. 

What a glorious harveft ! America in controverfy with France ! 
In controverfy with a nation, who affifted us when opprefied by 
Britain ; who lent us money, when our troops were naked and 
famifhed for want of this neceffary aid ; who fent her fleet, and 
reinforced our army with her veterans ; who are now ading 
over the fame tragedy in recovering their liberties, as was dif- 
played on the heights of Bunker. 

What a glorious harveft ! In controverfy with France, while 
Britain is ftill purfuing a fyftem of depredation on our commerce ; 
whfen their iflands are thronged with American prizes ; when tlie 
Thames is crowded with Britilh captures ; when their judges are 
condemning the hard-earned property of American citizens ; when 
our feamen are imprefled on board their navy. During this vio- 
lation of our neutral rights, how furprifmg is it that we have a 
junto who are advocating Britilh lenity ! apologizing for their 
enormities, and oppofed to a reconciliation with France. 

Yes, fellow-citizens, we have fuch a fadlion in the bofom of 
our country : Men who are the fupporters of Britain during their 
violation of our rights, and the plunder of our property. Their in- 
fidious meafures have entrapped us into the v/ily machinations of 
our implacable foes. An enemy hath done this, and this enemy 
is no other than a Faction, "crouching like tygers before they 
leap." 

In order, therefore, to defignate the party, let us henceforth 
ufe the old appropriate terms. Whig and Tory. — The Whigs 
are thofe who have long feen, and deprecated the influence obtain- 
ed in this country, through the operation of certain leading char- 
acters. They have been ftyled jacobins, but they are the real fup- 
porters of the Federal Conftitution, upon its jujl principles. They 
are aware of the artful defigns of Britain, and have always been 



No. XV, Rights of Conscience* £^ 

jealous of thefe tones, who have favoured their meafures. The 
Whigs (falfely ftyled jacobins) are defirous to eftablifh a govern- 
ment upon the equal rights of the citizens— -economy in public 
expenditures — taxes within the ability, and agreeable to the cir- 
cumftances of the people — a militia inftead of a {landing army — - 
a PEACE WITH FRANCE — and a national character as it refpeds all 
the powers of Europe. 

The Tories are oppofed to thefe meafures ; but are anxious 
to bring us into a controverfy with France, and alliance with Eng- 
land. They are panting for a standing army — an increase of 
TAXES — a MULTIPLICITY OF OFFICERS : — In Ihort, to bring us 
within the vortex of the Britifti government, (which has been de- 
clared as the " mod ftupendous effort of human wifdom,") and to 
copy all the expenfive fyftems which have nearly bankrupted that 
nation. Such are the men who oppofe Mr. Jefferfon. 

Thefe, fir, are my fentiments of a Junto, who are now, thank 
God, brought before the tribunal of the public ; and may the vin- 
(lidive refentment of an injured people never be fatiated till they 
are placed in that humble Jlat'tGu, in which they have attempted to 
debaje this country* 



No. XV. 

RIGHTS OF CONSCIENCE* 

To the Author of ** The Jefferfoniad,^* in the CentinsL 

JL OUR principal charge againft Mr. Jefferfon Is, that he is op- 
pofed to the Chriftian religion. But fo far from proving this, you 
have not produced one evidence to fupport your allegation. On 
the contrary, if we are to judge from his writings, he is the advo- 
cate of that religion by which Chrift has made us free. He has 
brought the whole fyftem to that point, through which conscience 
is to diredl us in the great bufmefs of Salvation, in oppofition to 
impofed articles of faith. He has vindicated this primary princi- 
ple, in contradiftion to thofe who placed themfelves in the chair of 
mfaUihUtty ; in fome mannerj as our Saviour did, in condemning 
I 



66 , l^ights of Cohsdencf. f^o. XV* 

the fcribes and pharifees during his pilgrimage on earth. The 
Jewifli fanhed/im let themfelves as the test of religious ortho- 
doxy ; and every adl, which our Saviour did, v/as oppofed hy 
tliem, as fubverting the efl;ablilhed fyftem of Jewifli religion. The 
Church of England, in their religious creed, was as juftly obnox-- 
ious to Mr. jefferfon, and every catholic citizen, as the Jewifh hi- 
erarchy was to our Saviour. This hypocritical junto were ftigma- 
tizing THE Author of our Religion in the fame opprobrious 
manner as the EfTex junto now do Mr. JefFerfon. His difciples 
were ftyled men, " who were turning the v\'orld upfide down." 
The Chief Pr'tejls, Scribes, and Pharifees, were his moft inveterate 
enemies. They would have crucified him much earlier than they 
did, "but for fear of the people.'* The People received him glad- 
ly, but the Chief Prtefls were always inflaming the minds of the 
multitude, and were the moft defperate foes he had to encounter. 
The fa<5l is, the whole hiilory of our Saviour Ihows, the hypocrfy of 
pr'icfls and their minions. They early combined againft him, and by 
their infidious machinations drove Pontius Pilate to condemn him. 

The hiftory of our Saviour fhow^s the dangerous tendency of 
Prieficraft, When a country is once brought under their influ- 
ence by eftabliflied Tefts, the nioft virtuous part of the community 
fall a facrifice to their fanaticifm. Let any man read over the 
New Teftament, and note down the frequent clamours of the 
Chief Pricfis and Rulers againft our Saviour, and they will find, 
that the whole oppofition to his miniftry was through this me- 
dium, and their apprehenfions of the dowmfall of Diana of Ephe- 
fus. Judas received his thirty pieces of filver from them ; and 
every defperate meafure to enfnare and betray Jiim was by the fe- 
cret plottings of a junto, influenced by the immediate agency of 
priefts and their fanguinary myrmidons. Even after he was cruel-' 
fied, " the Chief Priefts gave large money to the foldiers," to fab- 
ricate a falfehood on his refurrecftion. 

This has been the cafe in all countries where religion Is eftab- 
liflied by government. The Church of Rome has thus been able 
to rife to its pre-eminence. The Church of England, &c. have 
been founded on the bafts of an extenfive hierarchy. Our fathers 
fled from ecclefiaftical tyranny and their fons will never fubmit to 
inch degrading fervitude. In Virginia, before Mr. Jefterfon 
illumined the mind by his writings, a dift)elief in St. Athanafiue* 



No. XVj. Rights of Conscience^ / ^y 

creed vras a crime, which nothing but the flames of the (lake could 
.^cancel. Confifcations, imprifonments, whippings, and fcourges, 
were the inore lenient meafures to profelyte men tq the abfurd 
doctrines of the Eilablifhed Syftem. The mind of the people was 
enflaved by priefts, and the dogmas of the gowTi and furpllce 
Tvere to be equally obeyed with the oracles of the Supreme Being. 

In this ftate of things, who will not revere the m.agnanimity 
and cathqiiciim of Mr. Jefferfon ? Who will not elleem him for 
enlarging the human mind to contemplate the great fubjeft of re- 
ligion ? What American would wifn to be enllaved in his con- 
fcience, and bound by halters and gibbets to adopt the tenets of a 
proud prieft, who received an annual falary for lording it over 
Chriil's heritage ? Such abfurdities might anfwer in the dark 
ages v/hen mankind were fo ignorant, that a black coat, or lawn 
fleeves, were as terrific, as the thunder and lightning from Mount 
Sinai. But, thank heaven, the world is too enlightened to be 
duped by priefts ; and the people can read, and determine on 
facred things with that liberality and corre<51:nefs which fpurn at 
the leading firings of intereiled bigots. The days of martyrdom 
have long fmce pafTed away, and the torch of Smithfield has, 
thank God, been extinguifhed. 

Not but that the Clergy ought to be refpedled in their profef^ 
fion ; but to fuppofe that they are to di<5]:ate tenets, or that any 
fed: Is to affume a right to control others, is an idea too deroga- 
tory to be admitted at the- clofe of the eighteenth century. Such 
prepofterous abfurdities had their effed three centuries ago, but 
we hope the prefent generation will give an evidence, that they 
have grown wifer than to fubfcribe to fuch ignominious articles of 
faith. To the honour of America, though of late a few clerical 
charadters have difgraced their profeffion, and defiled their gar- 
ments, yet the liberality of the Clergy in general cannot but excite 
cur veneration. A Prince, Sewall, Mather, Colman, Chauncy,* 
Mayhew, Cooper, and a Clarke, with others now on the ftage, fland 
teftlmonials of tlieir patrlotifm. Thefe great and good men were 
really champions in the caufe of Religious Freedom, and flood 
forth in oppofition to every arbitrary fyllem to enflave or control 
tlie rights of confcience. Tfcefe are men who would embrace Mr# 
Jefferfon with the utmofl cordiality, 



^S nights of Conscience* No. XV. 

The abufive treatment given to Mr. Jefferfon by you, Decius, 
and others, is a proof of the bafenefs of your caufe, and the folly of 
your condu<5l. I would afk, whether you fuppofe that the people 
of the United States will ever fubfcribe to a Religious Teft I Do 
you expedl that the Quakers, Baptifts, Congregationalifts, Univer- 
falifts, Unitarians, &c. will admit the infallibility of any particular 
Church ? Do you expedl that they will join St. Atlianafius in his 
anathemas ? — You may pretend to talk about Mr. JefFerfon's infi- 
delity, but your whole charge againft him amounts to this, that he 
reprobates in his writings, the impofitions on the various profeffions 
which differ from the Englifh hierarchy and fupremacy. Do you 
mean to contrafl Mr. Jefferfon with Mr. Adams ? Do you wifti 
to infinuate, that Mr. Adams is in favour of a Religious Tefl, as 
a national eftablifhment ? While you condemn Mr. Jefferfon for 
his catholicifm, are you defirous to reprefent Mr. Adams as the 
advocate of an arbitrary church Aifc'ipUne P In plain words, are you 
for an Inquifition ? Let us, Decius, underftand the objedl you 
are aiming to accomplijQi. Are you daring enough to fay, that 
Mr. Jefferfon is unfit for Prefident, hecaufe he is a friend to the rights 
o/" CONSCIENCE, and that Mr. Adams ought to be chofen, becaule 
he is determined, during his adminiflration, to adopt a national 
religious platform ? Are you arrogant enough to aiTert this ? — 
But whether you do, or not, the application of your arguments 
amounts to it. You fay, that Mr. Jefferfon is oppofed to a Re- 
ligious Teft, and, being {oy is not worthy the Chair of Prefident. 
Does it not then follow, by a parity of reafoning, that Mr. Adams 
is in favour of a Religious Teft, and therefore is worthy of it ? 

Your arguments, Decius, prove fo much againft yourfelf, that 
it is needlefs to expofe them. You attempt to calumniate Mr. 
Jefferfon, but what you fay in oppofition to him, if intended to 
apply in vindication of Mr. Adams, is greatly unfavourable to 
him. For his honour and reputation, I hope fuch an application 
will not be made. Would a Quaker, Baptift, Congregationalift, 
Univerfalift, Unitarian, vote for Mr. Adams, if they fuppofed that 
"what you alleged againft Mr. Jefferfon was approved by him ? 
Are you fo ignorant as to think, while you are condemning Mr. 
Jefferfon for giving every fe<5t the freedom of confcience, that you 
are helping Mr. Adams by fuggefting that he is oppofed to this 
privilege ? However you may cloak your defigns, yet, upon 



No. XVI- Plots^ Plots, Plots, C^ 

fair ground, drawn from your own premifes, the conclufion is, that 
you are in favour of Mr. Adams in expectation of fuch an event. 

As a friend, Decius, I would advife you to defift from profecut- 
ing your publications ; for depend on it, your arguments are injur- 
ing, rather than favouring Mr. Adams. You will foon raife an 
oppofition from a quarter you little fufpecl, and their clamours 
will arife from thofe docum.ents which yourfelf have fumiflied. 

An injudicious friend, is the worft enemy ; — and you may reft 
aflured, Decius, that your publications will go farther towards the 
eledlon of Mr. JefFerfon, than any hitherto exhibited to the public. 
You have fo unfkilfully wielded your weapon, that it will finally 
recoil upon yourfelf. Mr. Adams's friends will curfe you, and Mr. 
Jefferfon's friends vAW. laugh at yon. You will become the fport, 
not of Tifmall, but of a large party, " at a future day." You will 
find, in the courfe of a few numbers, that you have furnlfhed mc 
with weapons to lay you, and your deteftable junto, proflrate. 



No. XVL 

PLOTS ! PLOTS ! PLOTS ! 
To the Author of " The Jefferfonlad,^^ in the CentlneL 

JL our lucubrations have become fo deficient, both in argument 
and decency, that even to notice them requires an apology to the 
public. Tour obfervatwns are unworthy a ferious refutation ; but 
at prefent I fhall make ufe of you, as a common fewer, to carry off 
the filth, which has been colleding under the aufpices of a defpe- 
rate tory junto. They have become, in a political fenfe, as def- 
trudive a^ the yellow fever, and require a national " board of healthy* 
to purge the country of their peftiferous infeftlon. 

Though my numbers are addreiTed to you, yet I would not 
flatter you fo far, as to lead you to fufpeft that I confidered your 
remarks on Mr. Jefferfon as having a tendency to leffen his char- 
a<5ter — They favour too much of the effence of Billingfgate to ex- 
cite the attention of the candid ; and are too deficient In argu- 
ment to profelyte any man who values his literary reputation. 



yO PlotSy Plots, Plots. No. XVI. 

Leaving you, Decius, out of the queflion, 1 fliall go on to ob- 
ferve, that the variety of meafures adopted by the tory junto In 
this country, for the four years pafl, are worthy the particular 
confideration of the Whigs, at the prefent crlfis. Every contri- 
vance vi^hich flratagem could devife, or intrigue fabricate, has been 
fraudulently practifed on the unfufpicious citizens, to efFe<5l their 
bafe purpofes ; a deeprlaid fyftem of deception has been purfued, 
and the mcll low tricks ufed, to intimidate the cautious, and terri- 
fy the ignorant. Every little dirty manoeuvre has been fo artfully 
managed, that the paltry efforts of a facftion have fucceeded to ac- 
complifh a temporary advantage. Atone time, a Tub-Plot was 
founded as the tocfm throughout the United States. The terror 
was fo univerfal, that every old woman expe<5led to find treafon 
and rebellion wrapped up in a bundle of linen ; and the contents 
of a ludfjjing-tuh were infpected with as much accuracy, as the 
entrails of birds and beads in the days of augury. 

This tub mania operated with wonderful fuccefs, till at length 
it gave way to a more myfterious Tailor-Plot. To ule a vul- 
gar expreffion, " the devil was to pay among the tailors." All 
the crofs-Iegg'd fraternity (as if touched with the wand of Har- 
lequin) were cried doivri, as being employed to make uniforms for 
an army of jacobins, who were (it was faid) to join the French 
on their landing in America. This induftrious thread-and-needle 
brotherhood were generally fufpeded to be in league with France, 
to aid Bonaparte in his defcent on the United States. Every tai- 
lor's fhop in Philadelphia was, confidered as " pregnant with 
evils" as the belly of the Trojan horfe ; and was viewed as the 
rendezvous of a banditti of " ivild hifcmen" v/ho had enliiled in 
the fervlce of tlie French Dire(5tory. The tailm'-fot was fo terrific, 
that, inftead of beholding honejl Buckram^ nine degrees lelow par, he 
was magnified to a political FalftafF ; his needle an Herculean 
wand J and his fhears a guillotine, befmeared with the blood of 
martyred federalifts. Little David, with his fling and flone, was 
not fo formidable to Goliah, as the tailors in Philadelphia, with 
their goofe and bodkin, to the government of the United States. 
— ^Thus were thofe honeft, induftrious citizens iligmatized by a 
junto, as the enemies of their country. 

The tailor-plot, however, paffed over as harmlefs as the morn- 
ing dew, and the next fcene prefent^d was a Lady-Plot. In thi? 



No. XVI. Plots, Phtsy Plots. 'ji 

part of the tory drama, every danger was apprehended. A 
woman ! a woman ! was all the cry. A French man and a 
French nvomany tub-plots, and tailors, were reprefented as forming 
an alliance of the moft formidable nature ; a ivoman was to fet 
fire to the magazine, and the Prefident, Senate, and Houfe of Re- 
prefentatives, with the Hon. Theodore Sedgwick at their head, 
were to Ihare the fate of King, Lords and Commons, under the 
fatal explofion of Guy Faux, with his dark lanthorn. The whole 
government of the United States was to afeend towards Heaven 
in columns of fmoke, and the Conftituted Authorities Were to rife 
to the fame elevation in chariots of fire. 

Thefe feveral Plots, however, did not fucceed fo fully, as to an-- 
fwer the purpofes of the tory fa6:ion. At length, Mr. Harper 
contrived to tie a bundle of plots together, which he emphatically 
chriftened " Clues to Conspiracies." He exhibited them to 
Congrefs, in as much order as a Connedlicut trader would a bunch 
of onions. As occafions offered, he could tu'ind off a Ikein of 
** Clues," with as much facility as a country gitl would a fkein of 
ilocking-yarn. Thefe " Clues to Confpiracies" were advertifed in 
Fenno's, Porcupine's, and fome modeft papers in Bofton, as dif- 
coveries which would inevitably blow up the jacobins. The tories 
were on tip-toe to fee the whole club in the air ; and were as plea-^* 
fed with the idea, as ever the Duke of York was, to find himfelf 
out of the reach of the French army. " Harper's Clues," how- 
ever, foon became like the bafelefs fabric of a vifion, and he and 
his fupporters funk into that contempt, which their folly and igno- 
rance merited. 

Plots ! plots ! at length loft their efficacy. The people got 
wearied out with fuch nonfenfe and abfurdities ; and tlie tory jun- 
to, being baffled in their projecls, had recourfe at laft to the defpb» 
cable infignia of a Cockade. In this part of the farce, they ap- 
peared more ridiculous than ever. To fee a group of old men, 
fwaggering through the ftreets, en mUitaire ; and a duller of boys, 
finging the formidable ditty of 

** When I nuas a little boy, my mother kept me In, 
But now I am a great boy, Pm fit to ferve the king,* 

fnterfperfed with a few ftraggling negroes ; with a huge throng {to 



^a Plots, Plotsy Plots. Nd. XVIi 

fill up the chafra) of fycophants, who were courting public favour, 
exhibited a fcene which naturally excited the laughter and pity of 
every confiderate citizen. This cocKADE-influenza was rather 
harmlefs, as folly was the only confpicuous trait which marked its 
progrefs — Only one blot remains on it, which was, the cowardly 
action of tearing a tri-coloured one from the hat of an iwualid 
Frenchman ; but as we know the man and his co-adjutors, who 
were guilty of this difgraceful action, it is an apology for the ftig- 
ma attending the tranfaftion. 

The tory junto, in this ftage of the bufmefs, got to their ne plus 
ultra ; ingenuity was exhaufted. They flood at bay for fome 
time, till they hit upon an expedient to roufe their drooping fpir- 
ks. Religion ! Religion ! was in danger ; — an Illuminati was 
about to darken the Chriftian world ; — Deifm, Atheifm, and every 
other evil was about to take place among mankind. Some of the 
reverend Doftors of Divinity were on fire to extirpate the perni- 
cious Society ; and they wrote in the public papers fo many ab- 
furdities, that all their rhapfodies became the fubjeft of ridicule, 
and themfelves the objects of derifion. 

Thus, for thefe four years paft, have the citizens of the United 
States been impofed on by a tory fatftion. Alarms, terror, threat- 
enings, and fraud, have been the weapons by which they have af^ 
failed the good fenfe of the people. Every fpecies of impofition 
has been pradtifed to accomplifh their wicked purpofes : thofe 
whom they could not coax they Intimidated, and thofe they could 
not intimidate they coaxed. They have purfued fo deteftable a fyf^ 
teni, that they have been afraid and afhamed to encounter thofe 
who had fpirit and refolutlon to challenge them to an explicit con- 
teft. They have adted the part of aflaffins towards their oppo- 
nents, by attempting, in an infidious manner, to injure them in 
their bufmefs, and afpeife their charaders. No meafure, however 
bafe and Infamous, has been neglected by this defperatc junto, to 
taife themfelves, and deprefs others. But, thank God, they are fruf- 
trated in their defigns ; and w^e tnifl in heaven, that the time will 
foon arrive, when the perfidy of fuch adverfaries will be as con- 
fpicuous to the public as their bafenefs is defpifed by their op- 
ponents. 

Plots, Illuminati, Ocean maffacres, &c. having loft their effica* 
cy, the tory fadion are now watching the motion of the waters in 



No. XVI. ' Plotst Plots, Plots, 7^ 

the enfuing eleiflion for Prefident. Their lad refource is, to ca- 
lumniate Mr. JefFerfon as an enemy to the Chriftian religion. The 
fame perfons who have hitherto deceived the citizens about tub- 
plots who have propagated the lie of the Ocean maflacre, are 

now bufy in fcandalizing Mr. JefFerfon. They have worn out ev- 
ery other falfehood, and are now reduced to the miferable fiibter- 
fuge of calling him an atheift. The fadl is, Mr. Jefferfon in his wri- 
tings vindicates the right of confclence on the fuhjeS: of religion, while 
his antagonifts are planning in conclave, to eredt a national 
hierarchy, to control and tyrannize over every other religious efta- 
blilhment. This mull be the cafe, otherwife it is impoffible that 
fo much virulence fnould appear againft him, for attempting to 
place every feci on an equal footing. Judge tlien, fellow-citizens, 
between Mr. JefFerfon and his opponents. 

The deceptions which have been pradifed on the public, and 
the falfehoods propagated by thofe whofe duty it is to fludy the 
TRUTH, have had a great tendency to deftroy the morals of the 
people, and to render them inattentive to the precepts of the goll- 
pel. When they find fo many of the Clergy deceiving them with 
foolilh political tales, the people begin to doubt the validity of 
thofe dodlrines which tliey preach and enjoin. When they obferve 
more zeal to propagate political, than evangelical principles, the 
people fufped, that the apparent fanclity of fuch Clergymen is 
more a cloak of hypocrify, than a garb of piety ; more efpecially 
when they find, that falfehoods delivered in the pulpit are not 
reflified even after the preacher is convinced of the fallacy of his 
afTertion, Common honefly didtates to a certain Reverend Dodlor, 
that he ought to acknowledge his error on the Ocean maffacre. It 
is to be feared, that a few overheated ecclefiallic partizans, have 
done more injury to the caufe of Religion, than all the deillical or 
atheiilical writers either in France, England, or America. A few 
leading Clergymen have fhown fuch an intolerant fpirit — have 
adted and preached with a temper fo unbecoming the mild catholic 
precepts of the gofpel, that many ferious perfons have beccrne fo 
far difaffeded, as to negled an attendance on public worfhip. The 
pulpit in many inflances has been a political theatre, and days fet 
apart for religious worlhip, have been converted to party rant, and 
defamation. The fociety inftead of being entertained or inflriafted 
K 



74 Thanh: giving Ssrmcfls. ' No< XVil* 

in matters of religion, have been enraged againfl each other by 
the inflammatory dogmari of the preacher. 

This fubje6l is fo copious, I fhall appropriate another number 
for a more ferioiis difcuffion. 



No. XVII. 

DR. MORSE ON THANKSGIVING AND FAST SERMONSa 

\ V HILE confidering the " decay of religion and moraUty^^ fo 
generally complained of among the enemies to Mr. Jefferfon, it is 
proper to irifert the following quotation from Dr. Morfe's Geogra- 
phy, which may lead us to judge of one cavfe of their decline — viz^^ 
*' There is one diftingulfhing cha-i-aclerljilc m. the religious char" 
a8er of the |)eople of New-England, whieh we muft not omit to 
mention, and that is the cuftcm of annually celebrating Easts and 
Thanksgiving-Days. This pious cuflom originated with our 
venerable anceftors, the firft fettlers of New-England, and has been 
handed down as facred through fuccefTive generations of their pof« 
terity. A cuftom fo rational, and fo happily calculated to cherijh 
In the' minds of the people a fnf of their dependance on the great 
Benefactor of the world, for all Iiis blefiings, it is hoped will 
ever be facredly preferved." 

A fentiment of this kind; coming from the Doclor, it is natural 
to fuppofe VvX-uld have had a proper effcSt on his mind on thofe 
anniverfaries. Inftead of Icii-ding his audience to fpeculative points 
of politics, in his faft and thankfgiving fermons, Vv'e might expect 
that his difcourfes would have a tendency " to cherlJh, in the minds 
ef the people y a fenfe of their dependance on the great Benefactor- 
of the tuorid, for all his hlejfmgsy Inftead of becoming a fiery 
zealot as a politician, we fliould conje«5iure he would have been 
more confpicuous as a divine. His fermons, on thefe occafions, 
have been more calculated to light up the torch of perfecution, 
than to inculca.te the benevolent principles of the gofpel ; they 
have been more congenial with the anathemas of a pope, than the 
mild perfuafions of a difciple of our Saviour. He has not only 
wrote fermons to preach, but has increafed them to an enormous 
bulk, for publicatim* His appendix has fometimes beea longer tliaa 



No. XVII. Thanhgiv'mg Serrmns^ f^ 

his original difcourfes ; and the advertifements, ybr the fale of thern^ 
feemed more calculated to inflame the community, and to fet 
neighbours at variance, than to promote that peace and good will 
which are Inculcated in the fcriptures. His pretended lift of Illu-. 
minati, containing a number of outlandifh names, may have excit-' 
cd the curiofity of the public, fo as to make it a caich-penny ivork, 
but how far the impofition balanced the profit, Is left for him to 
determine. An intolerant ecclefiaftic, is of all characters the mod 
to be dreaded ; not that I would judge too illiberally of the Doc- 
tor's intentions ; but if any thing has beei;i publilhed by him, as a 
FA,CT, which afterwards turned out an egregious falfehood, he Is 
bound in duty (as an honeft man) to make a public confeliion 
of his crime. As a Chnjlian teacher he would not v/ilh to give cir- 
culation to iQ barbarous a ftory as the Ocean mafTacre, under all 
the fandlity of a pulpit performance, and yet be backward to acr 
knowledge the falfity of the narrative. As a clergyman^ who is giv- 
ing, in his Geography, a ** diftinguiihing charafteriftic of the peo- 
ple of New-England, in their obfervance of fafts and thankfgivings, 
which (he fays) " is fo happily calculated to cherifli a feme of our 
dependance on the Great Benefactor of the world," It cannot 
be fuppofed that he would be defirous to blaft fuch an inftitutlon, 
by printing a fermon on this occafion containing a falfehood of the 
blackeft mature. If he Is honeft (as no doubt he Is) we candidly 
hope that this Reverend Divine will, ere long, make an humble 
confefEon of his fault, and publicly retradt every obfervation which 
he has made on this fabricated ftory. This condu(5l ivould be hon- 
ourable, and I cannot but pleafe myfelf that he will foon give this 
fpeclmen of his integrity. Many of his friends have expeded to 
fee it in print before this time ; but an apology has been given, that 
his various other cares. In colledting materials for his Geography, 
&;c. have hitherto prevented its appearance. 

Thefe remarks on the Reverend Dodor would not have been fo 
particular, had he not Hgnalized himfelf fo often In political con- 
trovert es, and publifhed fo many hard things againft others. But, 
as reafon is now taking place of declamation^ it Is beft to bring him 
to that point, in which he may fhew his fmcerity to the beft advan- 
tage. The times require an explicit condu<^ ; and. In order to try 
the validity of profeflions, an appeal fhould be made to the con- 
fciences of thofe who profefs to take " Truth for their guide," and 



76 Thanhghnng Days, No. XVII. 

Religion " for their object.'* The touchftone of religion is, to ac- 
knowledge a fault after having committed it. Charity may cover 
a multitude of fms, but cannot hide the deformity of wilfully per- 
fifting in error. A man muft caft out the beam in his own eye, 
before he attempts to pull out the mote which is in his brother's 
eye. Unlefs this "is done, it will not do to talk about Illuminati, 
deifm, atheifm, or the decay of religion, &c, Firft let him fhew his 
own veracity, and he will then feel a confidence in judging on 
other men's faults. If fuch an error had been committed in his 
Geography, he would have been bound in duty to rectify 
the miftake ; and, in candour to the Dodlor, it muft be acknowl- 
edged that he wifhes to ftand with equal reputation as an evangel- 
ical, and as a geographical author. Will calumniating Mr. Jeffer- 
fon, as an infidel, atone for the impiety of affronting the Supreme 
Being, by returning thanks, " that though we have loft a WaJJoing- 
ton, yet v/e ftill have an Hamllton^^ \ Hypocrify itfelf muft blulh 
at fuch duplicity. 

The mode, in v^hich our Faft and Thankfgiving Days has 
of late been celebrated, by feme of the Clergy, has had a tenden- 
cy to deftroy that religious charadler, which diftlnguifhed cur 
venerable anceftors, Thofe days originated from that pure prin- 
ciple which ought ever to govern a people profeffing godlinefs. 
They v/ere fet apart for the exprefs purpofe, " to cher'iJJo in the minds 
of the people afenfe of their dependance on the Supreme Being." But 
if we examiue the fermons, preached for four or five years back, 
how greatly deficient are they on this point ? The people have af- 
fembled en thofe occafions, but how fmall a part of the fermons 
has been directed to this purpofe ? Politics, inftead of religion, 
has generally been the theme for contemplation.^ The mind of 
the audience, inftead of being folemnized to adore the Supreme 
Being for all his mercies, has been convulfed with party contro- 
verfies. The preacher, in many inftances, has exhibited m.ore the 
attitude of a d'lBator^ than the folemn deportment of aChrlftian min- 
ifter. The congregation has been greatly difturbed by the incon- 
fiderate behaviour of the prieft ; and the foclety have feparated 
with as much perfonal irritation, as if they had been attending an 
ele(5lioneerIng town-meeting, Faft and Thankfgiving Days have 
been converted to days of ftrife, and the focial circles have often 
been rendered dlfagreeable by the difgufting condu<51: and political 



No. X\''II. Thanksgiving Days. 77 

dogmas of a vindl(5llve bigot. The Great Benefactor of 
THE Would has been but a fecondary object, and the names of 
men have been oftener mentioned than the name of God, or Jesus 
Christ. The fadt is, fuch an outrageous impulfe has been excit- 
ed, that feme perfons could fcarccly walk the ftreets without being 
infulted. Faft and thankfgiving fermons were made political en- 
gines to propagate particular fentiments. Thev became a mere 
-traffic, and were hawked about the ftreets like play-bills or quack- 
m'edicines. The pipers were filled with advertifements of faft 
and thankfgiving fermons ; the clergy feemed embodied, a.nd the 
prefs groaned with new editions of Morfe, Ofgood, and Dwight, 
and even a Gardner vented his venomous fpleen, fhroudcd witliin 
the pale of the fanctuary. Faft and thankfgiving days were days 
of political controverfy ; feme of the clergy took the field, and 
their pulpits mounted as many guns as a firft rate man-of-war. 
The pews of certain individuals were fo particularly aimed at, that 
the perfons were almoft obliged to raife a Ireali-ivGrk, to fcreen 
themfelves from their clerical affailants. Faft and thankfgiving days 
were, in a great meafure, affumed as the privileged periods, when 
fiery zealots arraigned theii congregations, to receive a fentence of 
condemnation for the deeds done as citizens and freemen ; the cul- 
prits were fummoned, and the reverend judge infiidled his punifh- 
ment, under all the terror which naturally attaches itfelf to a 
facerdotal anathema. When the congregation was difmiifed, In- 
ftead of hearing any thing which related to the bufinefs of the 
gofpel, each one went away " nvagglng his J?ead,^^ and infulting his 
political antagonlft. Amidft this torrent of political phrenzy, to 
the honour of many gentlemen In the profeffion, they omitted poli- 
tics, and led their audience to adore that Being, by whom all 
bleffings come. 

I would not be thought unreafonably fevere in my remarks, but 
I can appeal to mj fellow-citizens for the truth of them. In a 
cool moment It Is beft to recapitulate thefe circumftances, as reflec- 
tions on the unv.^arrantable behaviour of fame Clergymen, may be 
of fervlce to them in their future condu<5l ; neither do I wifh to 
cenfure them too rafhly, but when they have been guilty of fuch 

• • • 

impropneties, a plain ftatement of their " zeal without know- 
ledge," may lead them to a reformation, if not to repentance. If 
their feelings are hurt by a revificn of their proceedings, how do 



^8 Thanhgivhig Days, No. XVH. 

they think thofe whom they have cenfured were able to Hand the 
ordeal of their vindidive decifions ? It is but a fair retaliation, 
that they Ihould receive a few of thofe lafhes which they have fo 
unmercifully beftowed on others. 

The profiitution of Faft and Thankfgiving days, from thofe 
pure principles which adluated our pious forefathers, has been a 
primary caufe of the decay of religion. The people in too many 
inftances have found them, ufed by the clergy to improper purpofes. 
The minds of the aged have been foured and imbittered, while the 
young have been led to contemplate them only as fet apart for po- 
litical controverfy. Inftead of piety and devotion, politics have 
been confidered as the fubjed to arreft the public attention, which^ 
naturally excited an indiiference and inattention to every religious 
confideration. The worfhip of the Supreme Being, has fcarcely 
formed a trait of our public difcourfes ; inftead of adoring KiM,we 
haA^eblafted the French Directory — inftead of returning him thanks, 
we have abufed each other — inftead of praying for a bleffing, we 
have curfed thofe who differed from us. Society almoft feemed 
rent afunder ; contentions and bickerings, inftead of love and 
unity, were too often the productions of thofe folemn ceremonies. 
Why then .are v/e to look to French phllofophy, or Mr. Jefferfon's 
writings, for the decay of religion ? Let us look at home, and in- 
quire whether the caufe has not arifen a}no::g ourfehDzs.^ and from a 
fource, from which we had a right to exped better things. Relig- 
ion is conftructed of the pureft and rnoft refined materials ; an unfkil- 
ful profefTor, though placed in a confpicuous ftation, may deflroy its 
comelinefs and deform its features : it requires the moil delicate man- 
agement, otherwife it receives more incurable wounds from its advo- 
cates, than from its moft inveterate enemies. The garb of religion is 
of the mofl exquifite texture, and it may eafily be torn afunder by 
thofe who attempt to vvear it. A fiery zealot, in lighting up the 
torch to enforce it, endangers the fyflepfi to a general conflagra- 
tion. The mild precepts of our Saviour is the oil which burns in 
the lamp, and thofe who purfue a different courfe are the " foolifli 
virgins" who are ' deftitute of this vivifying ingredient. Though 
fuch perfons may fay, " I have eaten and drank in thy prefence," 
yet the denunciation, " depart from me," will fall on thofe who 
liave violated their facred functions, and proftituted them to 



Ng.XVIIL- CathoUc'ism, f^ 

worldly purpofes. Whilft the benevolent principles which are in- 
culcated by Mr. Jeffeifon, to give every man the right of confcience^ 
will be applauded, the fanatic reviler, who is willing to torture 
a man into his own creed, will be reprobated as an impoftor, and 
an enemy both to God and man. May the religious of every fedl 
think on thefe things. 



No. XVIIL 

CATHOLIC ISM.' 
To the Author of " J^he Jeferjomadr In the Centinel. 

IF our newfpapers v/ere confined within the territory of the United 
States, there would be no occafion to anfwer the many grofs ob- 
furdities which appear againft Mr. JefFerfon. But as they circu- 
late in Europe, fome reply is neceffary to remove the ftigma 
which othcrways might be attached to them. A gentleman who 
has for fo many years received the honours of his country, and 
been fo highly refpedled by his fellow-citizens, cannot at this time 
require the afliftance of his friends to vindicate his reputation. At 
the trying period of our revolution, he ftood confpicuous both as 
a patriot and ftatefman. Among the v/orthles which adorn the 
pages of the American hiftory, his name Is enrolled with diftln- 
guilhed approbation and applaufe. Ever uniform and confident 
with thofe republican principles which fuftalned America during 
her conflid with Britain, he has novsr brought on himfelf the curfes 
of APOSTATE ivhigs, and the anathemas of profefTed tories. Thefe 
men ficken at his virtues, efpecially thofe, who are balking under 
the funfhine of lucrative ojices) and are fharing a large proportion 
of the money arlfmg from the taxes of the people. The degenerate 
Jons offreedomy are appalled at his magnanimity, and view with af- 
tonilhment, that he has not, like themfelves, faciificed his political 
integrity, to his perfonal emolument. A Samuel Adams, and a 
Thomas JefFerfon ftand on that eminence of political rcdlltude, 
which difllngulfhed them before the pecuniary means of govern- 
ment had a charm to violate their former profefTions. They ftlU 
view the peopU as entitled to rights of which hq conftituted au- 



|<3 Caiholk'wn* Ko. XVIIL 

thority can dilarm them, and they feel thofe attachments to pre- 
ferve the liberty of the citizens, which led them to defend it againil 
Britain, and her tory fatellites. Honour, and difiindions are na 
lm*es with them, to annul thofe bleffings which Am.erica fo dearly 
earned, neither has their elevation fo far laifed them above their 
fellow-citizens, as to diflinguifh them in clalTes by any degrading 
appellation. This equality of rights y both as it refpe<5]:s ci'ulli and re- 
lig'wus liberty y Urged Mr. Jefferfon to vindicate the rights of con- 
science, and to difrobe the proud hierarchy, which had proftrated 
every other religious denomination to the lowell ftage of vaflalage. 
Not content with freeing America from the tlyaldrom of Britain, 
he thouo^ht the work but half accomnlilhed till he had declared 

the CONSCIENCES OF MEN FREE, SOVEREIGN, AND INDEPENDENT. 

For this, my fellow-citizens, is this virtuous chara6ter abufed ; 
for this is he vilified and calumniated ; for this noble difplay of 
catholicifm he is called an enemy to his country ; for giving every 
man a right to worftiip God agreeably to his confcience, he is called 
a deifl, and by fome is abfurdly denounced an atheift. Becaufe he 
has attempted to adminifter the Conftitution upon the principles of 
economy and republicanifrny he is charged as iiibverting its principles ; 
becaufe he is defirous to prevent burdenfome taxes, and to make 
the government fet light on our fhoulders, he is defignated as a 
diforganizer and friend to anarchy. 

While reading the torrent of fcurrility and billingfgate againil 
him, the heart of every veal American muft palpitate with refent- 
ment ; we mufl turn indignant on thofe venal columns, which are 
proftituted to defame the charafter of this firft of patriots ; the 
ghoits of Hancock and of Warren, with the hoft of heroes wha 
have bled in defence of freedom, muft frovv^n with vindidive ire 
©n fuch bafe ingratitude, and even Waihington muil view with 
abhorrence, the bafe treatment oi the man whom he delighted to hon^ 
our. The hero of Mount Vernon knew his worth, and confided in 
his virtues ; his talents were equal to the greateft em.ergencies, and 
his honour and integrity placed him above the groveling bias of 

« 

executive patronage. 

This is the man, fellow-citizens, whom the tory-faBion attempt 
to depreciate, to render fufpicious, and to excite our deteftation. 
They dread his virtues, and are afraid, left in the execution of his 
cfEce, he Ihould make manifefl their wicked machinations, to de- 



No. XVIII. CathoUdfm. %i 

prive us of our liberties. An hoft of fuch afTailants are now adtive 
in their diabolical fchemes, and have fet in motion every deteftable 
tool, and ^^ bafe-born" fycophant, to accomplilh their wicked pur- 
pofes. But I truft in heaven they will be defeated, and inftead of a 
JefFerfon falling a prey to fuch a venomous fadion, we fondly an- 
ticipate the happy profpecft, when his enemies v/jU be confounded 
by the approbating voice of his fellow-citizens. 

To injure the reputation of Mr. JefFerfon, they have foolifhly 
charged him with a defign to exterminate religion^ and deflroy the moral 
'Virtues of the people. The writings and condudl of this gentleman 
are fo contrary to defigns of this nature, that his defamers muft 
blufh at the afTertion, His Notes on Vircrinia aie worthy the pe- 
rufal of the chriftian and philofopher. The benevolence of his 
heart is worthy the imitation of the moft devout ; and the accura- 
cy of his inveftigations muft enlighten and inform the moft intel- 
ligent. As an author, he is an honour to his country, and the lit- 
erary reputation of America is eftablilhed in Europe, through the 
medium of his publications. 

His political condu(5t is a great argument, that he is not defi- 
rous to injure either the religious or m.oral charader of the people. 
His oppofition to particular meafures is a ftrong proof that he Is 
for preferving them in their primitive purity. Mr. JefFerfon has 
ever been oppofed to fyftems, which had a tendency to produce 
thofe evils with which his enemies charge him. If he had a feri- 
ous defign to deftroy all religious and moral principles, he would 
have been in favour of thofe meafures which would have led to this 
fatal cataftrophe ; he would have been an advocate for all thofe 
plans of fpeculatibn, v/hich ferve to diffipate and vitiate the mind, 
and lead the community to prey upon each other ; he would have 
fludied a deep fyftem of finance, whereby a (lock-jobber, an ufurer, 
and a fliarper, might defraud his neighbour ; he would have 
planned ways and means to throw advantages into the hands of 
unprincipled fpeculators, and by a dajh of the pen^ to rob the old 
foldier of his hard-earned property, and reduce to poverty the 
widow and the orphan | he would have matured plans to enric!Ri a 
particular clafs of men, and have fet a fnare to violate every tie 
which cements fociety ; he would have made itfajh'wnable to riot 
©n the fpcils of the unfortunate, and proHrate the virtuous to tha 



#2 Catholicism, No. XVIII, 

lov/efi: ftage of wretchednefs. Thefe are meafures which he would 
have adopted, if he had defigned to deftroy every fenfe of re- 
ligion and morality, but unfortunately for his enemies, he has ever 
expreffed his abhorrence to fuch horrid fyflems, as lead to thefe 
demo ranging purpofes. As a philofopher, he knew the human 
heartj and if he had a difpofition to introduce irreligion and immo- 
rality, he would have purfued thofe meafures, which had fuch a 
direft tendency to accomplilh his wifhes. More particularly would 
he have been in favour of a standing army, that bane to every 
principle which ennobles the human mind. This would have 
been his favourite plan, as the moft potent engine by which his 
projed:s could be effeded. A rendezvous, for the enliftment of 
foldiers, would have been a more powerful channel to communi- 
cate his principles, than long philofophical differtations. At fuch 
reforts, the drum and fife are more forcible arguments than fine- 
ipun difquifitions- — here the paffions are inflamed, and fcenes pre- 
fented which flrike the fenfes with the moft lafting imprefTions. 
The language of a rendezvous, together with all the arts and 
tricks to entrap an inconfiderate youth, are allurements which lead 
the mind to the utmoft ftretch of profiigacyr 

The fatal efFefts of fuch an eftablilhment have been too often 
felt in Bofton, and with pain have we feen a long train of young 
snen, following a ftandard in that ftate of intoxication, which fully 
proved the impropriety of the means by which they were induced 
to an enliftment. Such a difplay of immorality, and irreligion 
muft have been plcafmg to Mr. Jefferfon, if he was defirous to 
extend fuch fentinients as are alleged againft him, and he muft 
have been doubly delighted, to find the fiveeping of the metropolis 
garrifoned in different towns among the honeft and induftrious 
yeomanry. The profanenefs, and indecent condudl which are 
heard, and obferved in our ftreets, are in a great degree owing to 
this fource of iniquity. To this may be attributed the decay of rC" 
ligion and morality. 

If then, fellow-citizens, Mr. Jefferfon is the charadler he is rep- 
refented to be, how came he to be againft a standing army ? Can 
it be fuppofed that he was ignorant of its tendency ? No ; if he 
wifhed to annihilate every trait of virtue and morality he would 
have enforced it with all the powers of rhetoric, and called on his 
&llow-citizens to aid the eftablilhment. But, on the contrary, he 



No. XIX. Pulpit Decfamation, S3 

ftands among the worthies who early difcountenanced fuch a de- 
ftru(5llve evil. 

Amer-icans ! 
AfTume your wonted dignity — —revere the man who has thus 
deferved well of his country. Let not the enemies of our inde- 
pendence blaft the man who penned the immortal declaration, 
more particularly, when he is calumniated in thofe papers which 
eulogize a Suwarrow. 



No. XIX.- 

PULPIT DECLAMATION. 



ZxN enemy may be indulged to ufe his weapons, however weak 
and contemptible he may appear in the controverfy. Decius has 
ijuitted the field in difgrace, and has left a feeble antagonift, under 
the fignature of Ph'tlanthropos^ to cover his retreat. The purfuit of 
fuch an adverfary, though it cannot add laurels to the alTailants, 
yet it is fonietimcs bell to filence the croakings of fuch infignificant 
infedls. 

This neixj commjfioned general Philanthropes (if we may judge 
from his diftion) may more eafily be defignated by his black gown 
and tvk'Ue bandsy that by any other profeffional diftindlion. He 
appears anxioufly concerned for the reputation of the clergy, and 
expredes the greateft apprehenfions, left the reverend appellation 
fhould be brought into difrefpe^. In the height of his zeal, he 
has charged me as being a calumniator of this venerable fraternity 
—as defirous to depreciate their reputation — in Ihort, he pronoun- 
ces me an infidel, and ufes other epithets equally as obnoxious. 

This is a fpecies of virulence and indecency of language ever 
ufed by bigots. Deftitute of argument, they always have recourle 
to hard names and fcurrilous reflexions — they never reafon, but 
entrench themfelves within their facerdotals, and abufe their oppo- 
nents witli every opprobrious term which malignity can devife or 
fanaticifm fuggeft. Deift, atheift, infidel, defamer, diforganizer, 
are weapons with which they affail their antagonift s : but they 
are fuch daftards In fair open controverfy, that to confound them» 
It is only neceflary to (ketch their portrait, ^nd they are tfirified 
at the deformity of their own features. 



Pulpit Declamathn, No. XIX. 

Phllanthrop.os pofTefTes the y,enom of a fanatic to fuch a degree, 
that he difregards both truth and raodefty. He has wickedly 
mlftated my arguments, and unjuflly reprefented me as an oppofer 
of the chrijlian religion. So far from depreciating the clergy in the 
character they ought to fuftain, I have endeavoured to draw the 
line between thofe, nvho violate their ordination engagements^ and thofe 
who act agreeably to them. A gofpel minifter and a political dem- 
agogue, are very diflinft charadters, and though both may wear a. 
clerical badge, yet it does not require extraordinary penetration to 
difcover the impoftor. 

Xhe people, when they fettle a minifter, do not intend to eredl a 
clerical inquifition within the parifh. Politics were never contem- 
plated in the articles of a church compa-ft. They are willing to 
hear gpjpel truths^ but are oppofed to political creeds. A minifter may 
imbibe certain doctrines of evangelical faith : having a fpecim.en 
of his orthodoxy previous to his fettlement, he has a right to main- 
tain his tenets among his Jociety^ and endeavour to inftrudt them 

agreeably to the plan on which he firft engaged in their fervice 

but politics is a diftinft fubjedt on which no previous opinion had 
been determined, and he has no more right to Impofe his political 
creed upon the people, than to enforce any other fpeculative quef- 
tion whatever. If he em.ploys his time in preaching on political 
fabjefts, he robs the parifh, as they never gave him a falary to 
difcufs controveriies of this nature. Thofe clergymen, therefore, 
who have arrogated fuch liberties, either on the Sabbath, Faft or 
Thankfgiving Days, are not within the pale of the church, but 
muft be considered as heretics^ who have proftituted their facred 
profeflion, and* demeaned themfelves to become the tools of a 
wicked and degenerate faction. 

To evidence which, I will call on Philanthropos to anfwer, 
whether it is not highly degrading and derogatory to a chrijlian 
preacher^ to entertain a refpectable and devout audience, with a 
ftory, which had no reference to the folemnities of the day, and 
which ferved to irritate the individuals who affembled for religious 
exercifes on a ftated anniverfary ? and further, I would afk him, 
whether he can reconcile an ohjllnate filence in any man, if requefted 
in chrijlian charity^ to acknowledge the rafhnefs and precipitancy of 
his conduct ? If fuch a man is often charging others with deceiv- 
ing the public ; if he has denounced particular charaftersj as in= 



IN^o. XlXo Pujp'it ThdamatioUf %^ 

fidels, iiluminati, diforganlzers, &c. muft he not be confounded, 
while he Hands a felf-convicled propagator of the mofl mfamcu^ 
fVdfehood ? If he knows that his alTertions in the pulpit were 
erroneous, and yet contemns every religious and moral obligation 
to redify the miilake, we cannot but condemn him as a deceiver, 
even though he fhould pretend to advocate tlie truths of the gof- 
pel, or fnould be anxious to obtain miillonaries to propogate the 
chriftian religion. 

Suppofe Mr. JefFerfon had thus impofed on the public ? what 
would Philanthropos have faid to blaft his reputation ? How- 
would he ring peals of anathemas againft the author, and fijl coir 
umns in newfpapers to depreciate his charader ? And yet, ftrange 
to fay, a pmis ecclefiqjlk, of this defcription, can wipe his mouth 
with a hypocritical fan(5tity, and has the audacity to condemn 
others, v/hile he Hands pre-eminently confpicuous for calunmv, de- 
traifiion, and defamation. 

As Philanthropos has charged me with a defign to injure the 
clergy, I am bound in duty to declare, in my own vindication, 
that fo far from wilhing to traduce their character, I feel the iit- 
jxioft veneration for them. For this purpofe, I have placed them 
on that ground which was contem.plated by our Saviour. T have 
applied his dodlrines as taught in fcripture, and mentioned his de- 
nunciation againlt fuch only, as he exprefsly reprobates. If I am 
WTong, the fcripture is the rule of error, as my quotations are 
wholly taken from this fource. Philanthropos has charged me 
with a defign to injure the clergy, becaufe I have faid, that the 
hiftory of our Saviour Avas a proof of the wicked defigns of a na- 
tional hierarchy. To judge of this remark, let us refer to the 
Bible : — their charafler and conduct are thus given, viz. " That 
when the chief priefts favv'- the wonderful things which he did, they 
were fore difpleafed ;" he. reprobates their pride, " that they made 
broad their philaiTtories, and enlarged the borders of their gar- 
ments ; that they loved the uppermoft rooms at feafts, and the chief 
feats in the fynagogues, and greetings in the market places, and to be 
called of men. Rabbi, Rabbi ;" " that the chief prlefts mocked him, 
and faid, he faved others, himfelf he cannot fave ;" " that they 
came unto Pilate after his crucifixion, faying. Sir, we remember 
that that deceiver faid, when he was yet alive, after tliree days I 
yfill rife again," 



S5 Pulpit Declamation. No. XIX. 

If fuch things fliould now be fald by Him of the chief priefts, 
while exercifmg their hierarchical fundions, Philanthropos would 
cry out that He was deceiving the people, and there is no doubt 
he W3uld contemn our Saviour for his jealoufies of the clerical eilab- 
lifhments. But, while he was thus condemning the hypocrites of 
thofe days, we do not find that his dlfclpks were difpleafed with his 
conduc51, or cenfured him for expofmg the wickednefs of an ecclefi- 
aftical fraternity. At that period, the long-robe gentry were ful» 
minating the curfes of the altar agalnft him, and his humble follow- 
ers ; HE and they were fligmatized as men, who were ** turning 
the world upfide down ;" the hirelings of the church were vocif- 
erous In their anathemas, and the temple of Ephefus was proclaim- 
ed as tottering to its centre ; the friends to our Saviour were per- 
fecuted, and the apoftles were expofed to every Infult, and finally 
fell martyrs to their integrity. Stephen, when ftoned, was oppof- 
ing the hypocrify of prleftly bigotry ; and even St. Paul declares 
that " he received his authority from the chief priejis,^^ on his fan- 
guinary errand to Damafcus. Among the thoufands converted 
by Him, and his apodles, there does not appear one prkjl among 
the number. 

To fum up the whole evidence of the Bible, it Is clear, the chief 
prtejls were the perfecutors of our Saviour during his refidence on 
earth ; they arraigned him at the tribunal ; bribed Judas Ifcariot 
to betray him, and afterwards laughed at his repentance ; they in- 
fulted him at the crofs ; charged him with being 2. deceiver ; per- 
fecuted his dlfciples, apoftles, and followers, and at length com- 
rniffioned Paul to ^' purfue them to ftrange cities." 

Thefe particulars I mentioned in my former number, and for 
this I am accufed by Philanthropos as a defamer of the ivhole 
order of clergy. My authority is frqm fcrlpture, as it refpedts a 
national eflahl'i/hment, and while I can appeal to this document, the 
frowns of a few clerical bigots will be difregarded. 

I freely make this declaration, that I am a friend to the clergy, 
in the charader contemplated by our Saviour ; but in any other, 
they are on a level with other men, and if they enter into political 
controvcrGes and endeavour to influence the people in their elec- 
tions, they quit their clerical ftatlon, and muft expe<5l to receive in 
return as plain dealing as they give to others. 



No. XX. Congressional Caucus^ tj 



No. XX. 

CONGRESSIONAL CAUCUS, 

X HE numberlefs abfurdities of Declus, in oppofition to Mr, 
JefFerfon, render him fo ridiculous, that in order to anfwer him a 
man is obliged to condefcend to frholitiesf which are degrading 
in a free country, even to treat with civility. — As a fpecimen of 
which, I will bring before the public an argument on which he is - 
foolifh enough to lay the greateft ftrefs of his reafoning. He fays, 
" that previous to the adjournment of Congrefs, a Caucus was held 
on the budnefs of deciding on a Prefident and Vice-Prefident ; 
and that Mr. Adams and Mr. Pinckney w^ere agreed on as candi- 
dates" ; and, to enforce his argumentyht exclaims, " hov/ unreafonable 
would it be for the people to fruftrate this deciflon.'* 

Merely to flate this circumftance is fufficient to fruftrate fuch 
an unconftitutional and unwarrantable proceeding. It fcarcely 
admits of a comment. It is too degrading to be ferioufly noticed, 
and yet Decius has the folly to offer this plea as a conclufive argu* 
ment, why the citizens of the United States ought to accede to this 
determination. 

If any thing will roufe the freemen of America, it muft be the 
arrogance of a number of members of Congrefs to affemble as an 
EleBioneering Caucus, to control the citizens in their conftitutional 
rights. Under what authority did thefe men pretend to dilate 
their nomination ? Did they receive fix dollars a day for the 
double purpofe of caucujjlng and leglflatlng ? Do we fend members 
to Congrefs to cahal once in four years for Prefident ? or are we 
arrived to fuch a pitch of congrefHonal influence, that what they 
decide on. is to be binding on the United States ? Is there any 
paragraph in the Conftitution which gives them fuch an authority, 
or even countenances fuch a proceeding ? After Congrefs have 
accomplifhed their legiflative bufmefs, have they a right to didlate 
in the choice of an executive ? If fo, what an impofition on " the 
people" to talk about the freedom of ele<5lion ; or what confe- 
quenc'fe is. it that the State Legiflatures fhould concern themfelves 
in the mode of choofmg ele<ftors ? If a Congrefs Caucus is to de- 
cide, we have only to inquire who the man is in whom they have 



*t Congressional Caucus, No. XX, 

s>greed, and notifv him of his appointment. V/hy fliould we be at 
the expenfe of calling the LegiHatute together to choofe ele(5torsj 
for according to Declus' reafoning the choice of Prefident and 
Vice-Prefidsnt Is already made ? He tells us that they have agreed 
to vote for Meffrs. Adams and Pinckney. If this is the cafe, let 
the Governor of each State only acknowledge thefe two gentle- 
men, and leave it folely to Congrefs to difpofe of them. 

It Is full time that " the people" had fully afcertained their 
eledive privileges ; and if they m.ean to be led by Congreffional 
or Liegiilative CauculTes, it is bed the bufinefs ihould be openly ac- 
knowledged. For though an appeal to tlie citizens on this quef- 
tion might appear too abrupt, yet the fyftem lately adopted comes 
very near to the fame principle. 

There appears of late a deep dengn to fap the eledlions of the 
people by the various manoeuvres of a particular fet of men. In 
the firlt place, we are called on by Decius to vote for Meflrs. 
Adams and Pinckney, becaufe a junto in Congrefs had previoully 
determined on it ; in the fecond place, an attempt was made in 
tlie Senate to place the choice of a Prefident within the control of 
a feledi: committee in Congrefs ; in the third place, the people have 
been deprived of their ufual mode of voting for electors, becaufe 
the Legiiiature have afTumed this right to themfelves. Thefe 
combined circumftances are certainly alarming, and ought to be 
checked In their early ftages ; otherwife it will become an acknoiu- 
tedged right in the Legiflature to control the eletlions, and the 
conftitutlonal liberties of the people, will, in confequence thereof, 
fall a facrifice to fuch baneful encroachments. 

The argument of Decius, therefore, fo far from operating in 
His favour, ought to be reprobated as a high violation of the rights 
of " the people." If we admit his reafoning as conclufive, we 
may as Vv^ell burn the Conftitution and fubmit all our privileges to 
the Individuals In Congrefs. The people have only to fold up 
their arms and fet down quietly as the contemptible vafTals of a 
domineering ariilocracy. 

But, thank God ! there ftiU remains a fpirlt which ought ever 
to actuate Americans. The Conftitution yet ftands a facred 
pledge of the liberties of America. We feel too ftrong an attach- 
ment to its prefervatlon to fuffer any body of men to dellroy its 
vital energies* It is the ark of political ftfety, and may the vea- 



No. XXl. Obser'vdtlons on y^ristUes-» 89 

geance of heaven purfue the man who dares touch it with unhal* 
lowed hands. The freedom of eledion is the palladium of liberty, 
and while we exercife this right we may defy the power of tyrants 
and the intrigues of fadion. The people of the United States 
place themfelves on this mount, and on its permanent bafis they 
reft the happrnefs of fociety. It is of no avail to them to hear 
that a majority of Congrefs have determined on a Prefident or 
Vice-Prefident ; they turn over the leaves of the Conftitution and 
find it therein written, that they have a right to choofe their elec- 
tors, unbia/Ted by the decifions of any affumed power whatever. 
This is an interference with the conftituted authorities, (the 
people) which demands the moil pointed reprehenfion, and the 
men who have been guilty of fuch a profane breach of truft de- 
ferve the execration of the public. 

The infolence of Decius in prefuming to mention the determin- 
ation of the members of Congrefs, muft be placed to his ignorance ; 
he forgot he was writing to freemen ; he forgot he was ad dr ef- 
fing men who were afting under a Conftitution in the capacity of 
INDEPENDENT CITIZENS; he forgot that his appeal was to thofe 
Enlightened ELECTORS w^ho felt their own dignity and impor- 
tance on this interefting queftion. What ! Decius ! ! are you 
daring enough to arreft the votes of Americans, by telling them 
that their fervanfs in Congrefs have already decided the choice ! ! 
Are you fo abandoned as to ftab the Conftitution to its vitals, by 
checking the free exercife of the people in their fuffrages ? Jfyou 
are thus defperate, may their decifions give a lefibn to deter in 
future fuch imperious condud. 



No. XXL 

OBSERVATIONS ON ARISTIDES. 

It is a melancholy truth, that 2ifa8ion in this country have been 
able to purfue a fyftem of political meafures, which has plunged 
it into a moft ferious and alarming fituation. This infidious junto 
have had the addrefs to palm themfelves on the unfufpeding citi- 
zens, as the friends to government, and have had the effrontery 
L 



^o OhserTattons en Arisi'idei, No. XXI^ 

to defignate their fraternity Avitli the emphatlcal appellation of 
Federalists. Their impudence has been fo outrageous, that 
they have had the audacity to brand every nnan with the epithet 
of yacoh'in, who prefumed to exercife a right to arraign their con- 
du(5l before the tribunal of an impartial public. But heaven, in 
mercy to an injured people, has confounded their devices, and 
placed therii in a predicament fomewhat fimilar to Milton's fallen 
angels, in accufmg and condemning each other. 

How long have the citizens been impoi'ed on by the difgrace- 
ful tales fabricated within the circle of thefe caballing alToeiates! 
How many patriots have been facrificed to promote their detefta- 
ble purpofes ! Kow many charafters have been wantonly fported 
with to exalt them to the higheft elevation ! and how many honeft 
men have been degraded, to raife"^the fatellites of this party to 
places of honour and profit. — Yes, fellow-citizens ! we have feen 
the evil effeds of this unpiincipled combination, and this country 
has now to deplore its unhappy fituation, in confequence of the 
fatal pohcy adopted by thofe, who have too long trefpaiTed on our 
patience and confidence. It is rather fmgular, however, that 
every aiTertion made by thofe, who are flyled Jacohms, are proved 
to be fa<5ts, by the very men, who have been moll forward to de« 
nounce them. 

It is a diftrefhng refleclion, that the flratagems and Intrigues of 
a number of unprincipled individuals fhould have fo far fucceeded, 
as to bring America to its prefent crifis. If the mifchlefs had ex- 
pired on the difcovery of their defigns, or their baneful effe(fl:s had 
ceafed to operate on the divifions among themfelves, we might now 
contemplate the fubje(5t with fome degree of compofure ; but their 
meafures have been " pregnant with evils," and their names will 
long be execrated, in confequence of the mifery entailed on this 
abufed country. If it is true, that " Mr. Hamilton is the princi- 
pal inftrument in exciting an unfounded alarm, and producing 
meafures which put the country to unnecefTary expenfe" ; that 
" he addreffed the citizens of the United States on the necelTity of 
raifmg an army, and'endeavoured to convince them of the danger 
ef invafion, when it was altogether chimerical, and almoll 
morally impofTible" ; that the main objedl, in eftabliihing this 
army, was to crufh every domeflic oppofition, and eventually to 
*' ^\ve a government to this country by force'^ ; that he propofed an 



No. XXI. Ohsei"vations on ^rhthles, gi 

cftabllfiiment of 50,000 infantry, and io,ocp cavalry; that he Is 
the " father of the military fyfiem," and that his influence has 
been fuch, as to force the government into this mmecefTary mea- 
lure, contrary to the wifhes and recommendations of the Prefident. 
If thefe charges can be fubftantiated, then the controverfy wears a 
ferious afpecl. 

This, however, is the character drawn of General Hamilton, 
by the author of a Letter addrefled to him, under the fignature of 
Ariftides, and fuppofed to be written by A^oah IVebJier, Efq. If he 
is falfe in his ftatement, let Mr. Hamilton contradict his affertions. 
While contemplating this fubjefl, in the extenfive fphere thus deA 
cribed by Ariftides, it rifes to a magnitude which muft roufe the 
attention of every friend to America ; — that he fhould be able to 
effect a military fyftem, contrary to the fentiments of the executive ; 
that he Ihould have fuch a control over the chief magiftrate, as to 
carry plans in oppofition to his wifhes ; that he ftiould throw fuch 
an enormous expenfe on the people, by exciting an unfounded 
alarm, and at length come forward, in the face of the public, and 
ahv.fs the Prefident for prefuming to a6t contrary to his will and 
pleafure. In this point of view what muft we think of Alexander 
Hamilton ? Where is the American, who ever thought, that 
within fo few years after the adoption of the Federal Conftitu- 
tion, that the government of the United States would have been 
fo far proftrated to the ambition of one man \ What ! are the 
people of the United States to be burdened with a debt of mil- 
lions, to difcharge the expenfes of an army, raifed in oppofition to the 
judgment of the Prefident ? Does the Conftitution recognize any 
other perfons than the Conftituted Authorities, or have the people 
any other means than to arraign the real culprits to the bar of an 
mjured country ? What other atonement can be made, for the 
jnillions expended by the iijtrlgues of fuch unprincipled individ- 
uals, or for the falfe alarms excited by their arts and ftratagems ? 
! — In a free country, the inquiry ought to embrace the extent of 
the evil, as the conftitution never fubftituted ^ifcape-goat, or affign- 
ed a city of refuge to the men whom it held refponfibk. 

Ariftides, after defcribing Mr. Hamilton in the manner before 
recited, introduces another Important tranfa6tion, in which he fays, 
*' many influential characters in government were engaged, particu- 
larly Timothy Pickerings late fecretarv of ftats.'' This meafure was up 



gz Observations on Aristtdes, No. XXI>, 

lefs than " a treaty offevjlve and defenfive nv'ith Greai-BritainJ'* In this 
part of the bufmefs, Ariftides introduces a fmgular aiTemblage of 
chara<5ters, viz. the Britifh Minifler and Peter Porcupine ; the latter^ 
in particular, ** propofed and urged an offenfive and defenfive 
treaty between the United States and Great-Britain." He farther 
alleges, as a fa6l, ** that Porcupine was an jigent of the Brlti/h 
Miniftr :, and correfponded with the un4er Secretaries of State" : 
and t J top the climax, Ariftides afferts, " as a ivell known fact, that 
he had won over to his intereft, the Government-Paper of the. United 
Statefw^' 

Here, reader, I mnft befeech you to paufe, and reflecfl on the 
precipice over which our country has been fufpended ! Confider 
ferioufly the dreadful gulph into which we were threatened to be 
plunged. While we think on this fubjedl, we cannot but tremble 
at our own fituation. The foregoing recitals, on the condufl of 
men, are not the vague declamations of perfons who are defirous 
to diforganize and convulfe the government, but they are docu- 
ments taken from a writer, who declares himfelf " too long the 
faithful fervant of his country, to incur the fufpicion of apoftacy," 
and wlio has written in vindication of Mr. Adams, in anfwer to 
Mr. Hamilton. This man tells the public, as matters offaSl, " that 
Hamilton ivas the father of the military fyftem" ; " that it was 
adopted by his inftrum.entality, and contrary to the inclination of 
the Prefident" ; that Pickering, and other influential charaders, 
were defirous of a treaty offenfive and defenfive v/ith Great- 
Britain" ; " that the Britifh Minifter ftood ready to clofe the fatal 
contrad" ; and, ftill further, " Peter Porcupine had urged the 
meafure, and had fo far corrupted the ftreams of public commu- 
nication, as that he had won over the ft ate paper of the govern- 
ment." Are thefe things true, as afferted by this author ? I do 
not pretend to fay they are, but they certainly require fome expla- 
nation from the parties. 

Graciou-s heaven ! ! — Is Is poftible, that America ftiould be 
reduced to fo humiliating and degrading a pofition ? That an 
army fhould be raifed by deceiving the conftituted authorities, by 
whofe fandion alone it could have been brought into exiftence ? 
But the degradation increafes in its ignominy, when we find that 
a Britl/h corporal fhould have the eftrontery to profecute his plans 
by the fecret agency of the Britifti Miniftry, Thus the Executive 



No. XXII. Appeal to the Clergy, gg 

was deceived to raife an army, while Porcupine had, by his addrefs, 
fecured the patronage of the governmental printer. A hopeful 
ftate- truly, for the free, fovereign, and independent States of 
America. 

Ye fpirits of Hancock, Warren, and Montgomery ! if, in the 
regions of blifs, the concerns of your country arreft your attention, 
how muft the pleafures of heaven be allayed, to learn the abafe- 
ment of your country ! How muft indignation fire your fouls, to 
find that a ivretchy fo debafed as Cobbetty fhould be employed by 
individuals, to accomplifh th? wicked defigns of involving us in 
war, and that he fhould obtain fuch an afcendancy^ as to pollute 
the ftreams of pubHc information ! How changed fmce the days 
of our revolution ! when even George the Third, with his hofl: 
of troops, were baffled by the patriotifm and integrity of the free 
bom citizens of America ; and when a contemptible corporal and his 
accomplices would have been hiffed out of the country, with every 
mark of deteftation and difgrace. The contraft is too humiliating, 
to dwell any longer on the fubjedl: ; but I truft that the flame of 
our revolution will not be extinguifhed by the iveakeji engine of the 
Britifh nation. On tlie prefent emergency, may the people ral- 
ly round the Constitution, as the mount on which their polit- 
ical ark is to fettle with permanency. In this intrepid attitude of 
FREEMEN, may they check their enemies, and finally place them in . 
that debafed ftation in which they have attempted to put the in- 
dependent Citizens of America ! 
Americans, 
" Let then ail that is party be obliterated, and let all that is 
American appear" ; may it appear in that effulgence, as to blaft 
the ignis fatuus of a faction, who wifh to ally us with Britain : May 
the American citizens embody in a phalanx, and counteradl, with 
perfevering refolution, the machinations of thofe who are planning 
our ruin. 

No. XXII. 

APPEAL TO THE CLERGY. 

X HE fnare is broken and we have efcaped," has of late beert 
an exprefllon of thankfulnefs in our public devotions j but, while 



54 ^ Appeal to the Clergy. No. XXII. 

we adore the Supreme Being for his mercies, it behoves us to 
watch thofe who have attempted to deftroy us. The tory faftion, 
who have long been planning a fyftem of extermination, as it re- 
lates to France, have been equally as affiduous to connect the 
United States in an alliance with the oppreflive government of 
Britain. This party have wifhed to bring the two countries into a 
folemn league and covenant, and have been daring enough to 
rifque the peace, happinefs and independence of America, on the 
uncertain and convulfed flate in which Britain is now plunged. 
This alliance is as unnatural as winter with fummer ; notwith- 
ftanding her parade of energy, yet the immenfity of her debt on 
the commencement of a peace, v/ill unavoidably throw her into 
paroxifms of diffolution. 

A young government like America, to ally itfelf with Britain, 
is of all things the mod abfurd and ridiculous ; — a nation, in its 
vigor, to attach itfelf by treaty, to foHov^^ all the fpeculative and 
defperate projedls of one fo peculiarly circumflanced as the Eng- 
lilh, mull be confidered by every reflejSling man as injudicious and 
impolitic. However anxious fome are for their fuccefs againft 
prance, yet the United States have more to dread from the impo- 
fition on their commerce by the Britiih, th^n from any other power 
in Europe. Have we experienced that friendfhip from her, that 
America can feel an attachment for her welfare ? Has fhe refpe6t- 
ed our neutrality, during the prefent war, even though we have 
facrificed our interefl by a difgraceful treaty ? Did '[\\z exhibit 
fuch pajtience, magnanimity, and generofity towards us, during our 
revolution, that we can confide in her friendlhip, hi cafe Jhe fucceeded 
agdinjl her European enemies P The old Tories and apostate 
WHIGS may fay yes ! but their judgment is not the criterion in the 
prefent queftion. I would rather apply to the citizens of Amer- 
ica, who have experienced the vindidive temper of Britons, Hef- 
fians, and Waldeckers ; I would rather apply to thofe, who faw 
the flames of Charledown, Portland, Norfolk, Sec. who experienc- 
ed their cruelty on board the guard fhips at New- York ; who 
wept over the houfes of worfhip, difmantled of their fteeples, pul- 
pits, pews, and facramental tables ; whofe feelings were put to the 
torture, in obferving the fanduary converted to an equeftrian the*, 
atre ; who heard the profane language of a foldiery, within the 
temple which had long become venerated by the prefence of a 



No. XXII. Jppecil to the Ckrgy. 95 

Prince, and the benedidlions of a Sewall ; to thofe, who were ac- 
cuftomed to the pleafing voice of a Whitfield, when the Old South 
was crouded before the fun had ftreaked the eafteni horizon. 
Thefe are the characters to whom I would make my addrefs ; 
efpecially at this period, when P%.eligion, pure and undcfiled Re- 
lip-ion, is brought forward as the teR of patriotifm. tVhat fay ye, 
citizens of New-England ? — Ye Clergy, what is your opinion ? — 
Ye men of piety, in holy orders, what confidence can you place in 
thofe who have fo grofsly and imploufly profaned your houfes of 
worfliip, and who difturbed your devotions on the day fet apart 
for public worihip ? Can the minifters of the gofpel now become 
the friends of thofe who have fhewn fuch a difpofition of enmity to 
that BEING whom they adore ? After driving the flock from their 
wonted paflures ; after introducing heajls for fport on the altar 
where the fouls of men were proftrated before the majefty of heaven ; 
after polluting the courts which led to Zion's gates with every 
obfeenity which could difgrace human nature — can ye, ye fiiini/lers 
of the gofpel, embrace the perpetrators as the friends of God, or to 
the caufe in which you have engaged I Such an unnatural alliance 
is affronting to heaven, and mull in the end be reprobated by fome 
evident marks of its difpleafure. 

The minds of the Americans have been inflamed on the fubjeft 
of religion, and dlre(5led to anathematize the French as the only fub- 
verters of this facred inflitution. But what nation has ever been 
fo hoftile to the principles of this country as the Britlfli ? From the 
firft fettlement of America, has not the hierarchy of the church 
been attempting to annihilate the independency of our religious 
eftablifhments ? Why did a Mayhew and a Chauncy enter the 
field of controverfy againfl the aiTumed rights of National Epifco=» 
pacy I Why did thofe religious patriots encounter the fplritual 
weapons of bilhops and their hoft of hireling fcribblers ? Why 
were they blafted as diforganlzers in their facerdotal profeilions I 
The anfwer Is plain, becaufe they oppofed thofe who wifhed to 
** lord it over Chrifl's heritage." 

During the revolution this fplrit was evidenced In the mofl: 
ftriking colours ; our Prejhyterian meeting-houfes were the peculiar 
objedls of refentment ; they were fly led Schifm-Jhops, and every 
lliaft of calumny and detraftion was diredled againfl their fupport- 
ers ; fcarcely was a town entered by the Britlfh troops but th« 



^6 . Appeal to the Clergyl No. XXIL 

houfes of worfhip experienced their particular violence. In the 
town of Bofton the inhabitants can recolle<5t the large proportion 
■which fell a facrifice to their hoftilities. Their condud was fo vin- 
di(5live, that it feemed a war o{ religious exterminatiojiy and they plac- 
ed our Prejbyterian worfhip in fuch a ridiculous point of viev/, that 
they wantonly aimed at thofe houfes which were diftinguifhed for 
Hie veneration of the men who had preached v/ithin them. Dr. 
Sewall v/as eminent throughout the world for his piety, and there- 
fore they chofe to fignalize his fan6luary for the moft degrading 
amufements ; they continued in their impiety till the old gentle- 
man ilalked before them, in the attitude of ari injured ghofl.-— 
The Old North was diftinguifhed by its venerable charaflers, and 
this ancient fabrick was deftined to the flames. Many other 
places of worfhip (excepting the EpifeopaUan) were defiled by their 
unhallowed hands. Our Sabbaths were days of military parade, 
and the higheft coiltempt was fliown for every thing which wore 
the appearance of religion and morality ; drums and fifes were the 
interludes to our devotion. 

Fellow-Citizens ! Is this too high a wrought pi<5lure of Britifh 
proceedings in this country during our revolution ? Ye vged. 
patriots, I can appeal to you for the truth of the defcription : Ye 
venerable matrons, T can call On you for the propriety of the ob- 
fervations : Ye m.inifters of the gofpel, fome of whom now flumber 
on your pofts, I will even venture to fummon you as evidences to 
the foregoing ftatement. If I am wrong in my narration, come 
forward and deny the facls ; but if I ani right, you muft accede to 
my principle. 

Where is the American then, who wiflies an alliance with 
England, to defend either our civil or religious rights ? But it has 
lately been declared, that " many influential characters in the gov- 
ernment" have been defirous to accomplifh this meafure. On the 
prefent occafion, however, it may not be impertinent to inquire 
whether thofe perfons are not the friends to Mr. Pinckney ? Are 
they not defirous to make him Piefident ? Is he not the man who 
is the objed of this particular party ? It is true, he may not favor 
their defigns, but we ought to be jealous of the candidate, who 
IS fupported by men of this defcription. Is he not patronized by 
the EfTex Junto ? And while we detefl their politics, we muft be 
careful of the man whom they recommend. 



I 



No. XXIII. To the Electors of the northern States, §f 

Unwarrantable jealoufy is derogatory to an enlightened 
people ; but there are points of decifion to which wife men will 
adhere. The crifis is important, and it calls on every confiderate 
citizen to weigh confequences. If we miftake our fituation, or be- 
come lulled into fecurity, by the deceptive appellations q{ Jederal'ijls 
^nd jacobins, our ruin is inevitable. Our government muft depend 
on the wifdom of its adminiftration, and the economy of its ex- 
penditures. An extravagant fyftem muft impoverifh the people j 
enormous taxes muft prefs hard on the induftrious citizens ; eight 
per cent, loans will increafe the public debt beyond the ability of 
thofe who vv^ill be called on to difcharge it. Let us then throw 
afide party fpirit, and contemplate the man whofe whole political 
condudl has been oppofed to fuch meafures : Who this man is, we 
have the ftrongeft evidences ; as the abufe of Mr. JefFerfon has 
folely arifen from his decided difapprobation of every religious iy- 
ranny, and his defire to adminifter the govemm.ent on the pure and 
ECONOMICAL principles cf repuhlicanifm. 

Americans ! this being the ftate of the queftion, can we halt 

between tV70 opinions ? Let us a<fl like men, and exercife our 

rights as becomes the defcendants of " tueU-bGrn'* Americans. 

The evidence of being " ivell-horn^'* is to preferve our freedom. 
When this is permanently effecfled, then may we exclaim with 

plealurable emotions, " the fnare is broken, and we have efcaped !"" 



No. XXIIL 

TO THE ELECTORS OF THE NORTHERN STATES. 

IN order to give a fpecimen of the tendency of your proceedings, I 
fhall exhibit the charafter of Mr. Adams as defcribed by Mr. 
Hamilton ; after revifing this portrait, you may be able to draw 
proper inferences of your conduct. 

Mr. Hamilton fays — " Mr. Adams does not pofiefs the talents 
adapted to the adminiflraticn of government ; he has intrinfic de- 
fe(fls in his character, which nnft him for the ojice of Chief Magif 
irate** — " he is a man of an imagination fublimated and excentric 
—propitious neither to a regular difplay of fovnd judgment, nor to 
N 



9^ To the Electors of No. XXIII. 

fteady peVfeverance in a fyftematlc plan of conduft ;" and, fays 
Hamilton, " I began to perceive, what lias been too manifeft, 
that to thefe defects are added the unfortunate foibles of a vanity 
without bounds, and a jcaloufy capable of dfcohuring every oljed,,^* 

Mr. Hamilton goes on, *' the ccnfiderations which had reconciled 
me to \ht fuccefs of Mr. Pmckney^ were of a nature exclufively pub- 
lic ; they refulted from the dfgujling cgcifni, the dijlempered jealoufy, 
and the ungovernable indifcretion of Mr. Adams's temper, joined to 
fome doubts of the corrednefs of his maxims in adminiftration" — 
** it will not appear exaggeration to thofe who have fludied his 
charafter, to fuppofe that Mr. Adams is capable of being alienated 
from a fydem to ivh'ich he has been attached, becavfe it is upheld by men 
nvhom he hates." Speaking of the American miffion to France, he 
thus defcribes Mr. Adams, " fometimes he has treated with rldi' 
cule the idea of its being a meafure which would terminate in peace ;'* 
at other times, " that he has vindicated the meafure, as one con- 
formable with the general and ilrong wifh of the counlrj for peacCf 
and as likely to promote that defirable object." 

This is the character given of Mr. John Adams, by Mr. Alexander- 
Hamilton— and can any thing be more difhonorary and affront- 
ing ? Outrageous paffions, jealoify and duplicity, are reprefented as the 
prominent features which mark his political portrait. While Mr. 
Hamilton thus defames Mr. Adams, he is equally as elaborate in 
his eulogiums on Mr. Pinckney. 

Now, gentlemen, I would beg leave to afk you, with what pro- 
priety you could connedt Mr. Adams and Mr. Pinckney in your 
votes for Prefident and Vice-Prefident ? Was there one man 
among the electors in the four New-England governments, who 
knew any thing about Mr. Pinckney, otherwife than by the character 
given him by Mr. Hamilton ? And provided he had not been nom- 
inated by him, whether you would have thought of this gentleman 
in connexion with Mr. Adams ? You m.nft excufe me if I fay, that 
I very much doubt it. If this is the cafe, what could Induce j^ok to 
take up with the nomination of Mr. Hamilton, who had fo fe- 
verely treated Mr. Adams, and attempt to give Mr. Pinckney an 
equal (if not afuperior) chance with him ? This was an alliance of the 
moft unnatural kind ; for if Mr. Adams was In the leaft degree 
fimilar to what Mr. Hamilton had reprefented him, he was not 
defer ving of your choice, and yet you have reprobated his opinion as 



No. XXIII. the northern States, 5^ 

it refpecfled Mr. Adams, while at the fame time you have approbat- 
ed \iis nomination of Mr. Pinckney. How could you fuppofe that 
any cordiality could ever fubfift between the gentlemen thus 
chofen : One was denounced by Hamilton as unfit for the office, and 
the other was the candidate of his warmed approbation. Certain- 
ly Mr. Pinckney would feel an obligation to his patron, and while 
in office would attempt to promote his political meafures — Mr. 
Adams, on the contrary, being wounded by the cenfures thrown 
upon him, muft ever be placed in a moft difagreeable fituation, to 
adl in concert with a man, who obtained his votes by the recom- 
mendation of his opponent. Provided fuccefs had attended the 
eledion of thefe two gentlemen, Mr. Adams would have been " of 
all men the moft miferable." He would have been mortified be- 
yond expreffion, to fee the man of Hamilton's nomination in the firfl 
feat of government ; or if he perchance had obtained it, yet the 
problematical fuccefs of the eledion between them, w^ould have 
produced feelings, which the tendernefs of his mind could not 
eafily have eradicated. Mr. Hamilton would have exulted over 
him, and might poffibly threaten Mr. Adams as to the event of his 
next eledion. 

Suppofe that Mr. Pinckney had obtained a majority of votes, 
and was chofen Prefident, what would the northern iiates have laid 
to this bufmefs ? Would they not have feen that they were duped ? 
Would they not have difcovered the artful plot, and would not 
every citizen have been chagrined at fuch an event ? Yet, gentle- 
men, you came near to give this triumph to a party, who were 
laughing behind the curtain at the game they w^ere playing. 

Sampfon's Jire-brands and foxes were not a more unnatural alli- 
ance, than Pinckney and Adams, and It Is probable that a " fmall 
party" calculated to produce as much mifchief. After Mr. Hamil- 
ton had defcribed Mr. Adams in terms fo opprobrious, he could 
not lincerely wiffi him to be Prefident. 

This may be good policy, but I mufl confefs it is beyond my 
comprehenfion. As friends to Mr. Adams, the candidate of 
Hamilton would have been the lafl man to be confidered. It 
feemed a pointed reflexion on both to bring them in conta(5t. The 
connexion mufl have been fo difagreeable, that I fhould fuppofe 
no friend of either would wifh to have forwarded it. But the 
fiaft appears plain, that many who pretended to be the advocates 



LOO To the Electors of No. XXIV. 

for Mr. Adarns are his greatefl: enemies. They holjlered up Pinck- 
ney by the flrength of Adams ; and this is evident, for at the late 
feaft of the defcendants of the Pilgrims, in this town, we fee by the 
toads the real finthncnts of certain individuals. Hamilton is ftyled 
Xht pure goldf though deprived of his official Jiamp ; what is this but 
a dire<5l imphcation on the Prefident for his difmiilal ? If then 
we find particular perlbns extolling him for his purity, notwith- 
ftanding his late attack on tlie Prefident, can we hefitate to 
declare, thatfuch men are hypocrites, when they pretend friend- 
fhip towards Mr. Adams ? 

Excufe me, gentlemen, for thefe plain remarks — I have not 
ftudied elegance in diction, but I profefs franknefs in expreffion. 
The citizens will judge of the propriety of my remarks ; and as I 
write for their information^ apologies are unneceffary. I do not cen- 
fure youinyour official capacity, but I mull fay, if you are fiiends 
to Mr. Adams, that you took a ftrange method to exprefs your at- 
tachment. 

The Essex Junto, that bane to our country, have thrown us 
into our prefent difficulties, and occafioned our inconliftencies and 
perplexities. They have calumniated Mr. Jefferfon, and every 
honeft republican throughout the United States ; and Mr. Adams, 
in his retirement, will have an opportunity to reflect on thofe delu- 
fions, which thofe who have been ftyled jacobins, cautioned him 
againft. But we trufl in heaven that the defigns of this fadion 
are fruftrated, and that the fnare is broken and we have efcaped. 



No. XXIV. 

TO THE ELECTORS OF THE NORTHERN STATES. 

tVEPUBLICANS pofTefs that magnanimity of mind, that they 
fcorn to avenge themfelves of their adverfaries, by retaliating on 
the fordid principle of perfonal refentment. Though for many 
years paft, they have been expofed to the infolence of every petty 
fycophant, who was feeking a maintenance from the federal gov» 
ernment ; though fmgled out as obje(5ts of popular odium, by the 
deteftable tools of an EiTex fadion ; though vilified from the prefs, 
aud denounced from the pulpit ', though perfecuted, defamed, and 



No. XXIV. the northern States. loi 

libelled by every ignorant fcribbler, who could wield his pen in op- 
pofition to the liberties of his country : yet, amidft this torrent cf 
invedtive, the republicans (land pre-eminent for their moder- 
ation, and feel fuch a fuperiority as will not fulTer them to retort 
the pitiful and ignominious fcurrility, ^which characterize their ca- 
lumniators. 

The REPUBLICANS wifh not to fcreen themfelves from a ftrid 
inveftigation of their condudt. They place themfelves on the bafis 
of the Conftitution, and never dread an appeal to the public judg- 
ment, by threatening men with lines and imprifonment. Under 
the fyflem of a pure republican admmjiratton, -we hope never tP hear 
the groans of a prifoner echoing through the receffes of a dungeon, 
for expreffing his political fentiments ; nor to behold a wife and 
children bemoaning their misfortunes, by being deprived of the 
fupport of an hufband and parent under the cruel hand of a relent- 
lefs judiciary. Such excefTes are abhorrent to w/7//4or/z Americans. 

The republicans depend on principle, and not on terror.. 
The human mind is left unfhackled, and permitted to contemplate 
in it§ utmoft latitude the conduct of men , and the tendency o£ rneqf^ 
ures. They alTume no control over public opinion, nor defignatc 
a paiticular party by the childifli infignia of a black cockade. 
Thefe degrading anions are beneath the philanthropy of repub- 
licans.. They ftrive to convince, rather than to terrify. They ap- 
peal to the reafon rather than ihQfe£!rs of their fellow-citizens : and 
i£ thefe faiutary purpofes are not effeded, by thefe moderate meal^ 
ures, they pity and commifTerate the obdurate. A gaol is not 
the temple of Apollo to convince the mind, and fines and imprif- 
onment are arguments too unphilofophical to be offered as rational 
conviction. Magnanimity, benevolence, and moderation are the car- 
dinal virtues ; and may the caufe of republic anifm never be dif- 
graced by any fpecies of condu6t v/hich defignates tyranny. 

After thus giving, the outlines of republican tenets, I hope you 
will acquit me of exciting a fyftem of terror under the new admin- 
iftration. Though an oppofite line of condudl has hitherto been 
purfued by the oppofers of the republicans, (the feverity of which 
might juftify an ample retaliation) yet the brilliancy of the caufe 
in which they are engaged, I hope will never be clouded by imita- 
ting the degrading and difgraceful behaviour of a fet of infolenty 
intolerant, infulting, and abufive wretches, fome of whom have 



102 To the Electors of No. XXIV. 

been bafking under the emoluments, and feeding on the loaves and 
fiihes of government. Though the principles of republicanifm 
foften the vindidive paffions, yet they tend to the moll critical 
fcrutiny into all the motives and operations of their public fer- 
vants. No man, or body of men, is confidered above ** The Peo- 
ple" ; THEY are the Alpha and Omega of power ; they are the 
"checks and balances" which poife the political ftandard, and 
eleftions *are the aueights by which they decide merit. 

Thefe things being premifed, gentlemen, I cannot but make a 
few more obfervations on the tendency of your conduct in the choice 
of Prefident and Vice-Prefident. 

The confequences muft have been fatal, had you fucceeded in 
the eledion of Meffrs. Adams and Pinckney. It might have been 
fetting up two ftandards, to which the different parties would have 
repaired. The enemies of Mr. Adams knew this, and therefore 
urged their plans under the expectation of reviving their own par- 
ty. They knew that they could not expert any preferment under 
Mr. Adams's adminiftration t, they therefore artfully linked them- 
felves with Mr. Adams's friends, and, with the utmofi: fubtilty of 
addrefs, fo far ingratiated thcmfelves as to walk hand in hand like 
two fond lovers, towards the confummation of their defigns. But 
their friendfnip was delufive ; it might be compared to the afTaffin 
who had enticed the traveller to depend on his protection, and af- 
ter obtaining his confidence, facrificed him the firft opportunity. 
All the expeftations of this junto refted on the fuccefs of Mr. 
Pinckney, and if he 'did not fucceed, they were fatisfied that their 
plans were fruftrated. To carry him under his own political rep- 
utation, they knew was impofiible ; they therefore flood ready to 
couple him, either with Adams or Jefferfon : — and I am confidently 
told, that a propofition was made by Mr. Pinckney' s friends fox 
this purpofe ; but the fupporters of Mr. Jefferfon treated the com- 
promife with every mark of contempt ; they would not barter the 
general happinefs to bring forward a party, which they confidered 
as injurious to the general welfare, though it would completely fe- 
cure the election of their candidate. Mr. Jefferfon might have had 
a great fupport from Mr. Pinckney's friends, if his advocates had 
folely ftudied his elevation to the prefidential chair, in preference 
to the real republican principles^ which they meant by his eledlion t<» 
fubftantiate* 



"No. XXIV. the northern States* ro^ 

As an evidence In point, of the impropriety of conne(5ling 
MeiTrs. Pinckney and Adams, I will ftate a circumftance which 
would probably have taken place, in cafe Mr. Pinckney had been 
chofen Preftdent : and, as you gave him an equal chance with Mr. 
Adams, the event cannot be confidered as altogether vifionary. 
Suppofe the firft nominations of Mr. Pinckney had been Mr. Ham- 
ilton and Mr. Pickering, one as Secretary of State, the other. 
Secretary at War ? In this ftage of the bufinefs, the wound inflict- 
ed by Hamilton would have been laid bare before the public ; the 
friends of Adams would have confidered it as a pointed affront on 
him ; and the friends of the candidates would have viewed it as a 
juft compliment to their merits. During this controverfy, parties 
would have rallied ; refledlions would have increafed with an elec- 
trical celerity ; the honour of Mr. Adams on one fide, and the 
jealoufy of Mr. Pinckney on the other, would have created a fer- 
mentation in the public inind, which could not eafily be allayed ; 
the Effex junto would have ere6led their baneful creft, and the 
event would have been, if not a civil nvar, yet the inveteracy of paf- 
iions would have fell but little fhort of fuch a cataflrophe. The 
conteft might have been fo diftreffmg, that the hiftory of America 
would have furniflied a datum whereby to calculate our political 
misfortunes. The contending parties being powerful, the United 
States might have commenced the fanguinary detail of war, from 
this inaufpicious period. The nineteenth century might have be- 
gun Its progrefs with garments rolled in blood, within the once 
peaceful fhores of America. Hiftory, Inftead of being crimfoned 
with European controverfies, might have opened a new page to 
defcribe the fanguinary fcenes exhibited on the American theatre. 

Thefe recitals are not the whims of fancy, or the flights of im- 
agination ; they are probabilities which no man can controvert 5 
and we have reafon to thank heaven, that we are delivered from 
fuch apprehenfions, under an adminiftration fo congenial with 
uniform principles. 

Thefe obfervatlons, gentlemen, are offered for your confidera- 
tion — and the citizens have reafon to rejoice, that the eleftlon has 
taken its prefent courfe — and provided " the people" are atten- 
tive to their adminiftration, we may anticipate events the mofl; fal- 
utary and propitious. 



304 ' '^'^ ^^^'^ 'whom it may concern. No. XXVo 

Thus, gentlemen, have I offered my fentlments on the tendency 
of your votes, in paying attention to an inconfiflent nomination, 
and if they ftrike your mind with the fame force they do mine, you 
mull congratulate each otlier that you did not fucceed in your 
eledion ; for Mr. Adams muft have been the moft miferable man 
"within the United States, if chofen either Prefident or Vice-Prefi- 
dent, under the patronage of the E/Tex junto. The ViTitings of 
federalifts, and the toafts we fee drank, are but feeble fpecimens of 
what they would have done, provided this party had been brought 
once more into cur public councils. ** May they henceforth reft 
from their political labours, and may their 'worhs follow them,* 



' No. XXV. 

TO THOSE WHOM IT MAY CONCERN. 

r| '1 

X HE Essex junto, being completely baffled in their views, 

and finding that all their arts and ilratagems are defeated, have 
now become defperate, and are endeavoring to confound and per- 
plex that government by artifice, which they could not fubvert by 
intrigue, Thefe men are now reduced to the mod mortifying fitu- 
ation, in feeing themfelves difappointed in their defigns, and after 
anticipating the moft glorious profpeds, they cannot refrain ex- 
preffing their chagrin in being arrefted in the mid ft of their career. 

Thus we cbferve the continued calumny in the preiles devoted 
to their fervice. Every indecency of language and every oppro- 
brious epithet are expreffive of the malignity of their difpofition. 
They have the impudence to charge the republican citizens as aim- 
ing folely to acquire pojls of honour and profit ; when it is evident 
that a large proportion of thefe defamers are either enjoying 
places of profit or are conftantly feeking fome lucrative em- 
ployment. 

With what bare-faced arrogance muft thefe perfons prefume 
to allege fuch motives to the citizens who have given their fuf- 
frages for Mr. Jefferfon. The fuhflantlal property of this Country is 
in favour of this patriotic gentleman by the prefent ele<5lion. Their 
votes are not obtained by fraudulent m.eans, in voting for one man, 
tyhen another was evidently intended. Notv/ithftanding this une* 



i^o. 3^ XV. To those <whom It may concern* l6/ 

quivocal decifion iti their favour, yet this implacable fadlion are 
perfifting in their nefarious fchemes to throw the United States 
into perplexities. They have dared to call their opponents difor^ 
ganizerst enemies to the confiitution, and difpofed to depreciate the pub- 
lic confidence in all matters refpe(5ling xht funds, and other pecuni- 
ary eftablilhments. 

Thefe are the charges brought by this fa6tion againft the 
friends of Mr. JefFerfon. Let us then, fellow-citizens, fee how far 
their aftions correfpond with their allegations. 

Who are the diforganizers at the prefent moment ? Who are 
the men that talk about overturning government ? Are they not 
thofe v/ho are pleading in favour of an hereditary Prefident andt 
Senate ? Are they not thofe who are calumniating the flates which 
have given their fuffrages for Mr. JefFerfon ? If thefe perfons are 
in favour of the confiitution, why v/ill they not allow the fame 
jright to others, which they claim themfelves ? The confiitution 
contemplates a free eledion for Prefident and Vice-Prefident, once 
in four years, and on th's occafion every freedoiti is to be exercifed. 
by the refpe6tive flates, to choofe fuch men as are mofl agreeable to 
them. The mode adopted at the laft eledion has been peculiarly 
favorable to MefTrs. Adams and Pinckney, notwithfianding which, 
the return of votes has given the majority to MefTrs. JefFerfon and 
Burr. If this does not exprefs the fentiments of the citizens, what 
ihethod could be taken to give them a more decided avowal ? 
MafTachufetts has taken the right from the people for the exprefs 
purpofe of fecuring Meffrs. Adams and Pinckney j and Pennfyl- 
rania have carried their proje<5ls to the utmofl length to effe€t 
their purpofes ; who then is to blame in this bufmefs ? 

Though this is fo evident, yet vre daily obferve the ni6fl grofs 
abufe on the public voice. The vilefl calumny is publifhed againfl 
Mr. JefFerfon, as they know that hi ro the man contemplated by the 
cled:ors tO/ fill the feat of prefidency. To defeat this purpofe^ is 
now their great obje(^.. The EfTex junto and their adherents, 
therefore, are the aij'organi%ers ; they are the diflurbers of the pub- 
lic tranquiVity ; they are the men who are endeavouring to depreci- 
ate the public funds, to lefTen the value of all pecuniary eflablifh- 
ments, to create jealoufy among the citizens, and to injure our na« 
tional reputation in Europe. For this bafe end, they are defcrib» 
O 



Ic6 To those luhcm It may concern. No. XXV. 

Ing our government as tending to a diffblution ; that property 
t^-ill be fet afloat ; that out fix per cent, and other public ftocks are 
falling. 

Ye holders of the public funds, what have you not to appre- 
hend from thefe diforganizers ? How are you to receive your 
quarterly payments, if the confidence of the citizens in the govern- 
ment is thus blafted ? From v/hence do jom expect your intereft 
money, if this junto are to raife a diftruft in the neW adminiftra- 
tion ? If your ftocks are to be cried down by this defperate party, 
who are the people to give ftability to your property ? — Will the 
junto help you in the day of ad'oerfity ? If they convulfe the govern- 
ment, will not your pecuniary intereft be the firft fliaken in the con- 
troverfy ? Inftead, therefore, of joining this defperate clan of 
oppofers, rather fufpecl their views and defigns. It may be for 
their private emolument that confufion ftiould arife. Individuals 
among them may be fo plunged in arrears, (provided a ftrict ex- 
amination into their accounts laould take place) that their only fe- 
curity may lay in hurning the hooks, and involving all public tranf- 
aflions in intricacy and perplexity. Such men, we may fufpeft 
are afraid to have things brought to light, and under their prefent 
cmbarraffrnents may be defirous to introduce every difficulty to 
prevent a critical inveftigation into their condudl. 

The men who have been planning a war with France are not 
the friends to any clafs of real American citizens. In this ftate cf 
things, if they had accompllftied their purpofes, thefiochs, and every 
kind of LANr)ED PROPERTY muft have fell a facrifice. It would 
fiave been" impoftible to maintain the funds at their prefent eftima- 
tlon, as the public debt would have increafed beyond the ability cf 
the people to difcharge it. The fchemes of this junto were hoftile 
Co --ycrj man who held either public ftocks or landed property, as 
war muft have leftened the value c^f both. And it is further fuf- 
pecled, that many who are now clamoi'^ous againft Mr. Jefferfon 
are fo involved in the banks, ouftom-houfe, &c. that they wifti to 
balance their accounts by an annihilation of the g<overnment. 

The utmoft confidence, therefore, muft be placed in the new 
adminiflration. A war with France is now improbable, if not impof- 
fible. A fyftem of economy will give ftability to the funds, and 
appreciate the landed intereft. The merchant will not be burden- 
ed with exceffive duties to maintain a ftanding army and a clan of 



No. XXVI. Considerations for the Clergy and People, iq'j 

idlers, who have too long lived on falarles much above thdr Jcrvice^ 
or t/jeir merits. Economy Is the great work of reformation : — 
The imiuftrious are the v/orthy part of fociety, and the lazy drones 
who are baiking either at- home or abroad, under governmental 
patronage, ought to be put to a better employment. Economy Is 
the vital principle of a republic, and under the adminlftratlon of 
Mr. Jefferfon, we doubc not, the citizens will have reafon to returi^ 
thanks to heaven, that the " fnare Is broken and that we have' ef- 
caped.'' A defperate, Infidlous, wicked faftlon are now difcoverecj 
^emphatically ftyled the Essex Junto) and provided we keep 
fuch men from our councils, and remove them from their offices, 
the Republic of America will aflume Its national dignity. Thefe 
are the diforganlzers, and ought to be branded as fuch. Citizen^ 
of America, be firm j be vieila-nt. 



No. XXVL 

CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE, 
PROM DRo morse's GEOGRAPHY. 

IJOCTOR MORSE, in his Geography, page 453, fpeaking of 
the clergy of ConneBicut, makes this fmgular remark : — " The cler- 
gy, who are numerous, and as a body very refpedable, have hlth« 
erto preferved a kind of arijlocratical balance in the democratical gov^ 
ernment of the State, which has happily operated as a check to the 
overbearing fpirit of republicanifm.''^ 

This affertion, if falfe^ is a charge which requires the confid- 
cration of the clergy : l£ true, the declaration is worthy the im- 
mediate confideration of the people. If it is falfe, it is a libel on ^ 
the " refpectable clergy" of Connedicut : If true, it is a fubje(fl in 
which the citizens are deeply Interefled. 

In a republican government, it is an alarming idea, that an 
ariftocracy is operating among the clergy to check the fpirit of re- 
publicanifm ; and the alarm Is greatly increafed, when the declar* 
ation is made by a man, who pledges the authenticity of hii 
avoWal by fubfcribing his name to the publication. 

Dodor Morfe's Geography is paffing current through the 
United States. He is an author, who has obtainedi a reputation 



10$ Considerations for the No. XXVI» 

(if not by the propriety of his writings, yet his oivn afftduity has 
given a circulation to them) which has overpowered many inac- 
curacies contained in various pages of his performances. ^ 

Dodlor Morfe has taken peremptory ground. It is prefumed, 
then, that he is wiUing to be refponfible for whatever his Geogra- 
phy contains. If it is ftudied in our academies, public fchools, &c. 
every article ought to be well authenticated. If our children are 
to be taught not only geography ^ but the political principles ivhich 
govern certain orders of men^ how careful fliould he be, that nothing 
is inferted but w^hat will bear the ftridteft fcrutiny. 

By this ftatement, the queftion is reduced to a fimple point,-— 
do we wifli that our children, by perufmg Doftor Morfe^s Geog- 
raphy, fhould be taught as a rudiment of education, " That the 
refpeftable body of clergy in Connediticut, are a kind oi arljlocratical 
halatice in the democratical government of that ftate, and that they 
operate as a check to the ov.erbearlng fplrlt of republlcanlfm P'^ 

Will the clergy of Connefticut thank Dodor Morfe for this de- 
claration ? Do they wifh to be confidered as oppofed to a republic 
canfyjlem of government ? Are they defirous to become an arifto- 
cratical check in the civil eftablifhment of that ftate ? Are church 
and ftate fo allied among the free citizens of Connedicut, that the 
clerical order is introduced as an efficient branch of the adminiftra- 
tion ? Does their conftitution contemplate the clergy as part of the 
iegiflature, or have they a control over the " conftituted authori- 
ties" eftabliftied in their fovereignty ? 

What right has Dodor Morfe (while writing a Geography for 
his perfonal emolument) to bring into public view the clergy of Con- 
ne<5licut, as interfering in the civil departments of that Common- 
wealtli ? Who gave him an autliority to reprefent this refpedlable 
order as an arflocratlcal body, and acting in oppofition to the repuh- 
lican principles of their fellow-citizens ? Who empowered him to 
denounce the freemen of Connesflicut as esercifmg an overbearing 
fpirit of republlcanlfm ? Or will xhtfale of his Geography (as it 
refpefts his privats interefl) compenfate the refpedable clergy of 
Connedlicut for the cenfure thus throvm upon them \ 

While reading this remark of Do61:or Morfe, a ftranger would 
naturally fufped that the clergy of Connecticut had formed them- 
fclves into a civil phalanx : that inftead of attending to the duties 
4 their prof eJiQUy they had affociated as a body of politicians ; that 



No. XXVI. Clergy and People^ IOf( 

they voted and aSed in oppofition to the legal authority of the 
ftate ; that they ifTued tlieir veto or bulls to counteraft the refolu- 
tions of the legiflature ; tliat they forfook their pulpits, and com- 
menced political niiffionaries ; in Ihort, that the clergy had com- 
bined as an ecchfwjlical faction to fubvert the eftabliftied principle of 
the government. If a zealous republican had dealt fo freely with 
the Reverend Order, it might have been confidered as an outrage 
on their patriotifm, but when one of their own fraternity makes 
the avowal, it wears a more ferious afpedt. 

Not being particularly acquainted with the clergy of Connedl- 
cut, I cannot pretend to fay, how far the repiefentation of Dodlor 
Morfe may be agreeable to them. But this I am bold to fay, that if 
any man in Connedicut had made the fame indecent declaration 
againft the luhole refpeclahle clergy o/' Massachusetts, they would 
have refented it as a moft illiberal degradation of their clerical 
charaften The clergy of this ftate would have received it as a 
grofs refledion on their conduft ; and at their annual convention 
would have pafled a fevere reprimand on the officious author. 
The clergy of MafTachufetts would have reprobated every fuggef- 
tion that conveyed an idea that they had formed an ari/locratical bal- 
ancgf to check the fpirit of repubUcanifm, They would have confid- 
ered it as an affront on the Reverend Order^ to be placed in fuch a 
degrading political view, and defignated as fubverters of the liber- 
ties of their country. If Doctor Morfe can take this freedom with 
the clergy of Connedicut, it is prefumed that no man dare affume 
the fame liberty with the clergy of MafTachufetts. Though wc 
have reafon to think, that fome individuals of the clerical profef- 
fion are endeavouring to form an ariflocratical bajance, yet the 
clergy, as a body^ we prefume, are oppofed to fuch a meafure. 

When Dodlor Morfe was writing his Geography, and hurrying 
it for the prefsy he might flatter himfelf, that it was but of little con- 
fequence how he defcribed particular orders of men. But what he 
fays of the clergy of Connecticut is a charge of the higheft magni- 
tude. If this ariftocracy is already formed in Connedlicut, may 
we not fufped that it may have a more extenfive operation I Ha^ 
not Dodor Morfe, by his injudicious obfervations, taken an effe<5l- ' 
ual method to fet the people of Connedicut againfl their eccle- 
fiaflical teachers ? Does he fuppofe, that the citizens will reverence 
thf ir clergy as an ariftocratical body ? V? ill they efteeoi tteni »« 



IIO Considerations for the Clergy atui People, No. XXVI. 

nien, who are a check to tlie fplrtt of repuhlkanifm ? Are not the 
people of Connedlicut Republicans 1 If fo, they muft be oppofed 
to an ariftocrat'ical body ; and when they are told by Doflor Morfe, 
that the clergy are this body, will they not view them with 
jealoufy, and endeavour to render them uneafy in their refpedive 
congregations ? 

What can have a greater teiidency to deftroy the caufe of re^ 
ligion, than denouncing the ivhole clergy of a ftate as a combined body 
Gf ar'ijlocrats ? A deifc could not take a more effeclual way to ac- 
conipliih his purpofes ; and yet the pious Doctor Morfe is 
prejudicing tile citizens of Cormedticut againft their clergy by fuch 
an opprobrious epithet. The Palladium is bemoaning the 
progrefs of infidelity ; the Ne-w-England Slates are particularly 
(Galled upon to rally round the banner of religion ; and yet this 
fege Do(5tor has come forward, and declared, that the clergy of 
one of thefe ftates, *• happily'^ preferve an ar'iftocratkal balance, and 
check the fpirit of republican^im. The Dodtor, it muft be allow- 
ed, fhows fome degree of jefuitifm in his mode of expreffion ; he 
fays, " an overbearing fpirlt of republic anifrn. But who are the 
judges in t^is cafe ? Are the clergy fo far a branch of the gov- 
ernment as to interfere in the laws \ or have they fuch an influ- 
ence as to control meafures, after they are enadled by the legifla- 
ture ? Do they meet in conclave to* revlfe the laws P or are they 
recognized as Lords Spiritual ? Can they rally a faction to 
counteracl the proceedings of the condituted authorities ? — But, 
according to Doctor Morfe's flatement, all thefe things are done 
by the Clergy, and that it is in their power to check the fpirit of 
repubJlcanlfn?, as far as they think proper. 
Citizens of Connecticut ! 

Thefe remarks are made for your ccnfideratlon. Permit me to 
afk you, whether Dr. Morfe is right or ivrong P Is it a fadl, that your 
clergy are an aristocratical body ? Is it true, that they check 
the fpirit of republicanifm ? Have they fuch a control over your 
councils, that they can fay, hitherto Ihall you go in your republi- 
canifm, and no farther ? Have you a bench of bishops, or do 
your laws pafs through the ordeal of a fpiritual inquifition ? If 
thefe are fadls, we cannot but pity your fituation : But if they are 
notf we expedt that fome fevere cenfures will be pafTed on the man, 
whofe" arrogance has led him to give fuch a ftatement of your po* 



Ho. XXVII. Further Remarhs on Jjr, T/lorse* 1 1 j 

iltical vafTalage. The yeomanry of Connecticut are too enlight- 
ened to be prieft-ridden. The freedom of their conftitution foars 
above a clerical control ; and though a man may acquire a few 
dollars by the fale of a geographical .publication, yet the honour of 
freemen is too great a facrifice not to expofe his abfurdities. The 
liberties of a people are too facred to be fported with, and even 
prieftly habiliments fhould never be ?. cover, too impenetrable for 
inveftigation and reprehenfion. The federal conftitution has gua- 
ranteed a republican government to the refpedive ftates ; who 
then is the man that prefumes to affert, that the clergy are form- 
ing an ariftocracy to check this eonllitutional barrier ? If there is 
fuch a perfon, let him come forward and maintain his principles, 
and not impute to others, what lie dare not himfelf openly avow. 



No. XXVIL 

FURTHER REMARKS ON DR. MORS-E. 

T' * 
HE remarks on Old-South, in the Palladium, carry flrong 

traits, that the Reverend Dodor is the author ; — but when fo high 
a compliment is paid to him, " that every gentleman, who is friend- 
ly to the difTenlination of ufeful knowledge, feels Indebted to the in- 
duftry and talents of Do<5lor Morse for fo valuable a tuork, as the 
Geography of his own country," candour might forbid me to con- 
fider him as the trumpeter of his literary fame. But though can- 
dour may lay in her claim, yet we have been furniflied with fo many 
evidences of his fcribbling propenfity, I cannot fuppofe that any 
other perfon would take the pains to vindicate his political repu- 
tation. - 

I fhall, therefore, confider the Doctor as the writer of the re- 
marks on Old-South ; and, after he has com.plimented himfelf as 
a " man of talents,^^ 1 am willing to allow him the fame privilege 
with any other trader, who has an article to difpofe of. His Geog- 
raphy is an article of fale ; and as fuch, it gives it an additional 
value, by ftamping on the prefatory page the talents of the author. 
For we buy books for the improvement of the mind, as we buy 
" Hamilton's worm-deftroying lozenges," or any other medicine, 
for re<5lifying the humaa coijilitutiou. There never was a perfon 



iii Further Remarh on Dr, Morje. No. XXViL 

who publifhed a noflrum, but what declared the im^entor a man of 
talents, and that the medicine would cure almoft every complaint 
to which the human frame was liable. Though I am willing to 
acknowledge tliat Dodlor Morfe has great merit as a compiler ; 
yet in books, as in medicine, the public will judge for themfelves. 

Do6lor Morfe, while endeavouring to apologize for his expref- 
fion in his Geography, has perfifted in his declaration, " that the 
fentiment is perfeclly correct." He ftill perfifts in his avowal, 
^' that the clergy of Conne<fticut have hitherto preferred a kind of 
ariftocratical balance'^ ; — and how do they preferve it ? The Do<5lor 
tells us, " by preaching the pure do6lrines of the gofpel ; inculca- 
ting its moral precepts, and exemplifying them in their lives." 
' — Thus, by the ftatement made by Do<5lor Morfe, the pure doBrines 
of the gofpel ; its moral precepts, and 'walking agreeably to them, are 
ariflocratical. This is a new do(5trine, for when Paul preached be-: 
fore Felix, he was not denounced as an ariftocrat ; he was confid- 
ered rather as a madman. When the difciples and apoftles proceed- 
ed in their miffions, it was not declared by the infidels that the 
crijlocrats had come among them, but men who were " turning the 
world upfide down." The pure principles of the gofpel were nev- 
er ftyled ariftocracy, before Doftor Morfe gave them this appella- 
tion : — In what inftance did our Saviour give himfelf the charac- 
ter of an ariftocrat ? On the contrary, he bore teftimony againft 
every thing that led to this diftin^Sion, or excited the vain excla- 
mation, " / am holier than thou" 

The fadl is, Do(aor Morfe has completely expofed his political 
principles, in his defcription of the clergy of Connecticut. It is 
conjedured, that he felt a difpofition, in 1789, to give the clergy 
an ariftocratical preponderancy in the civil inftitutions of the govern- 
ment ; but finding, at this time, that it will not do openly to avovr 
his fentiments, he has recourfe to an explanation, which ftrikes at 
the very foundation of the Chriftian fyftem ;^ to ftrengthen his Ge- 
ography, he weakens the Scripture. He has, in order to juftify 
his mode of expreffion, been obliged to give a difgufting appella- 
tion to the pure doflrines of the gofpel. He has declared it a cor- 
rect fentiment, that preaching the pure dodtrines of the gofpel, in- 
culcating its moral precepts, &c. is a kind of an ariflocratical infti- 
tution. Will this kind of definition help the caufe of religion ? Will 
ks nainifters be recsived with alacrity, under all the apprehenfions? 



No. XXVII. Further Remarks on Dr. Morse. 113 

annexed to this difgufting exprefTion ? Will the people become 
zealous to propagate the pure doftrines of the gofpel, as an arifto" 
cratic eftablifhment ? Dodlor Morfe being thus reduced to an ex- 
pl'uit explanation, as tQ his charge againft the clergy of Connedticut, 
inftead of acknowledging his error, has chofen rather to give an odi- 
ous appellation to the doctrine of the gofpel, than to depreciate his 
Geography, which contains fuch a fevere cenfure on the refpedla- 
ble clergy of Connecfticut. 

Suppofs Thomas Paine had made ufe of this opprobrious epi« 
thet, would not the clergy have confidered it as an unfair repre- 
fentation of the tendency of the gofpel ? Would they not have 
reprobated the man who had attached fuch an unpopular idea to 
this facred fubje<5t ? The term ariftocracy, is no way applicable to 
the mild, equitable principles of the chriftian religion. Its worfl 
enemy could not introduce a word more injurious to its propa- 
gation. If ariftociaey is the tendency of its eftablifhment, will the 
people be zealous in extending its progrefs ? Dr. Morfe may be 
a warm advocate for religion, but if he means to get clear of his 
charge againft the clergy of Connecticut, by throwing the odium 
of ariftocracy on the pure dodlrines of the gofpel, the queftion isy 
whether greater injuries will not arife to the caufe of religion, than 
benefit to the community by the fale of his Geography ? 

His ungenerous ailertion, that I have " incefiantly abufed 
the clergy," " merits no other notice than a fmile of contempt ;" 
fo far from attempting to injure their reputation, I have endeav- 
oured to vindicate them from the ftigm.a which his publication 
tended to produce. To be plain with the Do<a:or, I confider him, 
and a few others of the fam.e vindictive difpofition, as wounding 
the caufe of religion beyond any body of men in the United States. 
He has expofed himfelf to ridicule in many of his fermons and 
newfpaper publications ; his ftory of the Ocean maflacre is degrad- 
ing to a minifter of the gofpel, efpecially when he has tarniilied his 
integrity by not acknowledging his error. 

From delicacy to his prof sjfion, I ftiall forbear comm.enting any far- 
ther on his remarks, as I might roufe the citizens of Conneaicut 
to treat him with too poignant a feverity. But his infmuation, 
that " this ariftocracy of manners afid virtue has been in a great 
degree preferved among the citizens of Conne(5licut, by the good 
P 



114 ^*'* ^orse ajain. No. XXVIIL 

example? and" moral mciilcations of the clergy," Is a high refle<5lio!i 
on the people of that ftate. " The refpe&ahle clergy of Connecflicui" 
^\^ll not thank him for this remark ; neither ■'Js^ill the merchants or 
farmers of that Common\vealth refpecl: him for this declaration. 
The clergy are too liberal to admit of fiich a degrading idea of 
their parilhioners ; and the citizens are too enlightened to fuppofe 
that the clergy (Injlead of their own good fenfe ) haye prevented them 
from plvinging into anarchy and diforganization. 

As a friend to" the Doclor, I would advife him to keep within 
his proper boundary ; he miftakcs his talents- if he thinks he can 
do his duty as a Clergyman, a Geographer, and a newfpaper Editor ; 
any one of thefe employments is fully fufficient for a man of his 
literary endowments. It is beft for him to make his eleclion which 
of them he will purfue ; for depend on it, his inad-equaeies will ap- 
pear more and more compicuous if he profecutes the whole of tliefj 
vocations. If money is his object, let him corre<5l his Geography ; 
if religion is his fludy, let him attend to his parifii ; if politics are 
his purfuits, let. him take a Printing-OfHce, and openly announce 
himfelf as the Editor. This is my advice, as a friend. 

I muft apologize to the Reverend Doclor, for omitting the 
word " very ;" it was wholly unintentional : But as it is of " iwjy'' 
little confequence, I am " wrjj" willing, and " very'^ much grati- 
fied, in giving the Reverend Dodior all the advantages refulting 
from the omiflion. 

I remain, his " I'frj" devoted fervant^ &€. 



No. xxvm. 

DOCTOR MORSE AGAIN ! ! ! 



H 



.UMANITY pleads fo ftrongly in favour of Doctor Morfe, 
that it would be cruel to purfue him any farther. He, or fome 
friend for him, is obliged to come forward and declare, " that he 
has never been a writer in the Palladium.^' Is the vindication of his 
Geography fo puerile, or the remarks on Old-South fo ridiculous, 
that the reputation of the Dodor would fufFer, if he fliould allov/ 
himfelf to be the author ? Are the publications in the Palladium 
fo difhouorary, that a man mull fufFer in his literary reputation? 



N©. XXVIII. Dr. Morse again, I15 

if he were recognized as the author ? Alas ! that the Palladiuin 
fhould fo foon iink in the pubHc eftlmation. After fuch a difplay 
of literary patronage, under which this paper was uihered into the 
world ; aftev fo many private fu.bfcriptions to fubfiantiate its eflab- 
lifhment ; after being told that men of the £ril abilities were in- 
vited to furnilh its lengthy columns with the rareft fpecimens of 
erudition ; after Dr. Morfe had been peculiarly a^ive in obtaining 
money from individuals, to eftablifh this " New-England Palla- 
dium''^ ; is it poffible, in lefs than two months, the Reverend Dodlor 
fhiould find it elTential to his literary fame, to declare, that he 
has never been a writer in it ? Why are you thus explicit, 
Dodlcr ? Do you think it fair, after getting p£rfons to fubfcribe, 
fome a hundred, and fome fifty dollars, thus to leave them in the 
lurch, and depreciate the paper w-ith an avowal that you have 
nothing to do with it ? Certainly, Doctor, this is not doing as 
you w^ould be done by. Do you fuppofe, that when the money 
was paid by the gentlemen to whom you applied for fubfcription, 
that they expedled you would fo foon have difowned their patron- 
age ? One perfon, I underftand, figned one hundred dollars, but 
if he had thought you would have denied having any thing to do 
with the paper, is it probable he would have been fo lavifh in his 
bounty ? The declaration appears ungenerous as it refpedls the 
fubfcribers, for it looks as if you were afhamed of the paper, 
though fome have coaxed fo much money from their pockets to- 
wards its eftabliOiment. 

The evidences, however, are fo ftrong, that Dr. Mode does 
furnifli pieces for publication in the Palladium, that it is fufpefted 
the denial, though apparently explicit, fomewhat partakes of a 
mental refervation. The writer fays, " that Dr. Morfe never 
has been a 'writer In the Palladium.''^ This " kind" of evidence 
cannot be admitted, for it is out of the power of any perfon (ex- 
cepting the Dodtor himfelf) to mq.ke fuch a negative declaratioiiv 
If the pieces were brought by another perfon, or written in ano- 
ther hand, yet no man can fay pofitively that Dr. Morfe was not 
the author. This declaration, theiefore, goes for nothing. But 
I fufpedt further jefuitifm ftill : the expreflion is, " Dr. Morfe ha* 
never been a ivrtter in the Palladium'^ ; neither is any other man 
a turlter in the Palladium ; it is a printed not a written paper, and 
it may be declared with fafety, that tlie Dodor's hand-writing 



ii6 Answer to Dr. Morse. No. XXIX. 

does not appear among the types of that paper. But will the 
Doftor pofitively fay, that he never has been a writer for the Pal- 
ladium ? that he never fumlfhed a piece for publication ? If he 
declares this, he will fay fomething ; but at prefent the aflertion 
wears a queflionable afpe(5t. 

However, Doftor, for once be candid and generous ; will you 
declare on the honour of a man, and on xho-fanBity of a Chr'tfliiin, 
that you have not, directly or indirectly, written for the Palladium. 
- Equivocation and mental refervation are out of the queflion : fay 
whether you have not furnifhed many publications, and don't be 
afhamed to tell the whole truth, even though your literary fame 
fhould fuffer by the acknowledgment. Is it not a fact, that you 
fpend many hours in the printing-office ? Is it not a faifr, that - 
you applied to many of your clerical brethren for their counte- 
nance and fupport ? If this be true, Do<5lor, why are you afraid 
to be confidered as a writer ? Has Old-South intimidated you I 
— Depend on it, notliing but honour and generpfity will arife 
from this quarter ; he will handle your publications with gentle- * 
nefs ; if he is fevere, yet it will be only the chaftifement of a 
friend, who rather means to caution you in your conduft, than 
expofe your imprudences. Your zeal has carried you beyond 
your proper boundary ; as a Clergyman I efteem you ; but as a 
Politician, I muft honeftly fay, that you have done an injury to 
religion, and even expofed yourfelf to ridicule. 

I fhall now clofe this controverfy, unlefs an unfair advantage is 
taken of my filence ; in which cafe I may renew my obfervations. 
Health and fraternity. 



No. XXIX; 

IN ANSWER TO DR. MORSE, ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS. 

JLjLS fubjeds of much higher importance than Dr. Morf/s Illu- 
minatly &c. are now before the public, it requires an apology for 
noticing his elaborate obfervations. But, as the Doctor has given 
it an apparent folemnity by his prolixity, a few gentle remarks I 
hope will not be confidered as impropero 



No. XXIX. Jnswer to Di\ Morse, iij 

The Do<5lor, with all the huinlUty and candour of ^* a Minifter of 
the gofpel of peace," has ftyled his opponents " unprmcipled 
nien" : Such an indecorous appellation does not favour of that 
chriilian fpirit, which ought to characterize his profeflion. Charity 
is an appropriate attribute of religion, and it ill becomes a man to 
ufe fuch opprobrious language, who afTumes the prerogative to 
ASSIZE himfelf the Jlandard of orthodoxy . 

My obfervaticns, on the paragraph taken from the Doctor's 
Geography, were principally intended to reprobate the idea, that 
the *' refpeBahle clergy of ConneElicuf'' were an arijlocratkal body. The 
affertion, in my mind, conveyed a fentiment injurious to that wor- 
thy clafs of citizens. The remarks were introduced, not to injure 
the Do6lor, but to give him an opportunity to explain his meaning. 
He has thought proper to be filent on the fubjedt, but fome friend 
in his behalf has made a feeble defence, and at the fame time has 
indire6lly fuggefted, that the Doctor has not written any thing in 
the Palladium, excepting advertifements and anecdotes. 

The flory of the Ocean malTacre is not fully cleared up by the 
Do(5tor ; for no perfon doubted that fuch a " report" prevailed ; 
but, as a " miniiler of peace and truth ^^ it was expefted that when 
he found it was falfe, he would frankly have confejfed the error of 
his afTertion ; that he would be as ready to reBify his mflah, as he 
was affiduous to propagate the report in his fermon. At leail it was 
as incumbent on him to ftand on the ground of veracity in this 
inftance, as in that of ProfefTor Ebeling's letter. 

The wild, ridiculous ftory of Illiimimfm^ I never pretended to 
mveftigate. This was too dark a bufmefs for my comprehenfion ; 
but if the Dodor would condefcend to publifli the real letter v\diich 
he received from ProfefTor Ebsling, it is expelled that great light 
would be thrown on this clouded fubjedc. 

Though I have never before noticed the controverfy on Pro- 
(effor Ebeling's letter, yet after reading the laboured vindication 
of the Do(5tor, the following remarks naturally recurred froni the 
perufal : 

The identical letter, received by - Dr. Morfe, from ProfefTor 
Ebeling, it is readily acknowledged, nvas not the one puhlijloed ; but 
will the Doctor fay, that he had not at the fame time, in his pofTef- 
«on, a letter from this gentleman of ih.^ fame import ? If he had, I 
v/ould aik. him '^hcthcr the modcj, in which he denied the letter puhljfJj^ 



ii3 Answer to Dr, JlLrse, Nc. XXIX. 

€ti, had not a tendency to raife a doubt as to the authenticity of 
Frofeiror Ebeling's opinion of Robifon ? And, whether this 
*' kind" of denial does not leave -d. famt Jhadoio of deception on his 
part ? Doclor Morfe, in his letter to the editor of the Bee, 
(fpeaking of the letter publiflied) fays, *• This I can, and do afiiire 
you, it is FALSE j I never faw the letter you have publifloed, till I read 
it in your paper." Now, Doftor, I would alk you, whether this 
decilive language did merely carry in it a denial of the letter being 
Jent to youy but whether it.did not convey a flrong idea that Pror 
felfor Ebeling had not luriiten any letter tvhatever dif approbatory of 
Rohfon''s hook? Further, the certificate declares, that "the 
abllradl was bafdy faJfe and calumnious.'^'' Such a pofitive denial 
gave a more ferious appearance againft \};i^ fads of the letter, than 
i;gainft the trifling miftake that it was d'lreSed to you. 

The whole raerlts of this quefcion, Doflor, reft on this fmgle 
point, whether, at the time you declared the letter publiflied to be 
FALSE, you had not in your poffeflion a fimilar one from Profeflo;- 
Ebeling, and though the letter publ'ifoed might not contain every 
particular word, which could be found in the one you received, 
(the word " very," &c. might be omitted) yet whether it did not 
cxprefs the fame in ^^ fubJlancCi fcope and end F The marrow of this 
caufe, Doctor, lies in this inquiry, and ten lines in the paper in 
cnfiver ia It, would as fully fitisfy the public, as the columns you 
l.|ave publiOiedv 

You acknowledge, Podor, that you received a letter from 
ProfefFor Ebeling, in July, 1799, " in which he mentions having 
feen Robifon and Barruel's books on the fubjecl of Illuminifm, 
and ^wto his ophiion, i3ind the reafons of his opinion againfl the authen-= 
iicity of thefe works" ; while the note you fent to the editor of the 
Bee, declaring the letter pablifhed to be " false," is dated Dec. 
3, 1799, ^^^^ months after you acknov^dedge to have received 
Ebeling's letter. How then could the letter be ^^ falfc,^^ even if a 
miftake was made, in faying it was fent to Docfor Morfe, inftead of 
the Rev. Mr. Bentley P The contents of the letter, as it refpeded 
Ebeling's '• opinion, and the renfons for h'ls opinion,''^ were the fub- 
je6ls of controverfy, not whether it were fent to Dodor Moife, or 
any other clerical character. 

The dired'ion of the letter TO Do6lor Morfe, might be fafely 
denied : but how could he undertake to fay, that the klter was 



Noi XXIX. insider t6 Dr. Morse. tiy 

**/al/e^* ? or how could any one for him fay, that it was ^^ fulfe 
and calumnious ^^ when he had every reafon to fuppofe the letter to 
be genuine, as he held one in his own hands containing fimilar 
fentiments ? The monofy liable " to*' could not alter the merits 
of the letter ; it was true or faife, not as dire(fled "to Dodlor 
Morfe," but in the validity of the opinion given of E-obifon by 
Ebeling ; wherein w2s the falfity or calumm'', as it related to 
the effence and quintefTence of the letter, whether the perfon who 
publifhed it, faid it was fent to you or any otlier perfop ? 
Robifon's book was a matter of public notoriety, and the public 
were pleafed to know Ebeling's opinion of it, and there could be 
no other calumny attached to Doctor Morfe by this difclofure, 
tlian the difference of his opinion with Profelfor Ebeling's. Great 
men in all countries, and in all ages have and will difagree, without 
the ftigma of calumny^ and 1 hope. Doctor, this will eonfole you 
under the mortification of finding the learned Ebeling reprobating 
a book, which you io feduloufly recommend. 

The Do<5lor alleges, that it would be improper to publifh a 
private correfpondence. This may be a very honorary apology, 
but will the Dodlor fay, that he did not write to Profeffor Ebeling, 
in expeElation that he nvould approbate the hook ; and provided he had 
been furnifhed with fuch a choice document, I v/ould afk him, 
whether he would not have publifhed it with avidity, to fubftantiate 
the belief of lUuminifm ? Unfortunately, however, for the Illu- 
minati votaries, the learned Profeffor reprobated the vagaries of 
Roblfon and Barruel, and therefore his letter was confined to a 
few confidential friends to lament their difappointment. 

The writings of Robifon- and Barruel have long fmce been 
exploded by almoll every literary character in Europe and Amer- 
ica. It is difcovered to be a mere trick to deceive the people. 
This being the faft, I am forry that Do(5lor Morfe fhould expofe 
himfelf, by perfifling to fapport fuch incoherent trumpery. 

Inflead of ftudying Robifon and Barruel, it would be more 
becoming a Minifler of the gofpel to have recourfe to the Bible, 
and difcover the " figns of the times." In this book, the Do(5tor 
may be led to more evangelical contemplations ; the prophecies and 
revelations might folemnize his mind to more judicious reflexions 
than the extravagant reveries of thefe fanatics. Fleming, on the 
fulfilment of the Scriptures, is an author more adequate to tht 



iid Ans'vjer to I))\ Morse. No. XXIli^ 

purpofes, as this divine has purfued the inquiry; on fcriptural prin- 
ciples. But, v/hile Dodlor Morfe adheres to fiich rhodomontade 
as Robifon and Barruel, and alarms the ignorant in his Faft Ser- 
mons, with the ridiculous ftories of knight-templars, &c. and 
excites the public attention with a number of outlandilh names, as 
confpirators againft religion, he weakens his profeffional energies, 
and rather appears in the ftation of a bigot, than in the dignified 
deportment of a man of literature. 

Religion does not require fuch paltry aid ; for he, who has 
declared that the " gates of hell ifhall not prevail againfl it," will 
fecure it from falling a prey to a few knight-templars, or a combi- 
nation of illiterate Germans. The alarm ought to fubfide in the 
Do(5i:or^s mind, for in this Commonwealth we have upwards of five 
liimdred learned and refpeflable clergymen, (under the guid- 
ance of the Supreme Being,) in oppofition to the combined ef- 
forts of fuch antagonifts. If we doubt of viclory, we depreciate 
(what I am unwilling to allow) the abUtties of thsckrgy. Why then 
is the Doctor defcribing the people as running headlong to deftruc- 
tion ? If the people in general do not refieft on the clergy^ is it not 
ungenerous for any clergyman to reile<5l on the people ? Wherein 
do the people appear fo difpofed to injure the clergy ? Are they 
not as IV ell paid, as well fed, and in general as h'lghly eflimated as 
ever ? While tiie clergy are treated well by the people, why fhould 
any man fuggeft in his century fermon, " that before the end of 
this century, the majority of the people of America will be f6 corrupt 
as to dilllke the reftraints of religion ?" If this fhould be the un- 
happy (late of our country, I am afraid it will arlfe from the im- 
prudent condud- of a few clerical zealots, v»'-ho are heiv'ildering their 
focieties wkh polities, inftead oi erdightenmg thqm with religion. Can 
' , it be fuppofed, at this enlightened age, that the vagaries of fanatics 
will pafs for gofpel truths ? And if a clergyman will fport the 
facred fcriptures upon the frenzies of Robifon and BaiTuel, he muft 
exped: to excite ridicule, Inftead of refped. Notwithftanding tliefe 
gloomy forebodings, I believe that real unadulterated chriflianity will 
prevail in America, and thofe of the clergy who walk in the path 
defcribed by their master, will be duly honoured and reverenced. 

lifome of the clergy have weakened their influence, on whofe 
fnoulders does tlie blame lie ? If the Dodor confiders himfelf as 
undervalued in public ellimation, let him refled on his own con* 



No. XXX. On President Jejerson^s Speech. I2l 

dudt ; he would never have been, a fubjeft of animadverfion, if he 
had kept within his clerical profeffion, but when he overleaped the 
bounds of decency in denouncing men as Jacobins, lUuminati, &:c. 
lie might naturally fuppofe that fuch cenfures would not be pa* 
tiently borne, though fanflified with the appellation of faft fer- 
mons, or pulpit difcourfes. A clergyman^owA/ refpeSt himfelf, if he 
means to acquire it from others. A teacher of gofpel truths 
fhould not prefume to denounce and anathematize as a political 
dicftator ; or print fermons with marginal notes, which afterwards 
prove falfe : If he will take this refponfible part, he places him- 
felf on an equality with his fellow-citizens, and at once ftrips him* 
felf of his ecclefiaftical habiliments. If, inftead of a clergyman, 
he afTumes the politician, he mull expe(5t to take his lot in the 
fcuffle. 

As the Doctor has ftyled his opponents " unprincipled men^^ he 
muft excufe the liberty taken in thefe remarks ; and though I 
would not retort in fuch uncharitable language, yet when a man 
affumes too high a prerogative, a gentle reprimand may prove 
ferviceable. Health and fraternity, Doctor. 



No. XXX. 



ON PRESIDENT JEFFERSON S SPEECH. 

W HILE reading the fpeech of Mr. Jefferfon, every American 
muil feel an indignation that within the United States there are 
men fo loft to every honorary principle, as to calumniate a charac- 
ter fo truly amiable and refpe<5l:able. The contraft between the ex- 
alted fentiments of this patriot and ftatefman, and the bafe detrac- 
tion vented by his enemies, muft ftrike every confiderate citizen 
with the moft forcible conviction, that malignity and defamation, 
are the leading paffions of his opponents ; while he exhibits the be- 
nevolence, candour, and magnanimity of a Chriftian, patriot, and 
philofopher, his enemies have portrayed him in all the deteftable 
qualities of Infidelity, immorality, and atheifm. 

While his opponents have been afliduous to deftroy his repu- 
tation, by the fouleft epithets of detradion, he has rifen fuperior 
to their calumny, and, inftead of condefcending tq " returr* 

Q 



122 On Fn'sulcnt JeJJlrson's SpeecJh No. XXX* 

railing for railing," has given ftrong evidence of the magnanimity 
of an honed heart, and an exalted mind, over the deformities at- 
tached to a polluted temper and difpofition. 

Fellow-citizews ; while reading the fpeech of Prefident Jeffer- 
fon, paufe at every period, and recolledl, that this is the man who 
has been held up to public view as the objecl: of univerfal detefla- 
tion. "While contemplating the fublimity of the fentiments ; the 
eloquence of diction ; the candour, and conciliating ftrains, which 
adorn every paragraph, refle(5l, that thefe are the nvords of a man 
who has been denounced as the deftroyer of government, the fub- 
verter of religion ; the demoralizer, the dcift, the atheift ; and 
whofe name has been profaned^ as the leader of a banditti to over- 
throw government, and dilTolve the bands which unite and har- 
monize fociety. 

Ye minlfters of the gofpel ; ye ttidhiduuh who have anathe- 
matized him from the facred defk, how muft fhame cover your 
faces, while perufmg this fpecimen of his political, and religious in- 
tegrity ! He now ftands unmafked before the public, and with 
the purity of hts oiunjignaturei announces himfelf an advocate for 
RELIGION : That religion, which places mankind on the balls of 
equal rights ; that undlfguifed conduct which defignates the real 
chriflian, from the impofmg hypocrite : An enemy to the perfecut- 
ing fpirit of bigotry, but a friend to that benign temper which fe- 
cures the happinefs Of fociety, and eftablifhes the facred doflrlnes of 
the gofpel on a foundation too permanent to be fhaken by zealots, 
or fanguinary fanatics. He difplays that mildnefs and modera- 
tion, which have too rarely been found in thofe who have affume^ 
the right of judging on his principles, and denouncing his conduct. 
While you have calumniated him, he has fcorned to retort in the 
language of reproach, but with that charity which is the ornament 
of chriftianity, enforces with a mildnefs of perfuafion, thofe doc- 
trines which you have charged him as violating ; from hencefoith 
then, be filent. Let your reproaches ceafe ; convince the world 
that yon are *' indeed, and in truth," what you profefs to be ; in- 
ftead of reviling, acknowledge your mifcondu6l ; give fome fpeci- 
men of your benevolence, by your works ; for as men of honour, 
and as chriftians, you muft feel a confcioufnefs of your error ; and 
ihus convi(5led, you muft confefs, that the moft permanent trait of 



No. XXX. On President jejfenotis Speech. 123 

repentance, is a confeffion of your manifold offences. This is a 
chriflian regimen of honefty and contrition. 

Every clafs of citizens mufi. feel a pride, when they perufe a 
fpeech fraught with fuch clailical erudition ; fuch propriety of fenti- 
ment ; fuch unaffeded evidences of patriotifm and integrity. The 
character of an American alfumes a dignified deportment in the 
literary and political world, when its Chief Magiftrate difplays a 
charadter fo fubiime and majeftic ; the great principles of our 
government are brought within the comprehenfion of every indi- 
vidual ; it is not a fummary of our Conftitution, but a perfect 
SYSTEM, fo completely condenfed, that it exhibits in one view all 
the vital organs of its exiftence. The man who ftudies this fpeech 
cannot be ignorant of the eflential qualities of a free government ; 
it is a lelTon which fhould be early learnt to our children, as con- . 
taining thofe rudiments, which ought to dire^l not only the ftatef- 
man in his duties, but inftrud each citizen in the prefervation of 
his rights. Solon as a law-giver is immortalized, but Jeiferfon as 
a commentator on the American Conftitution, ftands in a, more 
permanent attitude. The do6lrines which he inculcates, are fa- 
miliar to republicans ; they have ever been the creed of thofe, who 
have beenfalfely defignated jacobins and diforganizers. 

The comprehenfivenefs of his mind is confpicuous in the 
minute details of thofe eflential principles of our government, 
which ought to dired its adminiftration. They are comprefFed 
within fuch precife limits, as to enforce them on the memory, and 
cxpreiled with fuch claffical elegance, as to charm the fcholar with 
their rhetorical brilliancy. This is tlie peculiar happinefs attached 
to Mr. Jefferfon's literary performances. His Notes on Virginia 
are ftrewed with flowers feleifted from the parterre of the Belles 
Letters, while the declaration of American Independence 
exhibits the fublimity of his fentiments, and will forever remain a 
monument of the immenfity of his talents. 

It muft be allowed, that the licentioufnefs of the prefs has been 
extended in its utmoft latitude in calumniating Mr. JefFerfon ; but 
far from touching this palladium of public liberty, he avows his 
facred attachment to its freedom. He is not afraid to truft his 
condud to the infpedlion of his fellow-citizens : neither is he defi- 
rous to wreft the pen from the hands of freemen, and to rivet 
Jh0ckeh in its place. ConfciouS re^itude preferves his confideiice* 



J 24 2^^^ Means to lessen Taxes, No. XXXI. 

He readily fubmits his a<rtions to uncontroled Invefllgation. 
His own bofom is the tribunal, and integrity prefides as an impar- 
tial judge to confound his accufers. ' 

This being the real chara<S:er of Mr. Jefferfon, how mortified 
and how abafhed muft his calumniators be, if they retain one fpark 
of manly refleftion ! How muft thofe feel, who in private caucujfes 
have vilified this exalted and virtuous citizen — ^who never dare 
openly to avov/ what they privately aflerted — who have exerted 
themfelves in oppofing the eledion of Mr. Jefferfon, contrary to 
the apparent voice of the people — who have fhewn a rancour of 
temper (unbecoming even the chara<5ter of a gentleman) through 
the whole progrefs of the late election — who have quitted the fair 
ground of argument, and fcreened themfelves under the mafk of 
hypocrify — who have endeavoured to injure Mr. Jefferfon, among 
the ferious and well difpofed, when the condudt of many of them 
has been difcordant to every principle of honour, religion and 
morality ! Such is the fyftem purfued againft every patriot who 
has attempted to countera«5i; thi plans of an inveterate faction. 
Such is the procefs againft Mr. Gerry and General Heath, and 
while this " junto" can profecute their wicked defigns with any 
profpecl of fuccefs, they v^ill never " ceafe from troubling," 
neither will this banditti " be at reft." Let the magnanimity of 
the republicans be confpicuous in the treatment of their enemies ; 
but while we exercife our benevolence, let us guard againft their 
infidious and deceptive ftratagems. Let us fhew a fuperiority over 
their reign of terror ; but inftead of trufting to their repentance, let 
us put it out of their power to renew their fubtleties — remember, 
*' the tyger crouches before he leaps." 



No. XXXL 

THE MEANS TO LESSEN TAXES, 

X HE people of America are peculiarly attached to Liberty and 
Property. Perfecuted in England by the arm of tyranny, they 
fought an afylum in this country for the enjoyment of their polit- 
ical and religious principles. After experiencing tlie fanguinary 
difpofition of the government of Britain, they became tenacious 



No. XXXI. The Means to lessen Taxes, 125 

of thofe rights which they had acquired by their emigration- 
With a laudable jealoufy they watched over the conduft of their 
magiftrates, and in every inftance were alive to all thofe tender 
emotions which naturally ariie in the minds of men, who had fled 
from perfecutioi.. . 

The cold, unfeeling temper of thofe who were in league with 
the Britiih during our revolutionary conili<5l : the apathy of thofe 
individuals who were within the lines of the enemy, — can fpeak 
witli a peculiar indifference on the fears and apprehenfions of the 
people. They can exprefs their furpiife, that the citizens are 
alarmed, or that they fnould diftruft the intentions of thofe who 
are appointed to adminifcer the government ; but from the firfl 
fettlement of the country, it has been our misfortune to experience 
the woril of evils, from the hands of men, ivho made the hlghejl 
profejfions of friend/hip. Who would have thought that Hutchinfon 
was planning the ruin of America, under that courtly ma^ of 
cordiality which fo peculiarly diftinguiihed his character ? He 
was the idol of the Clergy, as hypocrify was the coat of mail under 
which he attempted to render himfelf invulnerable. 4. 

Far be it from me, to cenfure any pre-eminent character of our 

late adminiftration ; but if we examine the meafures adopted for 

a few years paft, it cannot but excite fufpicions which are hard to 

be fupprefTed. Who are the authors of our troubles I will not 

pretend to fay, but that we are in difficulties is too evident to be 

difputed. That there has been a party, devifmg " ways and 

means^^ to bring us into a war with France and an alliance with 

England is declared by AriHides. The conduft of ^individuals, 

in too many mjlances, has given a fandion to fuch a declaration. 

Every aggravation has, attended their reprefentations, as they related 

to France, and every palliative as conne6:ed with England ; while 

we have torn ourfelves afunder from France by a Non-Intsr.courfey 

we have as anxioufly renewed our connexion with Britain ; v-hile 

we have refented, with all the rage of m.alignity, the violations 

of our commercial rights by tlie French, we \i2iYQ pajpvely furren-r 

dered our neutral privileges to the arbitrary decifions of the 

Engl'iJJj. 

If this country had only experienced the effects of ivrongjudg-- 
ment, and the mifchiefs ceuld be as eafily rectified as the fentiments 
could be rctra<5ted, we might overlook tlie injudicioufnefs of thofe 



126 the Msans to lessen Taxes. No. XXXI. 

who have been the authors of our difficulties ; but a heavy debt 
is contraded, and the prefent and future generations muft become 
" tributary'^ to difcharge it. If we could difcharge our debt as 
eafily as we could dijband our army, the evil Vv^ould be remedied 
without any effcntial inconvenience. While refledling on this 
fubjefl, remember, fellow-citizens, ive are to pay for our folly ; every 
dollar expended muft come from the pockets of The People, 

During the debates in the convention on the adoption of the- 
federal conftitution, the duties arifnig from impofl were thought 
adequate to ail the efTential purpofes of our government, alfo for 
the payment of our foreign and domeftic debt. The people were 
led to anticipate a cheap and energetic adminiftration under the 
operation of this new fyftem ; but, ftrange to relate, within about 
twelve years, in a Jiate of peace, the moll powerful refources of rev- 
enue are called Into afcion ; Impoji, Exc'ife, Stamp Duties, Land and. 
Houfe Tax, and to cap the climax, a Loan at the enormous premium of 
eight per cent. 

Such has been the effedl of the late admlnillratlon ; and can 
any man fay that profperity has attended this country, when fuch 
an immenfity of taxes have arlfen under its operation \ Who is 
to blame, Is not at prefent my inquiry ; fome future numbers may 
be more explicit on this fubjeifl: ; but I can with confidence afk, 
whether any man had reafon to fuppofe, tliat within fo few years, 
the debts of the country would have called for fuch financial 
exertions \ Every bafe fyflera of fpeculation has been profecuted 5 
the artful defigning knave has preyed on the diflrelTes of the un- 
forttinate ; and a few men have been able to acquire a profufenefs 
of fortune, while the induftrious part of the community are bur- 
dened with exceflive duties to furniih their quarterly intereft. 

It Is evident, that the economy recommended by Mr. Jefferfon 
was not fully pradlifed during the late adminiflration ; for if it had, 
the neceffities of this country could not have demanded fuch ex- 
ceflive expenditures. The treafury department has been obfcured 
in myilery ; it is fo inexplicable, that one man will afTert, we have 
lejfened the public debt, while another will as confidently maintain 
that It has increafed millions ; whether it has increafed or lejfened is 
an important confideratlon. It might reafonably be expe<5{:ed 
that the debt would have been nearly extlnguifhed by the refpe<alvQ 
iburces of revenue. The people have been paying, for a number 



No. XXXI. The Means to lessen Taxes, X27 

©f years back, every fpecles of taxes, and yet they remain uncer- 
tain, whether we are not more in debt than before they made their 
payments. The extravagance in the expenditures of public money 
is generally allowed to exceed even European countries ; our 
trifling navy, it is fuppofed, has coft the United States four times 
as much as the fame force in any other nation ; the army was a 
wanton lavifliment of public money, and a moft egregious impo- 
lition on the United States. Millions have thus been fported with 
in various channels ; Algerine tribute, grants for carrying into 
efFe<5t a Britifii treaty, expenfes of foreign minifters, and, above all, 
that maufoleum of folly and extravagance the Federal City. Whil« 
our money is thus profufely fquandered away, can we expert to 
difcharge our debts, even though our taxes fhould increafe four- 
fold ? Through the agency of perfonal patronage, the benefits 
of this extravagance have been confined within about one hundred 
families within the United States. 

The ftate of the treasury is of the higheft importance ; an 
invelligation of the financiering fyftem, receipts and expenditures 
and the refpe£live items which have exhaufted the fupplies as 
rapidly as they were furnifhed. Thsfe stre particulars which call 
for the critical eye of the new adminiftration, and if the docu- 
ments are not burnt, it is hoped that a juft ftatement will be made ; 
that the people fhould be informed hov/ their money is fpent, and 
what is the remaining balance of their debts. A few men have 
enjeyed the advantages of thefe extravagances, but the burdens on 
commerce, agriculture, and manufav5lures prefs hard on the in- 
duftrious part of the community, and begin to excite difagreeable 
fenfations. Some other fources of revenue mufl be adopted, for 
it is unreafoneble that the whole weight of an extravagant fyftem 
of expenditure (which has principally enriched a particular clafs 
of men) fhould be laid on the mercantile, agricultural, and mannfaElur' 
ing branches. Let thofe who have experienced the " blejfings of the 
public debt,^* bear their proportion of the burden ; common fenfe 
requires an equalization of taxes ; the induftry of a country ought 
not to be the fole objeft of taxation ; afHuence and indolence have 
as broad Ihoulders to fuftain the ponderancy. 

On the eftablifhment of peace, how are our young men to 
acquire a mercantile fubfiftence, if commerce is cramped with ex- 
ttfllve duiiei ? How si^r« the manufa<5luring and agricultural 



12$ A pubikk Debty a puhlick EviL No. XXXIL 

branches to be fupported, if every tradefman and farmer are borne 
down by exorbitant taxes ? But what-ever may be the diftreffes 
arlfing from future taxation, Mr. JefFerfon cannot be anfwerable 
for them, as the debts for which he is to make appropriation were 
contradled during a former adminiftration. His economy would 
have prevented them ; but the errors of thofe who formerly had 
the lead in the financial departments, have brought a debt upon 
us, which will require the mod accurate arrangement juftly ta 
liquidate. 

The money departments are the great efTentia! points, to 
which the prefent adminiftration muft be directed ; an able and 
indiijlrious financier is the great requifite of our government. 
When the people underjland their public accounts, and when econ- 
omy is praftifed in expending the money, and each clafs of cuizens 
hear their proportion^ a general confidence will pervade the com- 
munity ; but diftruft will ever fubfifl, while money concerns are 
involved in clouds and darknefs. The Americans are ever ready 
to fupport government, but they are equally defirous to know how 
their money goes. 

Under Mr. Jefferfon^s adminiftration, we expefi: an open, ex- 
plicit ftatement of all pecuniary tranfa<5lions ; and there is the 
hlgheft expedation, that fuch a man will be found, who will fur- 
niih not only the amount of debt, but recommend fuch " ^ways and 
ineans^'* as to put it in the pov/er of the people, honourably and equ'i' 
tably to difcharge it. We wifh to pay our debts, but the fupport 
of nanial agents, with a long train of hangers-on, in various depart- 
ments, are burdens v/hich were never contemplated by the people, 
on the adoption of the federal conftitution. The conftitution was 
made for the people, and not the people for the conftitution ; or^ 
in other words, it ought to be adminiftered in fuch a manner, as 
that the people ftiould not be oppreiTed under it. 



No. XXXII. 

A PUBLICK DEBT, A PUBLICK EVIL. 

X HE profperity of a country, and the profperity of an individual 
muft be calculated on the fame pnociples; the fame ftandard 



No. XXXII/ A publkh Debt, a puhlid Evil, i2^ 

which determines the accuracy of one, equally decides the validity 
of the other. Mankind are too apt to confound their ideas in 
judging on particular fubje(5ls ; more efpeeially when fpeaking o£ 
government, they foar into the regions of myftery, and inconfider- 
ately adopt the falfe dodrines of defigning politicians, that it is a 
fcience too intricate and perplexed for common apprehenfion — the 
more abftrufe and unintelligible the adminiftration, the more " ftu- 
pendous the fyftem" of wifdom which guides and direiSls thofe who 
govern* 

But this is falfe reafoning ; upon this ground, the abfurd doc- 
trine, that " a public debt is a public blefling," is founded. It is 
impoffible, that fuch a grofs fentiment fhould be inculcated, if the 
people would exercife the fame common fenfe on this queftion, as 
they do in the general concerns of life, A public debt muft, in its 
confequences, create public taxes ; taxes muft be coUeded from 
the people, and thofe who pay them muft inevitably feel their ulti- 
mate tendency and pernicious efFeds. 

What can be the difference between a natron dnd an Individu- 
al ? Do not the fame conclufions follow In one cafe as in the 
other ? If a private citizen Is diftreffed by his debts, if he Is ex- 
pofed to many difficulties from the multiplicity of demands upoix 
him, why fiiould we fuppofe that a nation may not equally expe- 
rience the operation of fuch embarraffments ? 

This appears plain reafoning \ — but unfortunately for nations, 
an oppofite do(5trIne Is Inculcated ; and even in America, an at- 
tempt has been made to Inftll this abfurdlty, as the teft of political 
orthodoxy. It has been fo far confidered as tlie pivot of feder' 
alifmy that the man who prefumed to fpeak of the public debt, 
or recommended economy, has* been ftigmatized a jacobin, and 
cxpofed to every refte(^ion which could injure his political repu* 
tation. In ftiort, extravagance in public expenditarss appears ta 
have been fyftematlcally contemplated as the mark of national 
happlnefs and profperlty ; and though this chimerical mode has 
been fecretly adopted by Individuals, yet the project was too ab- 
furd to be openly divulged ; for while the plan was Intended to 
increafe the public debt, the citizens have been flattered that it 
was annually decreafing. But that the public debt has Incrcafed, 
cannot be controverted ; for if thi« had ngt been the fa(5i, how is it 
R 



i^d Ji puhlich Debt, a puhlich Evil. No. XXXI I^ 

pofiible that the iiugmentation of taxes fnould fo rapidly have 
taken place ? It either proves that we have expended our refour- 
ces needlefsly, or that the debt had kept pace with the call for 
taxes. The reafoning to be drawn from the increafe of taxes is, 
that the demands on the government are equal to the demands 
on the people ; and this being granted, it follows that the csig'inat 
debt was Vv'ithin the revenue arifmg from Iwpofi, but that the aug- 
mentation requires an e;<cife, fcamp-dutics, land-tax, and an eight 
per cent, loan, to cancel the arrearages. 

We may talk about the decreafe of the public debt as long as 
we pleafe ; nnancicring legerdemain may perplex the flatements 
from the treafury department ; Mr. Harper may write to his con- 
ftituents that our pecuniary affairs are in a profperous fituation ; 
but when the people find, that all the refources of the country are 
brought into operation, and that our public credit demanded eight 
per cent, to fupport it, they cannot be fo loft to the eftim.ation of 
pounds, Ihillings and pence, as to deceive themfelves by fictitious 
calculations. The money, raifed from various fources, ought to 
have diminiflied the debt by this time ; and it is but a poor confo- 
latlort to be told by a few fpeculators, that we are not more in ar- 
rears"Ci\2iX\. when we only paid the trifling duties of impoft. 

It would be highly fatisfaftory to the people of the United 
States, to have laid before them the whole revenue, arifmg from 
tte refpedive taxes and loans, from the firft year after the revenue 
fyftem was eftablifhed, to the 3d of March, 1801. Should this be 
done;, I believe the people would be aftonifned at the magnitude of 
the amount. From this ftatement, the citizens would be able to 
judge what have been their exertions in fupport of the governm^ent, 
and^ from this document they could afcertain how far the revenue 
might have been applied to difcharge the public debt. This ftate- 
ment would at once open the eyes of the people ; and when they 
looked at the amount, the objecl would 'ftrike them with wonder 
and furprife. But the misfortune is, the treafury accounts have 
hitherto been involved in myftery ; there has been fuch a perplex- 
ity attending thefe communications, that but few men knew, after 
they had perufed them., the real ftate of the bufmefs. In Hiort, it 
has been fo intricate, that in one circle, we Ihould hear them boaft- 
ing of the decreafe of our natioaal debt, and in another deploring;: 
its augmentation* * ~ 



No. XXXII. A piiUieh Debt, a pxihTid Evil 131 

But if the whole revenue was explicitly declared, and the 
expenditures were as clearly dated, the people at large could as 
accurately judge, ^.vhcU they had paid and nvhat had become of the money, 
as the ableft financier and the moll plodding negociator on the 
continent. This would be bringing our financial projects to a 
' clear, defined point, and the refources of the country would give 
an evidence to the world, of the hnmenfe ahUiticj of the United 
States hi the fupport of government. 

Mr. JefFerfon being introduced to the chair of government, 
by the republican citizens of the United States, in vindication of his 
adminiflration, it is hoped that fuch a ftatement will be made. 
The people vv^ill then fee, what has hitherto been done, and if 
their taxes continue, that it is in confequence of previous engage- 
ments. If a debt is contrafied by a former adminiftration. It is 
not Mr. Je(Ferfon's fault ; but the fulfilment of former contracts 
is indifpenfable on his part. Thofe, then, w^ho fneeiingly oblerve, 
that the republicans expert no taxes under Mr. jefferfon's admin- 
iftration, are to remember that the debt was contrafied in the 
days of his predeceffor. 

The citizens of America are peculiarly fond of knowing how 
their money goes ; they are ready to pay their taxes, but at the 
fame time are anxious to pry into the appropriation of them. 
Like honed men, they are defircus to anfwer all necejfary and legal 
demands, but It is a Nenv-England fojlo'ion to examine accounts with 
a critical acutenefs. Millions of dollars are large fums, and w^heni 
they come from the pockets of the people, they feel a fatisfadion in 
knowing their dire*5lion. If they are fairly expended, they are not 
difpofed to murmur, but If they go under the idea that " a 
public debt is a public bleffing," it Is apt to make them jealous of 
the propriety of the principle. They love their country, and they 
love their money ; they ^re not fond of pageantry, and not wilL 
ing to pay taxes, juft to gratify the pride of men, who vainly im- 
agine that the people honour themfehes by paying for their extrav-? 
agances. 

The ECONOMY recommended by Prefident Jefferfon is the key-? 
ftone of republicanifm ; this Is the confummatlon devoutly to be 
wifhed by the republican citizens of the United States. If this 
principle had been ftrldtly adhered to, I am perfuaded the rev-- 
enue already raifed would have nearly extingulflied the publi 



132 On the Abuse of Federalism. No. XXXIII, 

debt. But the poifon which has been infufed into our govenif 
ment, has given a baneful tendency to corrupt the vital organs of 
the adminiftration ; it has raifed a few to eminence, and thrown a 
heavy debt on the bulk of the citizens. A falfe, deceptive ap^ 
pearance of profpeiity has bewildered the public mind ; but when 
peace takes place, and the immenfe demands from the banks, 
cuflom-houfes, &c. are cancelled, thefe films which now obfcure 
the fight will drop from our eyes, and we fhall not only fee, hut feel 
the effedis of our political credulity and folly. 



No. XXXIII. 

ON THE ABUSE OF FEDERALISM. 

J-T is worthy of remark, to obferve the peculiar efficacy of the 
term "federalf/m" as conneded with the ftratagems and defigns of 
a particular defcription of men. It has for many years paft been 
ufed as a charm, to fubftantiate the propriety of charadler, both as 
it refpedts religion and politics. It has alfo had its operation ii> 
Xht fafhionable circles, being conficjered as a general palTport oi good' 
breeding, and a fubftantial badge of virtue and politenefs. Under 
this delufive impreffion, the young men confidered a^ avowal of 
thefe principles as the moft convenient introduction to the company 
of the ban ton, and inconfiderately adopted thofe political fenti- 
inents which have a tendency to promote the intereft of Britijh 
fadors, to their injury ; for it is a fad, that the leading men, who 
are now in favour of thofe meafures which have been pre-eminently 
fijlcd federal/fm, are the identical perfons who were the moft boifte- 
rous fome years ago to deftroy the very fyftem they are now pre- 
tending to fupport. If this obfervation is denied, a full proof will 
be given, and the names of the individuals mentioned. The 
young Americans have been egregioufly impofed on, in this politi? 
cal controverfy, and fome future numbers will be appropriated 
to undeceive them* 

This falfe defcription of federalifm was the teft even of ecclefi- 
ajlical orthodoxy. However pious, exemplary, and attentive to 
the duties of his profeflion, the clerical character has too ofte^ 
been tried by the federal touchjlone. However devout in the dif» 



No. XXXI 1 1. On the Abuse of Federalism, i^l 

charge of his fundlions ; however kind and charitable in his con» 
dud, yttfederalifm was " the pearl of great price," without which, 
jio man could expe<5l the affedlion of his parilliioners, or the efteem 
of his fellow-citizens. If the clergyman could obtain the role 
d^ equipage of federalifm, he might pafs current as a faint of the 
firft magnitude, even though the general tenour of his behaviour 
was not ftridly conformable to that modeft deportment, which de- 
fignates the difciple of his heavenly Mafter. If he negle(5led the 
duties of his profeffion ; impofed on the credulity of his parifh- 
ioners ; publilhed fermons containing the grofTeft falfehoods ; or 
endeavoured to palm on the public the moft chimerical abfurdities, 
ytlfederalifm fhrouded him from thofe cenfures w^hich juilice, and 
even Chriflianity demanded. 

How many worthy charaiflers have been calumniated, whof^ 
life and converfation were conformable to every moral principle I 
whofe behaviour, in the various departments of life, has in no in^ 
fiance been impeached with any fpecific criminality ! Kow often 
have we feen abufe and detra<51:ion heaped on them, as the mcfl 
abandoned in fociety, becaufe they exercifed the right of freemen, 
or prefumed to differ from thofe, who monopolized the appellation 
oi federalifls I This intolerance has pervaded almoft every circle in 
the community, and the reputation of men has been repeatedly 
facrificed, at the fhrine of party, with the moft wanton barbarity. 
I would not be thought unjuftly cenforious, but the validity 
of thefe remarks is fubmitted to the candid decifion of an en- 
lightened public. 

However honeft the dealings of the merchant ; however punc- 
tual in the difcharge of his engagements ; however induftrious the 
tradefman in his occupation, yet his good name was no longer fe- 
cure from defamation than he became the fycophantic approver 
of particular men and meafures, or dared to think for him^felf in 
any matters in which the honour or profperity of his country was, 
involved. Like the Jews of old, the cry was, " away ivith bim^ 
0iivay with him — he Is not Casfar's friend." 

This infatuation of the term federalifm was fo powerful, that 
it nearly eftablilhed an order of nobility among us. Under tills 
title, the difhoneft have oftentimes rifen fuperior to the man of in- 
tegrity ; a certain hauteur prevailed in the deportment of fome 
who werQ dignified with this appellation. Many, whofe credit 



T24- On the Ahuse of Ftderalism. No. XXXIII, 

would icarcely pafs the ordeal of an hour, would affiime a right to 
incur a debt of thoufands, ana if requejled to difcharge it, would 
Jihink their plea oifideralifin v/as as prompt payment, as a check on 
the bank. Some even confidered it as an honour to a jacoh'in., to 
h^ve their name on his books, and the delay of payment was often 
conceived as an indulgence to prolong his refpedtability. • Like 
a. Scotch lairdt they thought it a great condejcenfion to be a dehtor to 
the canaille, or vulgar. 

In the fafaionable qiyc\&s, fedcralifm was the Alpha and Omega, 
it was the viuting card to the felf-created nobles and noblefle ; 
it Vv'as the wardrobe from whence the habiliments of elegance and 
tafte were felecled ; it was the garment, which adorned the mo- 
dern Cheiterfields, and without which a man was oftentimes ex-: 
pofed to be bound hand and foot, and turned into outer darknefs. 

Thus the abufe of terms has been rendered fubfervient to 
parly purpofes. The times have been fuch, that a man required 
a ftrength of nerves as well as a ftrength oi principles. The attack 
of federaliliTi has been fo violent and outrageous, that every facuU 
ty of the human mind has been alfailed to enforce its ellablifhment 
— calumny and ridicule, perfonal affault and private detra(5lion, 
have alternately been ufed to intimidate and confound thofe who 
exercifed, not only the right of judgmicnt, but the right of con- 
fcience. A fyftem of terror of the moll malicious and vindictive 
nature has been profecuted, and the freedom of citizens has nearly 
been denied to every one, who die} not bow their knee at this altar 
of impofition. 

The term federaJlfm has been grofsly violated ; It has been 
made a ftepping-ftone to promote an interefl:, oppofed in mod 
mftances to the fundamental principles of the federal conftitution. 
— Federalifm has been abufed in its real, appropriate fignification \ 
it has, as it relates to many, b^en nothing more than torylfm In 
mafquerade. Under this deceptive mafk, every enemy of our 
revolution has rallied ; there is not one old tory but what has 
ftyled himfelf a federalift ; in all our poKtical controverfies, the 
tories have afTamed this infallibility of denomination. If an aiien- 
adt was pafTed, the tories approved the mieafare — if the liberty of 
the prefs was violated, the tories were vociferous for its moll rigid 
operation — if a citizen was confined in goal, or fubje(5led to heavy* 
jSnes, under the rip-our of the Common Law of England, the toriesi 



No. XXXIII. Oh the Ah use of Federalism^ 13^ 

applauded the infiiclion — if a {landing army was raifed, tHe tories 
recommended its continuance — if the people were burdened with 
taxes, the tories hailed the augmentation as the wifeft adminiRra- 
tlon of government — if Mr. JefFerfon, Mr. Madifcn, Mr. Gallatin, 
Mr. Lincoln, Gen. Dearborne, or even the venerable Samuel 
Adams, were calumniated, the tories were affiduous in aggravat- 
ing the fcurrllity — if an attempt was m.ade to involve us in a war 
with France, a;nd aii alliance with England, the tories were the 
moft active to propagate every vain ftory to urge on the deftrutfl- 
ive fyflem — if the Prefident fent commiflioners to France to renew 
our friendfhip, the tories reprobated his conduift in terms the moft 
degrading : — in: fhort, federalifm was tlie watch-word, which op- 
erated as the charm to deftroy all the vital republican principles 
of our conftitution, and to bring the United States to the brink of 
difunion. The abufe of federalifm, therefore, has bewildered the 
people. The enemies of our country have taken to themfelves 
an appellation, which really and elFentially belonp*s to thofe whom 
they have ftyled jacobins. The controverfy is not confined to 
words, but to principles ; the republicans, (falfely ftyled jacobins) 
have always been the fubftantial fupporters of the Federal Conftitu- 
tion ; they have been anxioufly difpofed'to have it adminiftered upon 
thofe principles which firft gave it e5:iftenee ; they are oppofed to 
every meafure which leads to extravagance, and which gives a power 
into the hands of they^w to deprefs the many. 

The fpeech of Prefident JefFerfon, as it relates to the adminiftra- 
tion of government, is the political creed of the republicans ; the 
rights of the citizens, both in their political and religious capacity 
are exprefTed in language confonant to the feelings and fcntiments 
of a free people. 

While thus defcribing the pernicious tendency of the term 
federalifm, as operating for many years paft, I would not be 
thought to explode the propriety of its adoption. Federalifm is a 
prominent article in the American compaft ; it is not a decep^. 
tive quality to anfwer party purpofes, but a defined principle,- 
which muft ever invigorate the whole fyftem of our government. 
The conftitution lives and moves by its vitality — it is the locks of 
the American Sampfon ; but while we contemplate its efficacy, 
let us not be led away by the hollow found iffuing through the 
caverns from wheace, during our revolution, the hoarfe murmurs 



Ij6 Cn the Aluse of Federatism. No. XXXIlL 

of our enemies proceeded. Thefe falfe-termed federalifts are 
fapping the ground on which our happinefs is placed ; they are 
attempting to render the refpe<5tive ftates jealous of each other 5 
they are trying their fkill at dividing the Southern from the 
Northern States. The " New-England Palladium" is brought 
into view, as If to rally the parties under territorial diftinftions. 
Publications have often difgraced thofe papers which afTumed the 
federal title, to urge a divlfion, and the eledlon of the Prefident 
has been denounced as the overbearing preponderancy of fouthern 
Haves. All thefe appearances forbode fome deep projedl to fhake 
the foundation of the federal conftltutlon ; they appear fyftem- 
atically purfued, and the opprobious epithets on our Executive, 
which are daily publlflied, we have reiafon to fear are precuriors 
to the fatal cataftrophe. 

^' IVe are all federalifts ^^^ fays the Prefident ; that is, every real 
friend to America Is in reality a friend to the harmony and union 
of the refpedlive ftates. Let us, then, fellow-citizens, rally round 
our conftltutlon, and maintain its federal features — ^let us fcan the 
defigns of men, who, with fpeclous pretences, have courted the 
fmiles of federallfm, but who wifti to violate the chaftity of ouf 
patronefs In their unhallowed embraces. The real republicans are 
the protedors of her honour, and under the wife and benign ma- 
nagement of our conftituted authorities, the enemies of our future 
profperity, we truft in God, will be bafiled. 

The foregoing obfervatlons are not made to excite any unrea- 
fonabk jealoufies, or to create a fplrlt of party animofity ; but In 
order to prevent the continuance of dlfunion In our public affairs, it 
is neceiTary to know xhtfource of divlfion. This falfe appropriation 
of federalifm Is the cause of all our difficulties, and the Effex 
junto have taken an undue advantage by ftyling themfelves " ex- 
clufive federalifts" ; a wound which had fo long been feftering, 
ought to be probed to the bottom, and when we underftsmd the 
9aufe of complaint, we can eafily apply the remedy. 



No. XXXIV. Economy, 13^ 

■ I ■■ I I . I ■ ■■ ^ — ■ ■ ■ I .III. - 1 ■■ I ■ - — ^^ ■ ■ — .1.1 ■■--■■ I I ,, »,i-—., ■,,■■<, ■, 1 

No. XXXIV, 

ECONOMY, 

OPECULATIVE fubjefh are liable to endlefs controverfy. 
But there are axioms, both in politics and religion, to which the 
mind admits of no difTent — the moft prominent of which are, the 
adoration of the Supreme Being, an adherence to our Conftitu- 
tions, and a patriotic attachment to the freedom, fovereignty and 
independence of our country. Thefe are tenets which bafHe all 
oppofition, and are the unequivocal teils of religious, moral, and 
foclal reftitude. 

In politics a variety of opinions may be promulgated and en- 
forced ; honeft men may differ as to the particular mode of ad- 
miniflering the government, but there is one radical principle^ which 
all the fophiftry of ftatefmen can never eradicate. The principle 
which I allude to, is economy. It is the blood of the body poli- 
tic — it is the ftamina which invigorates the focial organs, and gives 
animation to all the movemxents by which they are direfted. It 
is the alpha and omega of a republican government, and the war- 
rantee which fecurps the welfare and happinefs of a people. 

Economy in government, is like charity in religion. It is the 
cardinal virtue, and while we enumerate all the pleafmg charac- 
teriflics of a profperous adminiftration, we muil finally conclude, 
that the greateji of thefe is economy. 

The " modern philofophy^^ that " a public debt is a public blef-" 
fmg," is equally as abfurd, as if a man fhouid fay, that " pri- 
vate vices are public benefits ; and a m.aglftrate fnould be as re- 
prehenfible in endeavoring to augment the national debt, in order 
to increafe the happinefs of tiie country, as a minifler of the gofpel 
to diffeminate vice to promote the caufe of chriftianity. 

Extravagance in public expenditures is the ** tare among the 
ivheati^ and a farmer may as w^ell exped to reap a plentiful har- 
veft with his foil overrun with noxious weeds, as a government to 
hope for profperity, from a profufe laviihment of its pecuniary re- 
fources. The fame fimple principles are as applicable to nations 
as to individuals : and thougk a Contrary dodritis has been ad^ 



i^S Ij^conoms, No. XXXif. 

vanced in England and America by " modern Philojqphers^'* yet 
*' common fi;nft^ revolts at tlie folly and tendency of the fentiment. 

From the above plain pofitions, I am authorifed to draw thefe 
conclufions, viz. that x\\(i .pnances of this country, at this early 
period, ought not to extend to the utmojl ah'iTit'ies of the people, but 
fliould be kept within thofe rational bounds, trhich, in a time of 
peace, are adequate to an economical a dm'tnjji ration of the g^overn- 
ment ; and the accounts ihould be fo clearly ilated to the citizens, 
as that they might know to what purpofe their money has been 
appropriated. If we had purfued this method, is it probable that 
the ultimate refources of this country would ha?e been brought 
into operation, fo foon after the adoption of the federal conftitu- 
tion ? Within about twelve years, we have nearly embraced the 
cxtenfive fyftem of Britifh taxation — our impoft and exeife are 
proportionably burdenfomc with thofe of the Englifli — (lamp 
duties, houfe and land taxes, already bear heavy on the yeomanry ; 
but our loans at eight per cent, exceed the lavilli douceurs of Britain^ 
even under all the v/eight of war and perplexity of their finances. 
In order then to know the amount of expenfes, it is proper that 
the treafury dicpartment fhould be fully inveftigated, and that the 
fiatement fhould be within the comprchenfion of every intelligent 
citizen ; when this is done, all the financiering myftery will be 
d'iffipated, which has for many years- paft clouded our fifcal com- 
munications—arithmetic, inftead of " hijlrumentality^'^ would be 
the table v/hereby we could make our calculation. — debt and 
credit would be fubflantiated beyond the pofTibility of deception, 
and the balance would be fo explicit, that we fhould not be puzzled 
to know whether it was In our favour or againft us. 

This fyllem of expenditure is fo important, that we cannot 
dwell too long on the fubjecl. The people of the United States 
are generally induftrious and enterprifing ; the property earned by 
the farmer in his field, by the tradefman in his work-fhop, and by 
the merchant in his compting-roomy is too facred to be fported 
with, for the emolument of others. The Jnveat of the Irow are 
drops too precious to be applied In fuch profufion, as to run down 
(like the oil from Aaron's beard) on the fkirts of a few favourites, 
but, like a valuable and collly ingredient, fhould be applied with a 
medical fkill and accuracy. That this country is involved in a 
keavy debt, cannot be denied, and tliat the articles of taxsitioBu 



" No. XXXIV. EcDnomy* 



^£9 



^ 



have far exceeded eveiy calculation which could rationally be 
made, is equally as evident. Though the inveltlgation of the 
tceafury department may bring to view fuch particulars as may be 
difgulling to fome individuals, yet the body of citizens would be 
highly gratified by the difclofure. 

The duties of impoft, excife, &c, haye been more generally pai4 
within the United States than in any other country — it is true, a 
fetu federaltjls have been caught attempting to defraud the gov- 
ernment. In England, fmuggling is reduced to a fcience, and a 
great prop.oirtion of dutied articles are landed clear of the infpec- 
tion of the ciiftom-houfe ; notwithftanding which, they are able to 
pay an intere/l on a debt of four hundred and fifty-two millions 
Ilerling. 

This being a facl, it mufl be granted, that an immenfe revenue 
has arifen from duties fmce the adoption of the Federal Conflitu- 
tion. The queftion then is. What has become of the money ? 
This is a very important inquiry, as it involves in it the fecret 
tranfa(5tions within the Treafury ; it brings into view the expendi- 
tures of an Army and Navy, Indian War, with all the items of 
** mifmanagement and negleft," Algerine Negociations, Treaty 
Appropriations, Agent Contraifts, Bank and Foreign Loans, &Co 
in fhort, the finflum fandtorum of fifcal arr^mgements would be 
laid open to the infpe<flion of an interefted public : and, like a 
doom's-day book, y/ould decide -on the merits or demerits of thofe 
who have had the management of our government. In this in- 
quiry, it is probable we fhould difcover the mag'ic foiirce of tt.dek- 
ALisM — how far the private intereft of individuals has been con- 
nedted with certain high-toned meafures ; the bleflings of agen- 
cies, contradls, and official appointments, both at home and abroad. 
We might poflibly difcover the cau/e of the violent oppofition to a 
change of men and meafures — why Mr. Jefferfon has been calum- 
niated, and why Mr. Gallatin is dreaded. The Treafury depart- 
ment is fo involved in the meafures of government, that it is the 
key by which we may hope to unlock the Pandora box, which con- 
tains ttih-pIotSi Ocean majfacres, and even Harper's famous " clues 
to con/piracies,'^ That is, we may know how far thefe alarms have 
been connedled with certain financiering proje6ls. 

That every dollar has not been fairly expended, I would not 
prefume to fuggeft, but information on tltis fubje<a is neceiTary an^ 



14^ Economy, No. XXXIV. 

proper. It '^ould ferve to quiet the minds of thofe who are jeal» 
ous, that we have not " worked things right ;" but if the expendi- 
tures can bfe juftly accounted for, it will ftop the clamours of fuch 
as are cenforiovis in their remarks. 

The great oppofition made in our federal papers againil the 
appointment of Mr. Gallatin, as fecretary of the treafury, has a 
tendency to excite a fufpicion, that this inveRigation would ex- 
pofe particular tranfa'flions to fevere animadverfion. Thefe fam© 
perfons are firm friends to Mr. Hamilton, though he Is as m.uch a 
foreigner as Mr. Gallatin. They pretend to obje61: to his appoint- 
ment on this ground, but his abilities and peculiar talents for this 
bufmefs, even his enemies cannot controvert. The finances of 
this country have long been his (ludy, and the accuracy of his 
ftatements cannot be denied by his opponents. His induftry and 
integrity were never brought into queftion, and his family con- 
Tiedlions and large landed property are pledges of his faithful ad- 
herence to the happinefs and profperity of the United States. He 
has been calumniated by thofe who have committed the fam.e vio- 
lation on others, but, thank heaven, calumny in the federal papers 
is not the evidence of a man's demerit ; it rather qualifies him for 
the confidence of every real friend to America. Though calumny 
has exhaufted her venom againft his political condudl, yet his hon- 
cfty has flood invulnerable againft all the (hafts of his opponents. 
If talents are requifite, he poflefTes them to as great a degree as 
any man — if morality is the touchftone, will Mr. Gallatin be injured 
in his reputation by a comparifon with others ? I vv ill venture to 
predid, that the firft communication to Congrefs from Mr. Galla- 
tin, on the ftate of the treafury, will be as univerfally applauded, 
as the fpeech of Prefident JelTerfon. Such light will be thrown 
on the dark receffes of the treafury, that each citizen will confider 
the flatement among the moft valuable papers of the government. 

I have been rnore particular in my remarks, as our money 
concerns are peculiarly interefling. In cafe of peace, it will be 
difficult to fupport the fyftem of revenue under all the em.barraif- 
ments of commerce. The prefent ftate of the treafury is due to 
the adminiftration of Mr. Jefferfon ; it Is the ground-work of his 
future condudl, as the people ought to know the fituation of our 
jnoney concerns at the time of his entrance into office. If the laft 
adminiftration left a heavy debt upon us — if an immenfe rcvenut 



JTo. XXZ^CV. Introductory to cogeiit R.jiections, tai 

has been raifed, and it has all been expended, certainly Mr. Jeffer- 
ion is not anr\verable for the confequences. He, no doubt, will 
purfue a fyRem of economy, but the debt hitherto contracted, is a 
burden which he mud be obliged to difcharge. His enemies are 
aware of his enjbarraiTm.ents, and ?-re teilmg the people that the 
change is of no confequence, as taxes will be equally 4s high under 
ihe prefent as the laft adminiftration. In order, therefore, to pre- 
vent an unre2.fonable ceniure, if a juft ftatement is made of our 
iifcal concerns, the .complaint of taxes muH rell on thofe who 
originated the evil. His public conduct v411 fland on his individ- 
ual merit, and what may ije attached to it in confequence of 
previous embarraifments cannot be chargeable to him. 

I again repeat, that the treafury department is of all others the 
moft intereRing and important. It is the ark of our political fafe- 
Jy, and m.ay the economica.1 fyftem of Mr. JefFerfon convince the 
people, that the waters cf extravagance have fubfided. 



No. XSXV, 

INTRODUCTORY TO SOME FUTURE COGENT REFLEC- 
TIONS. 

1 N politics as in religion the human mind is more influenced by 
paffion than reafon. To effedl this purpofe, in all controverfial 
points relating to church or ftate, certain technical terms are ufed by 
partizans to gain an afcendancy. The divine confounds his antag- 
onift with the preponderating charm of orthodoxy ; if he acquires a 
popular applaufe under this fafcinating appellation, he is fure to 
gain an afcendancy over every opponent ; for who can (land in 
oppofition to orthodoxy ? But the misfortune is, that th^ world is 
not agreed in applying the term to any particular feCt. - In fom.e 
countries, the infallibility of the Pope, the purity of Mother 
Church, tranfubftantiation, and the efficacy of prieflly benedic- 
tions, are the tefl of orthodoxy. In the reformed countries, the 
Right Reverend Father in God partakes in fome degree of the 
excellencies and virtues of the Papal Hierarchy, and the various 



J 42 IntroduetGry to fogent Reflections, No. XXXV. 

grades I/Tulng from this evangelical fount are eftimated in propor- 
tion as the benedidion is accompanied with official emoluments. 

** ji Saint hi crape is twice a Saint in lawn J' ^ 

A firm belief in all the paraphernalia of this reformed eflablifli- 
ment, is in fome nations called orthodoxy ; and no man can expefl 
promotion or even common credence, if he is fo Jacobinical as not 
to fubfcribe to every article prom^ulgated by St. Athanafius. Or- 
thodoxy is a term which has had a wonderful eifedl in fociety — 
the Caivinift claim.s it as his prerogative — the Socinian afTumes a 
right to the appellation — the Univerfalift modeftly begs to be con- 
fidered within the latitude of its influence ; and every feet, however 
differing in the moft effential points, plume themfeives as carrying 
this flandard. 

Thus, in religion, we are led away by a term vsrhich in itfelf Is 
perfedly right, provided we can afcertain the real principle which 
conftitutes its authenticity. The definition of Orthodoxy, is true 
belief ; but the fentiment is fo fublimated, that we are lofl in tha 
application. One man's true belief is another's evident error ; 
various fpeculatiive fubjedls lead to different conclufions, but paf- 
lion often fo " demoralizes^' reafon, that men may fo far adhere to 
terms imbibed by education, as to anathematize others becaufe 
they affume a right to exercife th^ir judgment in deciding for 
themfeives, 

Thefe remarks are not made to weaken the ground of ortho- 
doxy as it lefpe^s religion ; but to ftiew, tliat terms, without a de- 
fined object, aie more apt to irritate partizans than to make con- 
verts. High church and low church, illuminati, jacobinifm, 
anti-federalifm, modem ph'ilofophy, demoralizing principles, &c. have 
been the common cant phrafeology of very formidable opponents 
for many years, and it was only to give currency to the refpedlive 
appellations as the parties acquired an afcendancy, in order to 
blaft the reputation of the individuals who efpoufed oppofite opin- 
ions. Reafon was buried in the mafs of detradion, and no man's 
^harader ftood fecure while there were more tongues to hellonu it 
down, than to reafon it up. In this cafe it is like a contefl on a 
precipice, the moft numerous could eafily croud over their op- 
jgonents^ 



ITo. XXXV. Introductory to togmt Reflecl'wns. 1 4j ' 

At prefent I fiiall be very brief in making my application. =-i 
The difpofition, above defcribed, has too long been the palladium 
ere(5led againft every thing that looked like an oppofition to cer- 
tain eftablifhed terms in politics. At the period when our Confti- 
tution was under the deliberative inveftigation of the ftate conven- 
tion, the terms y>^<?ra/ and anti-Jederal were the principal weapons 
of warfare. The man who hefitated to adopt it without amend- 
ments was cried do^ni as an anti-federalift ; federalifm was the 
order of the day, and the teft of patriotifm was an explicit avowal 
of your belief in every minute point of the inftrument fubmitted 
to the eonfideration of the people ; the perfon who dared to think, 
was purfued as an enemy to his country. But, notwithilandingj 
this fyftem of terror, the good fenfe of the oppofers rofe fuperior 
to perfonal perfecution, and at length obtained amendments 
which are now confidered as the moft valuable parts of the con- 
Ilitution. Even after the eftablifhment of the government, thefe 
nominal diftindions were kept up, but evidently with this differ- 
ence as to the objedls of the parties, thoje who meant to admlnljler It on. 
the principles contemplated by the refpeBive State Conventions were flyled 
unti-federalifts, and thofe who attempted to deftroy every republi- 
can feature in its conftrudlion were ftyled federalifi:s. — As an evi- 
dence of this remark, let any man read the debates of Maflachu- 
fetts, and he will find that thofe called anti-federal in Congrefs 
Iiave a(51:ed more confiftent with the fentiments of the ftate, than 
thofe who have afTumed the title of federalifts. Mr. Vamum has 
fpoken the language of the New-England States, and all his deci- 
lions have been agreeable to the dodrines inculcated in their ref^ 
pedlive conventions, and yet he has been peculiarly fingled out, as 
a diforganizer and an enemy to the conftiLution. The gentlemen 
from Virginia have been uniform in their adherence to the origin- 
al principles of the Northeni States. Mr. Jefferfon, in all his mea- 
fures, has ftri6lly conformed to the fplrit which pervaded MaiTa- 
chufetts, New-Hampfliire, Rhode-Ifland and even Conne^licut. — 
Taking the debates in Convention as the teft of federalifm, I will 
appeal to every American, whether the oppofition of the pretend- 
ed federalifts to particular charaders, has not been in proportion 
to their attachment to the fundamental principles of the conftitu- 
tlon, as contemplated at the period of its adoption ? Why was 
General Dearborne calumniate^ when brought forward as a meui- 



f44 Recafduiatwiu No. XXX^V"t 

ber for Congrefs ? Was it that he had abandoned the ground on- 
which the government was eftabliilied ? — No — but the truth is that 
lie adhered to all thofe radical points which gave energy to the 
debates in Convention, and which finally deilroyed the force of op- 
pofition to its adoption. Why has Judge Lincoln' been oppofed ; 
is it becaufe he had a difpofition to dePcroy government and de- 
■moralize fociety ? — No — his integrity led him to maintain the pure 
principles of the Conflitution, and vs^hen the enemies of our nation- 
al happlnefs found him tenacious of the rights of the people, they 
attempted to injure his reputation by flander and defamation. I 
I could go on to mention individuals, but tlie catalogue needs no 
enumeration. 

Feiioiu-Clilzens— It is time to recur to firfl principles, and in' 
order to afcertain them, perufe the debates of the feveral Conven- 
tions, more efpeclally MaiTachufetts. Thefe are the touchflones by 
which federalifm mull be tried — they are the records of public 
opinion on the conilitution, at the all Important period of Its 
adoption. Read them attentively, and then judge between the 
men who are ftyled federal and anti-federal. Mr. jcffsrfon is, 
(Iriftly fpeaking, a Neiu-England federalift, and fo is every man whcr 
has been abufed by a body of railers under the deceptive mafk of 
friends to order and good government. 



No. XXXVI. 

RECAPITULATION. 
Fellow-Citizens, 

OINCE the days that our forefathers difembarked on the rock 
at Plymouth, the defigns of the enemies of this country were 
never more artfully purfued than within the period of a few years 
pad — « deep laid plots, well woven fnares," have Interfedted 
almoft every footftep of the unfufpecting citizen. The Br'ihjh 
treaty was the drama which firfl Introduced every monftrou3 defor- 
mity alarming to the neutral rights of America. 

At this crifis, recolle<5t, fellow-citizens, with v/hat arrogance 
a " junto" ere(5led their menacing front. Thofe of us who ven- 
tured to fpeak, or even modeftly to think, in oppofitioa to them. 



No. XXXV I. Reeapitulatlonk iac 

were threatened with the full vengeance of political denuneiation. 
During this terrific confternation, there was almoft a paufe in 
fociety ; fcarcely a voice was heard, unlefs to eulogize the authors 
of our misfortunes, and no ejaculation could be whifpered, unlefs 
to implore heaven to fandlion the projects of thofe who were 
threatening our ruin. 

But how deceptive was the friendfhip which fuch men pretend- 
ed to exprefs ! How delufive their attachment to the permanency 
oi xht federal Confc'iiution ! As fcon as this treaty was completed 
in all its parts, they ftepped forward and placed themfelves in an 
undifguifed pofition. From that moment, the condud of the 
enemy became open, vindidllve and decifive ; eVeiy meafure was 
devifed, and even " bold ftrokes'' contemplated to involve us in a 
war. During this political tempeft, a fedition law rofe like a 
malignant meteor, and threatened to confume, in its progrefsj 
every veftige of republican freedom. An army was raifed to a<5t 
v/ith vigour and promptitude, when other accidental circumftances 
fhould countenance their effeciiive exertions. Young men werci 
bccafionally called together, (intermixed with fome of mature age) 
and proceflions formed, to hear, in the houfe of God, the difcor- 
dant babblings of thofe who were appointed to officiate. The 
pfofperity and peace of the country were fufpended by a thread 
of the moft delicate texture, and if heaven had not miraculoufiy 
interpofed, our ruin miift have .been inevitable. Even fome 
whofe duty leads them to pray for peace^ Were conff antly throwing 
combufliibles on the altar, peculiarly calculated to promote the 
iiorrid cataHrophe of war, and many of the pulpits were converted^ 
into roRrurns, to promulgate the dreadful doctrine of carnage and 
extermination. 

In the midft of this public inflammation, a fignal was given, 
tinder the appellation of a cockade, which nearly brought the ci- 
tizens to the verge of a civil war. This badge was carried to an 
excefs v/hlch threatened the moft ferlous confequences. Thofe 
who refufed to copy this fervile dlftincllon were expofed to every 
infult. They were treated with the grofTeft indignity, while the 
moft obnoxious during our revolution, were held in rever- 
ence, provided they difplayed this childifh trapping of federalifm. 
T 



t^6 Recapiiuhit'ion, No. XXXVl!. 

An old tory, with a cockade, was more refpefled than an old whig 
without it. 

This has been the degrading fituation of our country, during a 
reign of terror ; the repubhcans have been bajitkd by a fadion, 
which had acquired an afcendancy by the excefs of their effron- 
tery. The preffes, for the moil part, were under their control, 
and Corporal Porcupine was the chief director of this complicated 
fyftem of fraud and wickednefs ; he was the orb round which the 
federal fatellites moved. 

The republican, who dared to (land between this confli(fl, was 
placed in the ludicrous fituation of a man's body as defcribed in 
an almanack, governed by Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Leo, Scorpio, 
Pifces, &c. ; he was befet, from head to feet, with political dag- 
gers. The ^^«j- of terror were like the tivelve figns of the zodiack ; 
—they moved under different directions, and each of them acquir- 
ed an influence under Federalifm, Anti-Jacobinifm, Iiluminifm, 
Atheilm, Deifm, Modern Philofophy, Demoralising Principles^ &c. — 
Thus inflated, the public mind was fufceptible to every wrong im-^ 
preffion, and the well difpofed citizens were expofed to thofe hur- 
ricanes of paiuon, which political and ecclefiafticai fanaticifm have 
conjured from the caverns of monarchy, ariftoeracy and prieft- 
craft. 

At this period of terror, the federal papers (falfely fo called)^ 
were holding up the abettors of thefe perfecuting meafures as ex* 
clufi've fiends to the copjlitution. But no fooner had they accom- 
pliflied their purpofes, than Porcupine, Fenno, &c. began their at-^ 
tacks upon this palladium of our liberties. The Conftitutlons 
tvere fatirized under the degrading fimllitude of " a fow with a 
litter of pigs" ; an hereditary eftablifnment of Prefident and Se- 
nate was promulgated as the defideratum of government ; a divi- 
fion of the northern and fouthern States was propofed as the moft 
defirable objedl ; and it is worthy of obfervation, that in propor- 
tion as the faction acquired an afcendancy, under the term feder" 
alifm, they became more bold and afTuming in degrading the prin- 
ciples of our coii/litv.tion. Porcupine commenced his libellous re- 
marks on this inflrument, while Fenno and the Farmer's Mufeum 
reprobated " republicanifm as a leprofy." The divifion of the 
northern and fouthern States feems to be ferioufly contemplated by 
^iefe pretended federal papers, and no one carries a Ilronger cvi- 



No. XXXVI. Recapitulaiwn, 34^ 

dence of fuch a defign than the " Ncnv-Enghnd Palladium*^ ; this 
paper appears calculated to effect this purpofe, as moil of the par- 
agraphs are fraught with abufe againft almoft every State, fouth 
of Connedicut. The Prefident, and all die " coiiflituted authori- 
ties," are treated with that unbounded fcurrility which none but 
diforganizers and enemies to our government can pretend to 
approve. 

But, thanks to that Being who has ever been watchful over 
the liberties of this country, tlie day of terror is paft, and the 
citizens aiTume their wonted dignity. We can now reafon, and 
apply our arguinents to the good fenfe of the people ; we are ref- 
tored to the high itation of republicans ; no degrading infignia 
defignate one citizen from another ; the in'ind^ and not the hat^ 
gives the evidence of patriotilm. The man, who means to injure 
his country cannot ihroud himfelf under falfe colours ; his decided 
condu(ft, and not his tongue-profeffions, is the teft of integrity. 

_Prefident Jefferson has commenced his adminiflration upoa 
the genuine principles of our Conftitucion ; he feeks no afylum 
within a fedition law, neither does he fcreen himfelf under the ty- 
rannical conftrudlion of the Common Law of England ; he ftands 
on a level with his fellow-citizens, and to their tribunal he appeals 
for an impartial vei:.di<S. V/hile defamation iifues from the pre- 
tended federal papers, he mull ^nd a confolation in the integriiy 
of his heart, and rectitude of his conduft. He ieeks no prote<5lioa 
from declamatory partizans, but Hands, like Mofes on the mount, 
with the law for his protection. While a few unprincipled men 
are abufing him, (who have long foUovv'cd the federal government 
foiely for the " loaves and fifhes" of their ofhce) yet, as he knows 
the bafenefs of their heaits, he views tlieir calumny with the moft 
confummate indifference ; fuch men are unworthy the confidence of 
iiny governmenty for they would cry holanna, or crucify, for the pal- 
try recompence of " thirty pieces of filver." Like Judas, they 
would take a fop from their mafter, and enter the next hour into 
a league with the chief prtejls to betray him. How inconfiflent, 
then, are fuch people ; and what can be faid in their vindication ? 
— The fadt is, they are falfe and hollow in their attachment to our 
conftitution, and after attempting to facrifice Mr. Adams, they are 
now defirous to rally again under his patronage ; but we hope h^ 
begins to difcern their duplicity. 



148 Executive yfj>p»mfmenfs* No. XXXVII. 

Mr. JefFerfon has commenced his adminiflration at a moft im- 
portant period ; the republican fyftem is to be tried under his wif- 
dom and denfion ; the enemy know this, and are endeavouring to 
fow tares in the political field. The republican citizens gave 
him their fupport, and his good fenfe will lead him not to difap- 
point their expedtationso The constitution is the polar ftar, 
and while an " EJfex faUion'^ are attempting to divide and difunite, 
the real friends of our country will rally round him as their patron. 
Thus confolidated by our union, we trufl in God, that the enemies 
of our liberties will not be able to prevail againft us. The tree of 
American liberty has been fertilized by the blood of republicans, 
and may it never be blafted nor fuffered to decay by the peftif- 
erous exhalations of enemies, under the appellation of federalifts ; 
or Illuminati hypocrites, under the garb of religion. 

Fello^jo -Citizens — Judge ye then between Mr. Jefferson and 
his opponents. 



No. XXXVIL 

ON EXECUTIVE APPOINTMENTS. 

X HE ridiculous pedantic remarks of ignorant critics being 
unworthy notice, I fhall not affront the public by making a reply 
to their abfurdities. If fuch infignificant beings expeft to gain a 
reputation by my condefcending to expofe their folly, they will be dif- 
appointed ; they are a fpecies of infers too defpicable to be cruJJjed 
by the fmallefl weight which could be applied for their diiTolution. 

The prefent number is particularly referved for the inveftiga- 
tion of a fubjedl, which has peculiarly drawn forth the whole 
artillery of the ElTex faction againft Mr. JefFerfon. They have 
expended in a great meafure their fiie of deifm, atheifm, jacobin- 
ifm, &c. — they find themfelves defeated in thefe attacks ; but, as 
the laft refort, have rallied their whole force to check him in his 
official appointments. 

The conftitution has wifely refer^'-ed, in particular inftances, 
this right to the executive. — At the time the conftitution was 
^dopted, this prerogative was confidered as a high prefervative to 



Ko. XXXVII. Executive Appointments. 149 

the government ; for if the Prefident is amenable for his conduct, 
he ought furely to have officers in whofe poHtical integrity he can 
confide, if he adopted a particular fyilem of adminillration, it 
was proper that all thofe with Vv-hom he was connected fhould be 
friendly to his purpofes. This is an elTential quality in an eledtive 
government, for as the people have a right to change their public 
fervants, the procefs of their adminiftration fhould be uniform in 
all its parts, in order to afcertain the merits or demerits of the 
plans adopted and profecuted. If this pofition is not admitted, 
how can a Prefident maintain a confiftency of condudt in the 
various objetfls contemplated, while a certain part of the govem- 
m.ent are inimical to his proceedings ? — fuch a difcordancy of parts 
would be like a houfe divided againft itfelf ; the government mud 
ever be in diforder, while there are various wheels in the ma- 
chinery counterading the motions of each other. 

This mode of conduft generally, if not univerfally, was adopt- 
ed by Mr. Adams. He difpiaced almoft every man oppofed to 
his politics, and appointed others in whom he could confide for au 
adherence to all his meafures. Mr. Adams had, by thefe means, a 
fair trial of his political fyftem ; as every one, ading under him, 
aflifted to his utmoft ability to promote his wifhes. If this was 
right in Mr. Adams, why fhould it be lurong in Mr. Jefferfon I 
Why fhould we not admit Mr. Jefferfon to the fame privileges 
exercifed by Mr. Adams ? The lafl adminiftration went to the ut- 
moft extent of prefidential patronage ; nearly every officer flood 
ready to execute the will of this branch of the goveiTiment. — 
Profecutions were commenced, and every perfon Vv^ho dared to lifp 
any thing againft the adminiftration^ immediately became the 
objed: of vinditflive refentment. Every perfon muft allow that 
Mr. Adams had the full fweep of executive influence ; and the 
friends of Mr. Jefferfon only require a balance to reflore the gov- 
ernment to an equilibrium. 

The above obfervations are rather general ; but I am v/illing 
to confider this fubjed on the particular premifes admitted by the 
oppofers of Mr. Jefferfon. When this gentleman was chofen 
Prefident, thefe people declared in every newfpaper, that the Jyjiem 
of the admini/lration nvas to be changed. They openly avowed their 
enmity to him, and faid that jacobin influence had introduced him 
to the government. If it is thus granted, that a particular intereii 



I JO Executhe Jppolntments. No. XXXVII. 

fupported Mr. Jeffcrfon's eledion ; and if it is further acknowl- 
edged, that the fame interelt was oppofcd to Mr. Adams ; the 
confequences which follow are, that the parties were at iffue on 
the event of the election. 

The propriety of the oppofiticn, and the utility of the change, 
are to be evidenced by the future operation of the adminiftration ; 
but can any reafonable man fuppofe that Mr. Jefferfon could 
profecute a fyllem analogous to his fentiments, if he kept in office 
thofe men w^ho w^ere diametrically oppofed to him ? How could 
he move within the fphere affigned him, when the greatefl part 
of his official agents were counteracting his meafures ? It was in 
my laft Number obferved, that we are now trying the full extent 
of a republican government, under Mr. Jeffi^rfon ; and if this is 
the cafe, is it not proper that he lliould have thofe in government 
who are friendly to the experiment, who wifli to maintain tlie 
refpe(flabiiity of his charader, and who are fmcere friends, and not 
fycophantic hypocrites ? 

Certainly Mr. Jeiferfon is entitled to the fame indulgence with 
Mr. Adams, and while we allow him to exercife his conftitutional 
lights, the people will be able to judge, during his four years* 
.officiality, whether the change is for the better or for t'he worfe. 
To judge candidly on this queftion, we muft allow him the privi- 
lege to appoint fuch men as will adt congenial with his principles. 
If he is wrong in his judgment, vv^e fhall foon fee the fiillacy of 
pur confidence, and at the next eledion endeavour to introduce 
fome other perfon to rectify his rniflakes. 

The republicans only wilh to try Mr. Jefferfon by the fame 
touchftone the federalifts proved Mr. Adams ; if he fails, we are 
y/illing to relinqnifh him, and bring forward fome other perfon 
more adequate to the purpofe. Republicans are not attached to 
men, but principles. At piefent, w^e place our confidence in Mr. 
JeiFerfon, and in order that this gentleman fhould have a^^/V trialt 
we think he is perfediy right in appointing fuch perfons as will 
promote the general fyllem of his adminiftration. If, from a falfe 
delicacy, or from fear of the clamours of his enemies, he keeps a 
majority of his opponents in office, how can he expe(5l to maintain 
the government upon that ground which he has uniformly advo- 
cated ? If he was in oppofition to the extravagant conduvfl of the 
laft adminiftration, how can he adopt a plan of economy while he 



No. XXXVII. - Executhe Appoint ments\ i^i 

retains a majority of officers who were afting under an oppofite 
regimen ? 

The fa6l is, as Mr. Jefferfon is now Prefident of the United States, 
he muft have officers who are friendly to his operations ; other- 
wife the bufmefs of government vvill move under a preiTure, which 
will baffle' all his fkill to remove. Thofe perfons who are jealous 
of his adminiilration, and yet expecl him to retain all the form.er 
officers, are as iirireafonable as the Egyptians, in forcing the Jews 
to make brick without ftraw. He mud have republican mate- 
rials, if he is to effefl republican purpofes ; — in an aimy, a general 
jnuft have officers on whofe friendlhip he can rely, to fucceed in 
any expedition. 

Who are the particular individuals in office, or v/ho are out, are 
but fmall queftions among the people. If honeft, uniform le- 
publicans are appointed, and the government is adminiftered on 
'conftitutional principles — if economy is pradlifed in the expendi- 
ture of public money — if the liberties of the country are maintain- 
ed — if our property is fecure, our perfons protected, and peace 
and harmony prevail, " We, the People'' are perfedly willing 
that Mr. Jefferfon fliould exercife his conftitutional right. In put- 
ting down one who might oppofe thefe falutary purpofes, and 
fetting up another w^ho might promote them. 

We have no partiality for men, otherwife than as firm friends 
to their country ; — we do conceive, however, that thofe who 
are partially attached to Britain, and in all inftances endeavour 
to open a breach between France and America, are the greateft 
enemies to the happinefs and profperity of this country ; fuch men 
ought to be avoided, and never fuffered to partake of the official - 
emoluments of government. 

Why ihould a removal from office be confidered an " intolerant 
fpirit" ? Rotation is rather a republican principle — no man has 
fuch a claim on government as to demand a conftant fupport from 
it. If the officers under the former adminiftration have for many 
years experienced the emoluments of their appointments, -why are 
they diflatisfied that fome others fliould have equal advantages I 
The pecuniary benefits cf the government ought to be diiiufive, 
and no family or particular individuals have reafon to find fault, 
if fome other citizens are provided for, equally as deferving as 
■ themfelves. The " intokrant fpirlt'' arifes, not from the condua 



Ijf3 Executive Appolntmeiits, No. XXXVIL 

of Mr. Jefferfon, but from his opponents. As fupreme executive^ 
the conilitutlon gives him a right to confer offices of truft and 
profit, and while exercifmg this prerogative, is it not unreafonable 
thatthofe who have heretofore enjoyed them, jQiouid murmur and 
calumniate him for diftributing his favours ? 

His conftitutional right cannot be difputed, and certainly his 
appointments ought to be appropriate to the fyfteni which he con- 
templates. , If he means to purfue a line of economy, he would 
be very unwife to keep thofe in office, whom he has reafon to 
think have been lavilh of the public money in their refpeclive de- 
partments. If he means to profecute meafures on the pure prin- 
ciples of republicaniim, he muft be juilified in placing fuch men 
in government, as have given the highefi proofs of their attach- 
ment to it. If he has reafon to think that many have not a6:ed 
ftricftly conformable to thofe principles, common prudence will 
dictate the neceffity of a change. The queilion is, can a repub- 
lican fyftem be carried on with alacrity, while many of the officers 
of government have a ftrong prediledtion for an ariitocracy ? Can 
the government be kept in a ilate of quietude, 'vvhile a great pro- 
portion of the officers are in heart oppofed to the man, under 
whom the executive part of the adminirtration is condu6led ? 

Thefe perfons are ofien quoting thofe words of Mr. JefTerfon's 
fpeech, ^^ IVe are all federalljhi ive are all repuhlicans,^^ and draw a 
conclufion in their own favour, that, as fuch they ought to continue in 
office. However, if we are all federaliils and republicans, let us 
praflife on the acknowledged principle of republicaniim, viz. rota- 
tion ; but thefe men claim an exclufive right to the title and fay, 
none are federal'i/is hut we and our PARTY ; and they claim " all the 
religion, all the morality,'''' all the patriotifm, and of courfe ought to 
hold all the lucrative ojices in government ; nobody can be trufted 
but they and their friends, and all the citizens who advocated Mr. 
Jefferfon, ought to be reprobated by him. If we are " all federal- 
ills, all republicans," why fliould not Mr. Jefferfon's friends be 
rewarded by fome appointments, as well as Mr. Adams's adhe- 
rents ? They feem to think that the government was made for 
ihem, and unlefs they have an exclufive right, they are juflified in 
calumniating the conftituted authorities, and even convulfmg fo« 
clety. They are the political horfe-leaches, crying, give, give. 



No. XXXVIII. On Intolerance. 155 



IS^. XXXVIII. . 

ON THE FALLACY OF CHARGING THE REPUBLICANS 

WITH INTOLERANCE, 

X HOSE of the faBlon who complain of an " intolerant fpirit" 
on the part of Prefident JefFerfon, if they are ferious in their lam- 
entations, niuft be very deficient in the intelled of memory. If we 
deliberately reflect on their conduct, during the laft adminiftration, 
it muft bring to remembrance a long train of circumflances, which 
are diftreffing at this period even to contemplate,- Never could 
it have been thought poffible, that any party fhould obtain fuch 
an afcendancy in this country, as to intimidate the free citizens of 
America from fpeaking their minds on public meafures, or acquire 
fuch a preponderancy as to imprefs them \v\thfear while exercifmg 
their conftitutlonal fufFrages ; but this cruel deprivation of rights 
have been experienced under a fyftem of terror, which, nearly- 
pervaded not only every diftridt, but almoft every family through- 
out the United States ; the operation in many inftances has been 
fo eifedtual, that elections have been decided under the dreaded 
apprehenfions of this vindidive influence. Threats and menaces 
have been the irreliftible arguments, and votes have often beeii 
obtained by the arbitrary interference of men, whofe hardened 
hearts exulted at the profpect of infliding penury on thofe who 
dared to counteract their defign?. This mode of conduft was 
ftriking at the foundation of a republican government, as the 
bafis of its conftrudtion is immediately conneifted with the free 
and unbiafTed principles of each individual in fociety. Private opin^ 
ion in the aggregate muft form the public fentiment, for while ev- 
ery citizen has aright to judge on the condufl of public oincers, and 
to vote in moft cafes in their eie<ftion, the ultimate decifion depends 
on the majority of electors ading in their individual capacity. 
This freedom of inveftigation and action are the privileges guaran- 
teed by the conftitution, and no man ought to be intimidated 
from the full exei'cife of thefe rights, or denounced as an enemy to 
his country, w^hile difcharging in a legal manner (with the fpirit of 

(andour sxid moderation) this important duty* 
U 



354 ^^^ intolerance. No. XXXVIII* 

The republicans are willing to take this broad ground as it 
relates to Mr. Jefferfon ; they do nol^. wifli to check the mofl 
fubtle animadverfions on his meafures ; his enemies have an un- 
controled right to offer their remarks on all his proceedings. If 
they pleafe, they may ccnfure his plans, or propofe others ; but, 
if this freedom is allowed them, and, if in fadt they improve it to 
the utmoil latitude, let them only be fo candid, as not to charge 
the republicans with exercifnig an unrelenting fpirit of perfecution 
towards them. 

It is truly laughable to fee in the jacGh'm papers, fuch as the 
Centlnel, Palladimn, Coinmerclal Gazette, Port Folio, &c. the moft 
mtolerable abufe on the Prefident, and all the conftituted au- 
thorities ; and yet, while they are permitted to continue their 
billingfgate without any check by profecutions, or perfonal infult, 
are crying in the mod lamentable ftrains againft the intolerant and 
perfecuting fpirit of republicans. I would alk thefe flanderers, 
in what inftance this vindictive fpirit has prevailed ? Are any of 
their friends imprifoned for their libels ? Or are any under the 
la(h of the fedition law ? Why do they complain of perfecution, 
when they are fuffered to vent the utmofl malignancy of their fpleen, 
arrogance, and refentment ? Do they not purfue their courfes 
of defamation as rapidly as the prefTes can difgorge them, or the 
feveral polls can circulate them ? Every day in the week they 
are handed to the public — almofl every houfe is fupplied with 
them — colleges, academies, and fchools are liberally furnifhed 
with " line upon line, and precept upon precept," here a little and 
there a good deal. What then, in the nam.e of common fcnfe would 
thefe infuriated jacobins want ? Nobody molefts them, they fpeak 
as they pleafe, write as they pleafe, and pubhfh what they pleafe, 
and yet they are fo unreafonable as to complain of a rigid fpirit of 
perfecution. 

If thefe high-toned jacohms will fay what will be fatisfadlory to 
them, if it is not too unreafonable, poiUbly they may be indulged 
in their requeft. But the fact is, they want Mr. Jefferfon to iffue 
a proclamation, declaring that his enemies poffefs all the religion, 
all the morality, all the virtue, all the property, all the patriotijm, all the 
'wifdom and all the honejly in the country — and that his friends are 
a body of mifcreants, deftitute of religion, morality, honefty, &c. 
and as fuchy were unworthy of h'u confidence* Nay, they wifb him 



1^0. XXXVI II. On Intokrance. 155 

to go further, and denounce every man who 'voted for htm or /poke 
in his fanToiir, as a diforganizer, deift, and robber. I would alk 
thefe modejl gentlemen j whether this declaration would fatisfy them I 
Whether this humble acknowledgment on the part of Mr. JefFer- 
fon would remove their complaints againft him ? Would they 
ceafe abufmg him, if he fhould give it under his band andfealy that 
every office in government fhould be filled by his moft inveterate 
opponents ? That tliey fliould have the exclufive patronage of 
government, and flill have it in their power to treat with the 
gro/Teft indignity every man V\'-ho was friendly to his eledion ? 

As the controverfy now ftands, I do not fee that any thing 
fhort of fuch a manifefto will fuit them. For they are permitted to 
ipeak in the public papers a language fomcv%rhat fimilar to this — 
they conftantly vilify the Prefident, and call his adherents plund- 
erers and villains — they are fuffered without moleftsition to ufe 
epithets the moft degrading ; notwithftanding which, they keep 
up a conftant cry about the intolerant fpirit of the republicans. 
Permit me, modejl gentlemen^ again to alk, who among you is perfe- 
cuted \ In general you ftrut about the ftreets with your ufual 
hauteur, though in fome particulars a little more cautious in your 
perfonal infult ; none of you are under bonds to appear at the 
Diftri(5t Courts to anfwer for libels. Your funds have rifeu 
rapidly fmce the ele<flion of Mr. JefFerfon, and every thing appears 
perfedlly fecure within the alcoves of the federal infurance offices. 
The refpeElahle corps of negociators are as bufy in their fpeculations 
as ufual, and each of them fits within his little /«z/^ department in 
State-Street, like Patience on a monument, having none to make 
him afraid. Where then, modeft gentlemen, is the danger I 
Wherein are you injured ? Be calm, be compofed, there is no 
danger but what arifes within your own diftempered pericranium. 

For tlie fake of argument, let thefe perfons be placed in the 
Htuation which was experienced by the republicans, about three 
years back. If the fame fpirit had now prevailed againjl them, as 
was exercifed by them, during thofe periods, they would be juftified 
in reprobating the fpirit of perfecution. Suppofe the republicans 
had adopted a black infignia under the appellation of a Cockade ; 
threatened to fend every one who refufed to wear it within the 
lines of the enemy ; pointed the " finger of fcorn" at thofe who 
had refolution enough to withftand their threats and infolence 5 



J ^6 On Intolerance, No. XXXV I IL 

and had employed a number of bullying editors to traduce the 
chara6ters of fuch as would not fubmit to the impofition : Suppofe 
further, that the republicans had employed a number of hireling 
prieflis to anathematize in the pulpit, while they were defaming in 
the papers — to propagate falfehoods on Fafl and Thankfgiving 
days, under the deceptive mafk of fermons and pious difcourfes : 
Admit further, that the judges were fulminating their common 
law againft the Centinel, Palladium, &c. as they formerly did 
againft the Chronicle, Aurora, &c. — that the editors were imprif- 
oned and fined for their attempts to bring the " Prefident into con^ 
tempt" : Suppofe that a member of the legiflature lliould have 
■the impudence to anticipate a decifion of that body, by declaring 
his opponents " a contemptible minorlty^^ : Admit further, that the 
republicans forced themfelves into all focial circles, and erected 
the ftandard of perfecution even amidft inftitutions, eftabliflied on 
the broad bafis of benevolence and " relief In dijlreji^ — that the 
wicked fpirit of intolerance fhould poifon the fiream.s of friendfhip 
and mutual fafety — that fycophants fhould become fo bafe and 
deftitute of principle, as to difturb in fuch meetings that order and 
fraternity which ever chara61:erifed the citizens of Bofton. The 
ignominy of fuch condu(5l muft be forever reprobated, while 
honour and urbanity are efteemed effential requifites to defignate 
the reputation of gentlemen. 

A review of pafl times Is requifite. In order to exhibit a por- 
trait which muft ficken thofe who gave the finlfhlng ftrokes to the 
picfture. Federalifm. was diftorted, and difplayed the features of 
a monfter ; Inftead of the pleafmg deportment of good fellowfhip 
ftnd brotherly affection, It more nearly affumed the hoftlle attitude 
of an afTairm, and Its terrific menaces were the powerful weapon 
which profelyted its votaries. The moft abandoned of our citizens 
bafked in fome Inftances under th+e patronage of Its title, and 
fcreened themfelves while pra6lifing their vlllany under the fpe- 
clous garb of federalifm. The honeft man often fulFered by the 
appellation of jacohimfm, and the rogue as often matured his 
projedls by the impofmg term of federalifm. — Thank God, the 
public mind is now at reft, and principlej and not terror is the 
order of the day. 



No. XXXIX. To Old-Br'icL 157 



No. XXXIX. 



TO " old-brick/^ 



X HE high eftlmation in which I hold the religious fociety under 
the appellation of the " Old-Brkh,^^ led me to perule your addrefs 
in the Commercial Gazette with peculiar attention. The venerable 
and refpe(51:able chara61:ers which have officiated in that ecclefialli- 
cal department, naturally excited an idea, that whoever aflumed 
this fignature w^ould claim a particular refpedl, not only from the 
force of his arguments, but the decency with which they were 
communicated. The names of a Chauncy and a Clark will be 
ever efteemed, while energy of reafoning and purity of compofi- 
tion are confidered as prominent chara(5leriftics to defignate the 
fcholar and gentleman. 

But, fir, how great was my difappointment in finding you fo 
deficient in every point which could imprefs that veneration which 
1 anticipated in your addrefs. Inftead of that perfection of erudi- 
tion and propriety of expreffion, which ever gave the " Firft 
Church" the Jir/l reputation in the literary v/orld, the moft fordid 
vulgarity and the moft fuperficial reafoning difgrace the publica- 
tion. As a friend to that religious fociety, I feel mortified in ob- 
ferving fuch billingfgate language attached to fo refpedable a fig- 
nature. Since the corner-ilone of that ancient building was laid, 
it is the firft time that the Old-Brick was difgraced with calumny 
inftead of argument, or fcurrility inftead of decency. 

As a proof of my obfervations, I will quote a few of your re- 
marks, and, if you are not deftitute of fenfibility, the flagrancy of 
your infult on the Prefident will be fufficient to excite in your 
mind an abhorrence of your late publication. You fay—" I willi 
to cover the defects of the prefent, under the merits of the lajl^ ad- 
min'ijlration ; but this (you add) is impoffible ; for we might as 
well endeavour to aflimilateWaftiington with Robefpierre, as Adams 
with JefFerfonr" Now, Sir, paufe a moment on the inference na- 
turally drawn by this ungenerous remark on Mr. JefFerfon — You 
place him in a character analogous to Robefpierre ; the burden of 
proof therefore lies on you, to produce any fimilitude between the 

two chara<5lers. Th^ cruelty and inl^umanity of one has become 



158 To Old-BrlcL No. XXXIX. 

proverbial ; but In what inftance has Mr. Jefferfon fliewn a difpo- 
fition in any refpect {o fanguinary and vindidive ? Has he dif- 
played a temper in any degree fimilar to Robefpierre ? Has he 
ere6led a guillotine, or purfued his enemies with that unrelenting 
fplrit which marked the footfteps of this tyrant ? Even if we quit 
the deteiiabie character of Robefpierre, and compare Mr. Jefferfon 
with Mr. x^dams, the magnanimity of his condu6l is not depre- 
ciated. Has he, amidft the torrent of abufe heaped upon him in 
the papers, ordered any profecations againft the authors, or are 
^ny of the editors prefented in the federal courts to anfwer for 
their defamation ? Even you> Sir, feel a fecurity in the lenity of 
his adminiitratlon ; — for, let me afk you, whether you would 
have dared to write in the fame ftrain againft Mr. Adams, as you 
have done a^-ainft Mr. Jefferfon ? Would you have had the im- 
pudence and alfurance to aiTert, as you now do, " that Mr. Jeffer- 
fon, after a few years trial, like fome mpure metal, will melt away, 
and nothing but the drofs remain" ? 

Is this. Sir, a language which you ought to ufe towards the 
Supreme Executive of the United States ? Have you a right to 
arraign his adniiniftration, and denounce him at this early period 
of his political exiftence ? V/iil the removal of a few officers juftify 
fuch a fevere condemnation of his future condud ? Have you the 
effrontery to place the happinefs and profperity of this country, 
on the patronage bellowed on a feledl body of men, who have 
hitherto been employed in the lucrative fundions of the govern- 
ment ? Or will you prefume to declare, that Mr. Jefferfon will 
*' melt away and become as drofs" ! becaufe he has exercifed his 
prerogative in giving the principle of rotation its proper opera- 
tion ? Pray, Sir, examine the characters who now hold offices, 
and let me afk you, whether they are not men equally entitled to 
prelidential patronage, as thofe who have heretofore enjoyed it I 
From poverty, hav-e not many of them rifen to affluence ? Why 
then, Sir, let me afk you, fhould other citizens be excluded from 
equal benefits ? 

If, Sir, you had written fuch a pointed libel on Mr. Adams, as 
you have againft Mr. Jefferfon, you would have been arraigned be^ 
fore the judiciary tribunal, and nothing fhort of your ears would 
have atoned for the criminality of your allegations. In fhort, per- 
mit me to tell you, Qld-Brick, the publications of fuch infuriated 



No. XXXIX. Ta Old-BrlcL 159 

jacobins as yourfelf are full proofs of the mildnefs of Mr. JefFer^ 
fon's admlniftration ; and, with confidence I will further fay, that 
you are fo completely deftitute of ecmmon civility, and at the fame 
time fo fraught with ignorance, that you take ati advantage of his 
lenity in propagating your diforganizing principles. Your party 
are not capable of diftinguifhing between the mildnefs of the pref- 
ent, and the feverity of the lail:, adminidration. If Mr. Jefferfoa 
fhould purfue them in the fame manner as was formerly pra<5tifed, 
their perfonal, cov/ardice would be a fufficient " gag-a£l^^ to check 
their infolence. Their caufe is fo infamous, that they would not 
have refolution enough openly to avow their fentiments before a 
judiciary tribunal, though they may under the prefent fyjlem of 
moderation have temerity fufficient to declare the wickednefs of their 
intentions. It is a happy circumftance, that the fedition law is re- 
pealed, as we can now judge how far their evil defigns extend, and 
to what lengths they contemplated their meafures, to overturn the 
republican principles of our country. 

However, Sir, I will if poffible endeavour to bring your re- 
marks into fome argumentative order, (though they are fo de- 
ranged it is difficult to place them in any accurate form.) You 
fay, that " reafonahk men did fuppofe from Mr. Jefferfon's fpeech, 
that he would purfue a fyftem friendly to the good of the commu- 
nity, but we find the reverfe has been the cafe, and from all prefent 
appearances, is likely to be fo." Now, Sir, I would alk you, 
w^herein he has purfued a fyftem unfriendly to the community ? It 
is true he has displaced fome men, and put others in their room. 
If this is the cafe, it does not follow, that the former were the 
moft worthy, and the latter the moft unworthy. If you affert, 
that " his fyftem is unfriendly to the community," it lies with you 
to pro'ue it. Bring forward your chara6ters, and let us try them 
by the touchftone of rectitude and ability. Is difplacing the naval 
agent in Eofton unfriendly to the community ? Is reftoring 
Meflirs. Whipple and Gardner attended with difagreeable confe- 
quences ? Is fuperceding the diftrift attorney a matter of public 
lamentation, as it refpedls integrity or talents ? Is the appoint- 
ment of Meffrs. Madifon, Lincoln, Dearborne, and Gallatin, at the 
head of their refpeftive departments, unfriendly to the community ? 
Is forwarding the treaty to France, in the moft expeditious and dig" 
nlfied manner, injurious to the commercial interefl of the United 



i6a To Old-BncL No. XXXlX. 

States ? is the fyfletn of economy, propofed by him, deflriKftive 
to the general happinefs ? Or will the faving of twenty thoufand 
dollars annually, by abolifhing the office of infpe(5lors, " fpeedily 
fmk us into the gulph of anarchy" ? If lie has done any thing 
worthy of cenfure, point it out in fpecific terms^ and do not, as a 
* friend to order,' fligmatize his conduct by general charges, with- 
out one evidence to fupport them. 

I am aware that you will anfwer, that Mr. Gallatin's appoint- 
ment was injurious to the community. But, Sir, don't be too 
hafty in this particular ; you are not yet competent to judge on this 
queftion. Time will difcover the propriety of Mr. JefFerfon's con- 
du6l, in this inftance ; v^^ait at leaft till the meeting of Congrefs, 
and I believe that his communications on the fubjed- of revenue, 
will convince " The People" of the wifdom of the executive, in 
feleding that gentleman for this department. The appointment 
of Mr. Bifhop, you may fay, is injurious to the community ; but 
I am well informed, that the office of Colledlor in the port of 
New-Haven, has never been more regularly and honeftly condu<5t- 
ed than fmce his officiality. 

Now, fir, as you have prefumed to come forward and charge 
Mr. Jefferfon " as purfuipg a fyftem injurious to the community," 
I challenge you to produce your fpecific charges. It is needlefs to 
alarm the public with vague declarations. If you have; any thing 
to allege, place yourfelf in the pofition of an honefi man, and give 
the citizens the charges of crimination in detaih In this cafe, I 
am Vv'illing to meet you ; but while you deal in fcurrility and 
defamation, notwithftanding you take the refpe<5table fignature of 
" Old-Brichy^ yet, Sir, as I refpedt truth rather than names, your 
lucubrations (while they bear their prefent afperity) will be ever 
eflimated by me as the malignant effufions of a difappointed, mor- 
tified, diferganizing partizan. Your fuggeftions are unfounded, 
your charges 2x0. falje, and nothing but the mildnefs of the man 
whom you calumniate, gives you confidence to purfue your fcur- 
rility and invedive. If you have any modefty erafe your fig- 
nature, and no longer difgracc the Old-Brick with your uncandid 
and indecent publications. 



Ko. XL. On the Carrying Trade. i6i 



No. XL. 

ON THE CARRYING TRADE. 
^* ^Tts from experience that ive reafon heJlJ'^ 

XxS me great commercial privilege of the- carrying trade is 
ridiculed, and almoft reprobated by our modern federalijls, it is pro- 
per while contemplating this fubjedt, that we produce fuch evi- 
dence as will fubftantiate the fentiments of the republicans, in oppo- 
fuion to a do-flrine fo defcrudive to the intereft of the United 
States. It is a happy circumftance, while confidering this impor- 
tant queftion, that we can appeal to thofe who formerly came for- 
ward in fupport of our commercial rights ; and though a few may 
hare apoftatized from their avowed principles, yet it is hoped that 
a majority of the citizens retain their old opinions, unbiafTed either 
by the fmiles or frowns of their opponents. Freemen examJ.ne the 
propriety of things, and fcorn to be influenced by the low, contemp- 
tible paffion oi private intercfl. 

Being in pofleflion of documents which cannot be controverted, 
I fhall purfue a courfe of inquiry, founded on the fentiments of thofe 
individuals who took a lead in our commercial controverfy with 
England, in the year 1785. If I am oppofed by the modem 
federalifts, it is incum.bent on the gentlemen who wrote the fol- 
lowing Circular Letter, to vindicate my obfervations, if they are de- 
fircus to fubftantiate a reputation for political confiftency and 
integrity. Their letter conveys a ftrong idea of the importance 
of the CARRYING TRADE ; it portrays the pernicious tendency of 
Britifh refidents, and expreffes, in the moft forcible language, an 
abhorrence of thofe reftridlions v/hich expofed the commerce of 
America to the uncontroled impofitions of the Britifli nation. 
While examining this fubjeft, I fhall pay due refpeft to the char- 
after of each individual ; but, at the fame time, as principle is my 
objefl, I fhall clofe witli fuch obfervations as will oblige fome of 
I them to acknowledge, either that they were wr^?;?^- in 17S5, or 
that I am right in 1801. 
W 



i^'Z Or: the Carrying Track j: No*. XI.. 

This fubjed is impoitant as it relates to the young American:' 
Tncrchant, tradcfman, and nianuJuBurery and as tlicir intercfi; is {o 
immediately concerned in the qiieftion', I mud requeil their par-* 
ticLilar attention to the numbers which may be appropriated to its 
Gonfideration. 

As introdu»5lory to my remarks, I fliall infert tJie following 
Letter, written to the feveral ftates in the year 1785, en the ar- 
rival of a few Britilli merchants in the town of B-fton. The a- 
larm excited at that period among the American merchants, will 
convince the j'(?«/7j meri that the monopoly of cur trade was con- 
fidered as the inevitable confequeuce (jf permitting Britifh refidents 
to enjoy equal adva.itagcs with our own citizens. The agitation 
which prevailed at that time on the rcftriftions of our commerce, 
will fully iaew how far the carp.ying trade was contemplated as 
CiQ palladium of our commerce, agriculture and manufiidures. 



ICIRCULAR.-l 

"Boston, April 22d, 1785^* 
** Gentlemen, 

" WE being appointed by the merchants, traders and others, 
citizens of tliis town, to write to the merchants of the feveral fea- 
ports throughout the United States, on the alarming fituation of 
our commercial intercourie with Great-Britain> do, in their names 
addr&fs you on the fubjed ; which, we doubt not, you will think 
with us, requires mature deliberation, as well as the mofi fplrUed 2i\\dt. 
vigorous exertions to be properly arranged. 

" Happy fliould w^e be, if we could devife fome plan w-hich 
Vv'ould effectually produce, and lailingly cement, that union of fen- 
timent, on which fo eiTeifcually depend* the advantage and liability 
of the commerce of this country : we do not, however, prefume to 
didlate v^hat is befi. to be done in this critical fituation of our 
affairs ; but conceive it highly necelfary to have a free communi- 
cation of the fentiments of the mercantile intereft ; as on meafures 
which may be adopted in confequence of this correfpondence> 
fome permanent and beneficial purpofes may be effeded. 

" The CARRYING TRADE, fo important to this country, 
IS alfo elfentially affeded ; and Great-Britain Is endeavouring, by 
every means in her power, to annihilate It — by prohibiting the 
eatry of our fliips in her Wed-India colonies — difcouraging, and 



No. XL. On the Coi-rymg TraJ.e. 163 

(by rumours which aie generally exaggerated) preventing her 
own manufadlures, intended for our confumption, from being 
llnpped in Ameri\:an bottoms, unlefs buithened with an extra 
charge — by employing her veflels — by depriving our faips of the 
privilege of cairying the produce of our own country to Quebec, 
Newfoundland, &c. — and, by reftriiling the fak of them in any 
part of the Britilh domains, confifcating the property in fome in- 
ftances, and fubjeding it to duties equal to a prohibition in others; 
while the fubjed:.s of that nation are permitted to fend their veffels 
to any part of the continent for bread, flour, tobacco, rice, &c. 
— and to ihip them from mod of the ilates, upon the fame terms 
with our own citizens, and from others, with but a trifiing dif^ 
crimination. A trade, the balance of which is fo eiTentially 
againft us, muft, if not fpeedily checked, inevitably ruin us. 

" Feelingly impreffed, therefore, with the necejjity of an imme- 
diate attention to afubjedl, fo important to the people of America, 
the merchants., traders, and others, citizens of this town, have held a 
GENERAL MEETING, to coufuit upou mcafures neceflary to be 
adopted on this occafion ; the inclofed refolutions will acquaint 
you with the refult of tlieir deliberations ; fome of the expedients 
there ufed are meant only as temporary remedies, and intended 
folely to retard the ruin ijuhich threatens us, until a general fyftem 
of relief can be adopted. 

" Perfuaded, however, that the exertions of Individual cities, 
or even dates, without the fupport of the whole confederacy, wnli 
be inefficacious, or at moft can operate only as a partial relief, 
and that nothing fhort of veiling Congrefs with full powders tO 
regulate the internal, as well as external commerce of all the 
States, can reach the mifchiefs we complain of, we w^ould, agree- 
ably to the diredions of the inclofed proceedings, eanieflly recom- 
mend to you an immediate application to the Legiflature of your 
State to veii fuch powers in Congrefs (if they have not already 
done It) as iLall be competent to the great and interefting pur- 
pofe oi placing the commerce of the United States upon the footing of per- 
fed equality with every other nation ; and to requeft you alfo to peti- 
tion Congrefs (when they fhall be thus clothed with authority) 
to make fuch Internal regulations as fhall have that happy efFe<5l:, 
-encourage an attention to our manufadlures, and remove the 
embarra/fments under which our trade at prefent labours. 



' 164 On the Carrying Trade. No. XL, 

" Were not the embarraffments on our trade, by fatal expe- 
rience, too well known to you to require a particular ftatement, 
it would be eafy to prove the neceffity of adopting this, or a 
fimilar conduct, by^ detail of facfts, and a train of arguments not 
fairly to be controverted, it being evident on the moft curfory 
view, that the necefTary effect of the Reftriftions in queflion is, 

PESTRUCTION TO OUR ShIP BuiLDING, FISHERIES, NAVIGATION, 

AND Commerce in all its branches, and confequently to the 
PROPERTY and support of the merchant, hufbandman, and me- 
chanic. 

" Your cheerful concurrence we may therefore in return ex- 
pejfl ; not doubting the fuccefs of fuch meafures as are founded 
on the principles of juftice and found policy, and: fupported by the 
united and fpirited exertions of a free people. 

<* To add to thefe evils already fufficient to excite our utmoft 
difquietude, the late intervention of BRITISH FACTORS, 
threatens a monopoly of our trade, and haftens the rapid decreafe 
of our circulating medium. Unlefs the trade and exports of thefe 
flates are contravened by fimilar expedients on our part, tlie com- 
merce of this country, and of confequence its wealth, power, and 
perhaps the Union itfelf, muft become vidlims to the artifice of a 
nation, whofe arms have been in vain exerted to accomplifh the 
ruin of America. 

** We are, Gentlemen, with every fentiment of refpedl and 
efteem, your friends and brethren in a common caufe. 

yohn Hancock. Jonathan L. Auftin. 

Samuel A, Otis» Charles jfarvis, 

Samuel Breck, P/illiam Tudor. 

John C. Jones. Stephen Higginfon. 

Samuel Barrett. y^fip^ Barrell. 

Edward Payne. Pere% Morton. 

Caleb Dams. J'^f^p^ Rujell, jun.'^ 
Thomas Rujfell. 



The foregomg letter is a text, which will furnilh a number 
of discourses through tlit fall and -winter months. As I write on- 
ly at my leifure, I ihall purfue my obfervations v^nth as much de- 
liberation as fome clergymen perform their fticerdotal fundlions. 
Qld fermons are fometimes delivered, and probably old remarks piay 



No. XLI. On the Carry wg Trade, 165 

cccafionally furnifh a fpeculative number. Having produced the 
document from whence my conclufions will be drawn, (accompa- 
nied with the foregoing refpedable fignatures) I fhall feel peifed- 
ly at eafe while defcanting on the patriotic principles contained in the 
above Letter, and the confijlmcy of the refpeftive individuals who 
Jfubfcribed to its authenticity. 



ae 



No. XLL 

ON THE CARRYING TRADE. 

To thofe Gentlemen of the Committee of Merchants, luho Jigned the Cir- 
cular Letter in l']^^,for the purpofe of reflriBing the Britifo Trader 
and nvho ivere in favour of the Britifh Treaty in 1795°. 

Gentlemen, 

VV HILE reading your important Letter, (which was commu- 
nicated to the citizens in every commercial town throughout the 
United States) on the alarming fituation of the American trade, 
and obferving the name of Hancock among the fubfcribers, I can- 
not but drop a tear of condolence for our country that this patriot 
is no more. His fpirit has afcended to the heavenly regions, and 
we truft* receives thofe rewards peculiarly affigned to the philan- 
thropift and patriot. He was always foremoft in the caufe of his 
country ; he ever ftood confpicuous as a friend to the rights of 
man ; in every inftance he placed himXelf in a refponfiUe lituation, 
v^hen the welfare of America demanded it: — but alas, the peo-. 
FLE loft a friend, when the death of Hancock was announced. In 
him every patriotic heart was united, and he continued to his laft 
breath, uniform in an adherence to his principles. In honour to his 
memory be it fpoken, he never advocated a political meafure, which 
his real friends, during the revolution, reprobated ; neither was he 
reduced in any part of his adminiftration, to look to the old enemies 
of his country for approbation. The patriot Hancock lived le^. 
vered by his friends, and during the period of his exiftence, only 
the invenomed pen of a Laco dared to impeach his integrity. — ^ 
The fidelity of Hancock was rewarded by the univerf^ detefta-* 
tion of his defamer. 



1 66 On the Carrying Trade. No. XLI, 

Your Circular Letter, gentlemen, in 1785, is honoured with 
the name of our deceafed friend ; and no doubt, was he now alive, 
he would be active in vindicating the fentiments to which he then 
gave his lignature. His heart and his hand ever beat and moved 
in unifon : He was in no inftance the dupe of a party, and never 
foolifhly trufted to the fupport of men, who were planning mea- 
fures to fuperfede him in his oiEcial capacity. He had {uah fagcir 
city as v/ould have defeated the defigns of his enemies, if under the 
garb of flattery, they had meant to bring forward a rival to mar 
his political reputation. , 

Thy political reputation, Hancock, will ever be revered by the 
republican citizens of America ! Thou wilt live, Uluflr'ioiis fplrlt, in 
the hearts of thy countrymen ; and while liberty and the rights of 
thy country are duly eflimated, thy name will be held in grateful 
remembrance ! The pro/cripticn of George the Third is a "mauso- 
leum" to thy memory, which will furvive a ponderous monument 
of marble ! 

Your Circular Letter of 1785, contahis five principles — ift, that 
the CARRYING TRADE IS important to the United States — 2d, that 
the impofitions of Britain are intolerable and grievous — 3d, that the 
balance of trade w^ith Britain is greatly againft us — 4th, an earned 
recommendation to Congrefs, to place the commerce of America 
upon a footing Osi equality with every other nation — 5th, that British 
FACTORS are ruinous to the commerce of our own citizens. 

Upon thefe feveral particulars I fhall occafionally addrefs you. 
A.sfome of you were Jirong advocates for the Brit'^Jh treaty^ and as 
this inftrument, is now brought forward in our tory papers as the 
tefl o{ federaUfm^ I now call upon you candidly to anfwer the fol- 
lowing queftions. As truths and a fair ftatement of the fubjedl be- 
fore the public, are my fole objects, if you are rights and I am 
lurong, I will readily make an acknowledgment of my error. 

If the carrying trade is important in your mind, does not the 
Britifh treaty efTentially injure it ? Does it not, by extending the con- 
traland articles^ annihilate a large portion of this branch of com- 
merce ? Does it not, by depriving us of our freighting hufmefs in the 
Eafl'lndies (which we enjoyed before the treaty without any ob- 
ftru6lion) greatly leffen this profitable part of our trade ? Does 
not fubjecfling our vefTels to be fearched by the Britifli, and being 
liable to be fent into their ports upon bare fufpiclon, embarrafs us n;j 



ho. XLL On ths Carrying Trade. 1^7 

almoft all our foreign mercantile connexions ? Does not admitting 
provifions to become a contraband article effentially deftroy that 
valuable part of our exports, and expofe the produce of America 
to the rapacity of Britifh cruifers ? 

In ihort, Gentlemen, if you are noiv in favour of the Britifh 
treaty, you cannot hold the fame fentiments you did in 1785. To 
be confiftent with your Circular Letter, you cannot nonv fay, that 
the carrying trade is of the utmoft importance to this country ; 
if you are in favour of the treaty, you muft be obliged to change 
your language, and fay, that the carrying trade, inftead of bemg 
of the " utmoft importance," is but of little confequence to our 
commerce. If Britifh impofitions were then thought grievous, 
furely the wanton captures and arbitrary decifions on our veffels 
fmce the treaty, m.uft convince you, that Britain has not relaxed 
in her feverities, fmce the adoption of it. — What boon have you 
obtained, gentlemen, by the treaty ? Some of you came forward 
in the Old- South, as tlie champions of our national honour ; the af- 
tonifhed multitude clapped with the utmoft vehemence your enthufi- 
aftic fpeeches ; \htfateUites, within your influence, fancied they had 
got their depredation money in their pockets the moment the Mod- 
erator declared the vote in favour of the treaty appropriations. 
The Individuals who had the refolutlon to oppofe the meafure, were 
derided by thofe whofe folly led them to fancy that Pitt had all 
the money counted out in the exchequer, as foon as Mr. Gore 
fhould appear in England to receive it. They fancied that our 
orators would terrify the whole Britifh government, and xht'ir pretty 
fpeeches would either footh or Intimidate the nation to cancel cur 
claims. 

To return, gentlemen, if you approve of the Britifh treaty, you 
muft difapprove of your former cGndu<5l ; for the inftrument agreed 
to by Mr. Jay deftroys every principle on which you predicated 
your Circular Letter in 1785. At that time, you were alarmed at 
the arrival of a few Bntijh fadors and agents ; you reprefented 
them as " deftru<Slive and ruinous to the American commerce," as 
having a " tendency to monopolize our whole trade." 'But the 
treaty admits fuch perfons to greater privileges than at the period 
you were oppofed to them — and yet, furprifmg as it may feem, you 
became boifterous againft them at that time, and no'w with the 
fnoft fubmlfTive complacency accede to their admifTion. 



i6S On the Carrying Trade, jslo. XLI.- 

This reverfe of condu(5t requires fome explanation. I would 
aflc you, gentlemen, why the Carrying Trade was not in the year 
1795, (when the treaty was adopted) equally important as in 
1785, when you wrote your Circular Letter? Did not fome of 
you flatter the tradefmen, that upon the ratiiication of the treaty 
the Carrying Trade would be esctended ? But fmce the treaty has 
been ratified, has not this important branch of commerce become 
fnbjecl to innumerable reftridtions ? If the decifions in Britiili 
Courts of Admiralty are the fupreme law of the land, w^ill not the 
navigation of the United States in a fev/ years fall a facrifice to 
Britifh policy ? Will not oitr harbours and wharves, inltead of 
being filled with American fhips freighted on our otvn accounts, 
be thronged with Britifh manufadlures, configned to Englifli agents 
and Scotch fadlors, reading in our feaports for this purpofe ? 

The next article, gentlemen, in your Letter is, that the Brltifh 
trade Is againjl us. If this was the cafe in 1785, why not in 180 1 ? 
If it was againil; us at that period, is it not more againll us fince 
we have fubmitted to the treaty ? As by it, w^e allow greater 
privileges to the Britifh than we did before— we rather encourage 
Britifh fubjedls to carry on this pernicious trade — we give them a 
right to put chafe flores, wharves, warehoufes, &c. without limita- 
tion of time, and to purfue their bufinefs to the injury of every 
young American. 

Some of you, gentlemen, may pofTibly think, that you are 
noiv beyond the deftrudive influence of thefe Britifh refidents and 
itinerants, by placing your property in the BANKS or funds. But 
reflect, firs, how many young men, now comfortably fituated in bu- 
finefs, and whofe wroes and chlldreti depend on their induftry, muft 
feel the effedls of a treaty, which gives refidence to a body of 
altensy to profecute bufinefs in every part of the United States to 
the injury of our own citizens. In a few years this will be expe- 
rienced, and the young men will have reafon to rue the day that 
they attended to the artful defigns of men, who have placed the 
principal part of their property in the banks and funds, or turn- 
ed their bufinefs into other channels. On thefe things let our 
YOUNG MEN think, and refled. 



No. XL 1 1. Non- Liter course ivltJj France. 169 



No. XLII. 

NON-INTERCOURSE WITH FRANCE, 






X HE Circular-Letter from the merchants In the town of BoftoDj, 
fiibfcribed by feme of thofe who now emphatically ftyle them- 
{QlvQsfederaiifis, conveys In the flrongeft terms their difapprobation 
of the Britiih gcvernm.ent, in violating the commercial privileges 
of the United States. The fentiments inculcated at that period 
by thofe high-toned federalifts, are now denounced as jacobinifm. 
I would not hurt the feelings of the gentlemen by mentioning 
them indhicfually, as any man by reading over the names of the 
Committee, can eafily defignate the friends to the treaty. 

If the merchants, tradefmen, and others, in the town of Bof- 
ton, were juftifiable in their proceedings, at the time they for- 
warded their Circular-Letter, we muft certainly conclude, that the 
advocates for the Britifh treaty were blameable in every particular 
— -for this inftrument bafHed every principle contemplated by that 
meafure. We gave up, by its adoption, every right, as it refpedt- 
ed our neutrality, and fubmitted to the moll humiliating degrada- 
tion. Our Carrying Trade we laid proftrate at the feet of Britain, 
and as to Brkj/t:) fa&ors, we have, In the moft humble attitude, 
courted them to our embraces. We have placed our own cit- 
izens at the footllool of aliens, and fuffered our young men to- 
become dependant on their clemency-- 

To eftimate our European connexions, let us attend to ths 
following ftatement, as fubmitted to Congrefs, in 1 794 : 

Cur trade with Spain was 1,6703797 in our favour, 

Portugal 1,687,696 do. 

Netherlands 791,182 do. 

Sweden 932,635 do. 

France 2,630,387 do. 

Denmark 126,000 agp.inll us. 

G.Britain 5,923,912 againll U9. 

Thefe documents are authentic, and yet fuch has ^eea ouy 
infatuation, that every meafure has been taken to alTift the natior^ 

X 



l'j& NoTi'Intfrcourse *w'uh France, No. XL 1 1. 

whofe trade was agahijl us^ and injure thofe whofe trade was in oat 
favour. 

When we talked of a non-Intercourfe with England, the par- 
tizans of Britain exclaimed that it would lead to a war ; but when 
a propofition was made to annihilate our trade with France^ thefe 
fame men acceded to the meafure with the mod. fervent compla- 
cency — that is, they were anxious to continue in connexion with 
a nation, the balance of whofe trade was upwards q{ jive milTions 
agahi/} iis^ and break off every intercourfe with thofe, whofe 
balance was upwards of tiuo vnUions in our favour. They were 
willing further to hazard in the controverfy, Spain, the Nether- 
lands, Sweden, &c. (whofe balance alfo were m our favour) in 
order to form an alliance oftenfive and defenfive with Britain. 
What a degree of infatuation mull have polTelfed the minds of 
thofe projectors ! ! 

The non-intercourfe with France was fuch a favourite objedl, 
(^notwithftanding our trade with her was fo advantageous) that 
the YOUNG MEN Were called upon to celebrate the period of its 
adoption — prayers were offered to heaven for its continuance — 
the priell paraded our ftreets arrayed in his canonicals — the 
meeting-houfe was thronged — the young men were fummoned to 
attend the folemn mockery of the Supreme Being — a poetic 
orator was felecfted to celebrate the bleffings of a controverfy with 
a nation, whofe balance of trade was nearly three millions in our 
favour. — Myfterious ! unexampled ! ! incomprehenfible ! ! ! 

This was the day of political madnefs. A few deceived otd 
men countenanced a train of mifgutded youths, to celebrate the moft 
impolitic meafure that ever took place in our country. 

Young men are not always to blame for imprudences, as ex- 
perience will naturally mature their judgment. Time will ripen 
their decifions. Thofe whom they have heretofore confidered as 
their enemies, will ere long be known as their friends ; thofe whom 
they have reprobated as inimical to their intereft, will foon be 
confidered by them as the moft attached to its promotion. 

Mr. Jefferfon, Mr. Madifon, Gen. Deai borne, Judge Lincoln, &c 
are the uniform fupporters of the real liberties of this country, as 
they relate to commerce, agriculture, and manufadtures, — The abulc 
thrown on them, is the laft defperate effort of a junto, which 
mow ficken at the profpet^ of our real national independence- 



No. XLIII. To the Toung Men, I71 

While fuch people confidered x\merica as tending to a war with 
France, and an alliance with Britain, the higheft encomiums were 
^ paiFed upon our government; but now they find their proje6i« 
are fruilrated, they are endeavouring to deftroy our confidence 
in the adminiftraticn ; but, we truil in God, their mifchievoui 
defigns will be baffled, and the United States rife fuperior to their 
rnachinations. 



No. XLIIL 

TO THE YOUNG MEN, 

X HE sjood fenfe which fo peculiarly chara<51:erizes the young rs* 
publican citizens of the United States is a happy omen that reafon, in- 
ftead of deception, will eventually terminate their decifions. The 
author cf thefe Numbers would not wifh to impofe on their creduli- 
ty, but is defirous rather to appeal to their judgment. The young 
men are materially interefted in the great political queftions 
which arreft the attention of the refpedive individuals within the- 
United States. Their future profperity depends on the reditude 
of their determinations, for while the aged patriots are daily ccn- 
£gned to the tombs of their predeceflbrs, the rijing generation are to 
experience the bleflings or misfortunes attendant on their public 
condu<fl. The young American is deeply involved in the confequen*- 
ces refulting from right or ivrong meaiures. The direcflion will ei- 
ther advance his happinefs or involve him in difficulties. Being; 
thus interefted in our political decifions, it is a duty incumbent on 
them to read ^nd. judge for themfelves. 

The revolutionary events in Europe are more connefled with 
their future welfare than is generally imagined. It is a revolu- 
tion, on the ifFue of which are fufpended the political and commer- 
cial rights of fociety. Although it thus involves the fate of ages, 
yet the enemies to the real liberties of the people endeavour to in- 
culcate an indifference in the minds of young men, on the prefent 
fubjed of politics. This apathy is often excited by men, who, from 
peculiar good fortune in their fpeculations, are quarterly fuckled 
with maternal indulgence, from the breafts of the funds. While 

♦njpying the copious bounties of theie pecuniary eftabliihrnents; 



172 To the TGiing Men. No. XLIII.^ 

they vehemently exclaim againft every inveftigation ofthofemea- 
fures which raifed them to their pre-eminent fituation. Such men 
are defirous to diffipate the public m.ind, and artfully attempt to 
make it difreputalk for a young man to concern himfelf UMth the af- 
fairs of government. They would confine his refie<5lions within 
tlie narrow compafs of the counter, and endeavour to perfuade him 
that if he is capable of felHng a yard of Engl'ijlj broadcloth, or 2.Jlra<uj 
haty and make a regular fiatement to the CuPcom-houfe of the duties 
arifmg on them, his qualifications are fufficiently adequate to hi2 
employment in life. Thus thefe people are zealoufly difpofed to 
ftifie the manly energies of youth, and render them fubfervient to 
the ftratagems of thofe who fludy to impofe on them. 

By this falfe mode of reafoning, an afcefndancy is acquired over 
the well-informed young men in the commercial, agricultural and 
manuFacluring occupations. A partial, monied intereft is confid- 
ered as the only proper director, both in church and (late, and 
oftentimes the flippancy of fome within the bar bears down all the 
-natural good fenfe of the other profeffions. A preponderancy of 
influence is gained in the community by thefe factitious means, 
while the prominent features of our government are obliterated, by 
.the modejl d'tffidence of thofe who follow the beneficial employments 
.of commerce, agriculture and m.anufadures. 

Eve'ry private citizen is the guardian of his own and his coun- 
try's honour — it is therefore a degrading idea, to imagine that the 
glory, prcfperity and freedom of America, depend on the boafted 
wifdom, patriotifm, fiiperior abilities or integrity of any one clafs of 
citizens. The people, in their individual capacity, are the pledged 
truftees of the facred treafures of the Conflitution. They are the 
threfliold through which the focial compa<5t was uiliered into the 
fanhedrim of the nation ; the firft paragraph announces this author- 
ity, by the pov/erful declaration of •' We the people." The peo» 
.pie are the arh in which the rights of fociety are depofited, and, 
whoever violates their prerogative, muil expe<5l to meet the fiate of 
him who facrilegioufly trefpalfed on the holy building, while mov- 
ing under the immediate aufpices of the Supreme Being. Voa 
Popul'i, Vox Dei, -moTQ immediately applies to the American re- 
public. 

Thefe are the fentiments which ought to invigorate every clafs 
^fAm.eric an youth, as their education intitles them to a full pre- 



\ 

No. XLIII. To the Young Men. 173 

pondeiancy In our political concerns. They fhould rife fuperior 
to the -mere impe<5tcr of an account current, and Ihould ftudy the 
principles of the Conftltution, as well as thofe political and com- 
mercial rlp-hts contemplated on its adoption. Thus informed, they 
would be enabled to Jpeah and ad: on fiibjeds relating to its eftab- 
lifhment. JSlot that the Toung Men Jloould mgleEl their private con- 
cerns, and become holfierous politicians^ but there is a dignity Attach- 
ed to every man's ftation in fociety, which fhould render him com- 
petent to judge on the utility of public meafures. It i? degrading 
to an American to take every thing on truil:, and even the young 
farmer and tradefman Ihould fcorn to farrender their right of 
judging either to laivyers or priejls ; thefe profeffions ought to be 
duly eilimated, but no man ihould fo humble himfelf as to depend 
altogether on their infalliUUty . 

If the federal conftltution v/as avowedly adopted to enlarge the 
commerce of the United States, the quellion is, whether the fur- 
render made to the Englifh by the treaty, was calculated for this 
purpofe ? To determine this point, I Ihall compare the fentiments 
of our delegates in Convention and the principles prom.ulgated by 
the merchants in their Circular-Letter, with certain articles of the 
Britlfli treaty. How far they are analogous will then appear ; 
and whether the furrender of our com-mercial rights. In this inftru- 
znent, will not ultimately have the moft baneful operation on every 
Am.erican citizen. The principal object will be, to prove the incon" 
Jijlency of men. In advocating a treaty which counteradled every 
principle they form.erly efpoufed. 

While confiderlng this fubjedl, I fhall not aim at roufmg your - 
paffions, but Ihall attempt to convince your judgment. If the 
pernicious tendency of admitting Engllfn fubjecls to an equal par- 
ticipation of our trade was deprecated by the gentlemen who for- 
warded the circular-letter, let me conjure you, my young friends, 
to refiect whether the confequences are not now equally fatal ? If 
a hanvklng Briton, cr ScGtchman, can, hj a parfimonious fyftem of 
living, underfell you In your Importations, how can you exped to 
acquire a competency for the maintenance of your wives and chil? 
dren, in your commercial connexion with Britain ? The late trea- 
ty between Ruffia and Sweden is a document vaftly apropos to 
this fubjeft : it exprefsly ftipulates, that " travelling merchants and 
haivhcrs of both nations fhall not be fufFered, but confidered as 



174 To the Young Men, No. XLIV. 

fmiigglersy If this article was necefiary between Ruffia and Swe- 
den, how much more fo between Britain and America ? 

To illuftrate this queftion, i fhall appropriate a few Numbers 
to confider the fubjeft. If the Young Men finally fay, that my 
plea is erroneous, I mufl acquiefce In their decifion. I have no 
other objeft than their intereft ; for whether Humphrey Clinker as a 
Scotchman, or John Bull as an Englifhman, enjoy equal benefits 
with American citizens, in vending Britlfh manufailures, cannot 
efTentially aft'ecl me. The only queftion is, whether the friends to 
the treaty, or the oppofers of it, aded mod confiflent v/ith the 
eommsrcial inter ejl of the country ? 

The moft illiberal reflections have been thrown on the Individ^' 
uals, who dared to come forward in oppofition to its adoption ; 
let then the young citizens (who are deeply interefted in its opera- 
tion) jiidge between the friends and enemies of this derogatory 
inftruinent. 

I am aware of the artful plea made by fome of the Anglo- 
federalifts, that, as the treaty is made, it is needlefs to remark on 
its Inutility. This, however, is but a poor confolatlon. It is pro- 
per that we fhould know the folly of our condu<5l, even if we can- 
not Immediately remedy the evil. It ferves at leaft to bring to 
remembrance the ftroUing Street-Committee, with their pen, ink, 
and paper, threatening every one with vengeance who would not 
fubmit to their demands. It will ferve to make the Toung Men 
cautious how they truft to thofe who have thus far deceived them. 



No. XLIV. 

TO THE YOUNG MEN. 

Y the mod unaccountable fatality, thofe, who afTumed the 
name o{ federal\jls, acquired an influence over the minds of the 
young American citizens. A fyflem of terror was fo generally 
efliabllflied, that/^^r operated too powerfully for reftraint. Po- 
litical ciuefl;ions were not confidered upon the ground of difquifi- 
tion, but the adoption of particular tenets was enforced with a 
fpecies of inquifitorial intolerance. If a young man dared to 
ejcrcife his judgment, or to hefitate in fubfcribing to the infalli- 



No. XLIV. To the Toung Men. I^^ 

bility of certain dogmas, he was denounced under all that feverily" 
attached to the charader of a diforganizer and jacobin. He was 
purfued in every diredion with a malignity of temper, which 
threatened his ruin in bufmefs and perfonal reputation. An im- 
placability of difpofition was encouraged between citizens, and 
even the focial intercourfe was diffolved wherever a difference in 
political fentiments prevailed. 

In this ftate of controverfy, we cannot be fiirprized that the 
young men were borne down by the deluge of tlieir opponents. To 
flem the torrent, required not only an energy of mind, but firmnefs 
of nerve. Perfonal fafety in fome inftances was eonnecicd with 
political belief, as the bully would oftentimes become the oracle 
of public opinion ; the brawny arm of a defperado would threaten 
to level an antagonlft, v/hen the voice of reafon would make but 
little ImprefTion. 

But, thank heaven, the clouds of delufion are diffipating : the 
period has arrived when each clafs of men can exercife their rea- 
fon, and be guided by their unbiased judgment. We can now 
ipeak unawed by the threats of a junto, who have too long claim- 
ed a prerogative to control both public and private opinion ; we 
are reftored to our ancient privileges, and each citizen ftands i» 
that dignified attitude peculiarly adapted to his fituatlon in a 
republican government. We are nonu " all republicans," we are 
noiu " all federalifts," as the fyftem in which we move gives every 
man an equal right In foclety ; there are no exchifive republicans or 
federalijlsy as It refpe(5ts the privilege of judging : nor 2Si-j partial 
law to arraign one fet of opinions before the tribunal of vindidive 
judges. — There remains however a fmall convulfion (excited by 
the infuriated paffions of fome difappointed men) ; but, as it relates 
to the community at large, the hurricane has fubfided, though 
from Its tail a few gulls occafionally explode. 

I have, in a previous Number, reminded you, my young friends y 
of the proceedings of the merchants of Bofton, on the arrival of a 
few Britifh fadlors, in the year 1785. At their meeting, ihtj fol- 
emnly declared, that " the refidence of fuch fadtors threatened an 
intire monopoly of all Britllh importations in the hands of fuch 
agents, and would eventually deprive the indujlrious American trader 
of every benefit of our commerce." If, at this period, the intro- 
ilu<5tIon of Britifli fa<5tors was fo deftruitive to the commerce of 



116 To the Young Mcu No. XLIV. 

this conntry, what may be your apprehenfions under the Britifh 
treaty ? If it was then confidered " ruinous to the American 
trade" that fuch factors Ihould refide among us, what mud be the 
confequence when they have a right by treaty not only to refide, 
but " to purchafe ftores, houfes, and Ihops" ; to " remain nv'uhout 
limitation of time'' ; to continue among us ihould we even be 
** in open rupture with England" ; and, to complete the whole, 
provided their conduft Ihould be fuch as to render them ''• fujpecled 
as being enemies to the country,''^ h"ave a right by treaty to remain 
*• twelve months*^ before they can be removed, and, during this pe- 
riod of their enmity, are to enjoy every commercial privilege and J 
advantage, equally v/ith our ov/n citizens ? As a proof of this, 
examine the 14th and 26th articles of the Britifli treaty. 

If thefe are fa6ts, let us paufe for a moment, and refle<5l on 
the ftrange condu«5t of men, who deprecated the temporary reh- 
dence of fuch faftors in 17 85, and, at the time of the treaty in 
1795, were difpofed to give thefe fame perfons fuch an uncon- 
troled monopoly of our commerce ! Ten years, it is fufpe^ledp- 
have as efFeiluaily changed their fentiments as they lefpedt their ' 
pr'roate hiterejl^ as their prefent fituation has altered the oljeEls by 
which it is promoted. They were then attentive to commerce., they 
are noiu defirous of revenue ; they were then living en trade, they 
are noiv living on banhs and funds. It makes no odds to them, 
whether a ftroiling Scotchman or Englifnman fupports them, or 
an induHrious young citizen of Bollon. They care not, whether 
2. fellow -citizen is the importer, (who has paid hundreds in taxes to- 
wards the maintenance of the town,) or an alien, who never paid 
a farthing. Whether the young American is the [weeper, or a 
Briton the mafler of a (lore, is but of little confequence to them ; — • 
give them their quarterly payments, and they are perfectly fatisfied. 

The foregoing obfervations are the true ftate of this bufmefs, 
and though they may at prefent be unnoticed, depend on it a few 
years will evidence the fa6l. Our young men will feel the effects of 
their duplicity, and thofe who have injured them will hereafter 
" mock at their calamity, and laugh when their fear cometh." 

This cataftrophe will fenfibly touch the tender feelings 01 the ylmC' 
rican ladies, when they find temporary refidents undermining the oc- 
cupations of their hufbands, and obliging tliem to retracft their ex- 
penfes within the narrow compafs of a fa*5lor ; when they find fuch 



No. XLIV. To the Toung Men. 177 

venders hiring a ftore, previoufly occupied by an American, and 
living in the garret in the moft penurious manner, while retailing 
thofe commodities, on the fale of which many of our own citizens 
depend for a maintenance. Such perfons are an injury even to the 
PURCHASERS ; — for though they may for the prefentfell cheaper 
than our own merchants, yet after they have monopolized the 
whole bufmefs by impoverifhing others, and difcouraged them 
from importing Britifh manufadures, will finally take advantage 
of their exclufive trade, by an advance of 10 or 20 per cent. 

Viewing this bufmefs even as it refpedts the revenue, it is greatly 
againfi: the government of the United States, A man who is a 
ftranger, may not be governed by thofe cautionary principles in his 
entries at the cuftom-houfe, as generally influ^ce our own citi- 
iiens ; a ''^ point of honour y^ as it refpedts their private reputation, 
will naturally lead the latter to a juft eftimate of their invoice ; 
but the formery knov/ing that his refidence is but temporary, cal- 
culates more upon the benefit he may obtain by defrauding the 
revenue, than the character he may fuflain in confequence of 
paying the duties. 

The foregoing obfervations are plain truths, though the manner 
of expreffing them may be confidered as uncourtly. If property 
is efTential to refpet5lability, certain it is, that a fubjed which con- 
templates the tendency of Britifh fadlors in America, is worthy 
the attention of thofe who are immediately involved in its confe- 
qucnces. 

As the Britifh advocates in America exult at the pretended 
advantages gained by England over Rufiia (as an apology for our 
treaty) I fhall, in my next Number, compare the treaty between 
thofe two nations, with that between America and Britain, The 
comparifon wnll Ihew the fallacy of federal reafoningy both as it 
refpeils America and Ruffia ; for the fa^f^ is, Ruffia has obtained 
every advantage over England in the late controverfy ; wliilc 
the United States have facrificed every neutral privilege by that 
injudicious deed emphatically cajlcd the EritifK treaty. 



s^S 7 he Omn'ipotetice of Brhahu No. XLY. 



No. XLV. 

THE OMNIPOTENCE OF BiLITAIN^ 

TBI 

JL HE OMNIPOTENCE of the' BrltiHi nation has bsen fo long z 
fubjev^ of exultation, and from political motives fo generally ad- 
mitted, that an attempt to place America in an attitude of oppo- 
fition to her inaiine mandates^ is confidered by fome, as the height 
of arrogance, if not of madnefs. But no country has been more 
overrated in its real commercial ixrength, provided other nations 
would exereife thofe natural advantages -which they polfefs. The 
United States, b^ exaggerating the power of Britain, and lejfening 
their onvn energies, have originated the errors they have committed, 
and fubHantiated the benefits obtained by England in our commer- 
cial negociatioiiS:. Th.^ fears, excited by the friends of the Britifh 
treaty, that ivar 'would he the confeqvence of refuftng it, were derog- 
atory to our national character, as it exhibited a pufiUanimity on 
our part, which ftimulated Britain to further excelTes. The de- 
claration of our apprehenfions of her refentment, and the dread 
we difplayed at her prowefs, led the government to purfue a fyftem 
of depredation, unawed by any meafures of retaliation from the 
American adminiflration. Our language on that occafion was 
tliat of timidity ; we became fupplicants to their clemency ; we 
openly crouched to the treaty, though we fecretly detefted its prin- 
ciples ; and thus governed by far, we unfortunately furrendeied 
every neutral right to the uncontroied management of an expen^ 
Hve Engliih judiciary. 

So far from confidering Britain a3 omnipotent either In her 
marine, commercial, or manufa&uring Ration, I believe there is no 
power m Europe more completely dependant, as they relate to 
thefe particulars. Her marine depends greatly on Ruffia, and her 
commercial and manufacliiring interefts are principally fupported by 
her connexion with America. The immenfe quantity of manu- 
factures yearly impoi~ied into the United States, together Vv^th the 
export of our ftaple articles to the Weft-Indies, and within her 
own dominions, give fuch a balance of trade, in the various direc- 
tions of her commerce, as would (if for a fhort time ftopped) 
ftrike a fatal blow to the revenue and mercantile tranfa(51:ions of 



No. XLV. Thf; Omnipotence of Britain, 179 

that comitry. The benefits, arifmg from cur commeree with 
England, are allowed by all the authors who have written on 
the fubjecl, and the dread excited during the Ihort period of cur 
embargo, proves the propriety of its eilimation In the American 
fcale. Our embargo threw the xvholc exchange of London ijito 
confternation. 

This principle was ftrongly urged in the State Conventions on 
the queflion of the conftitution ; it was ever confidered xht palladium 
of our national importance. Mr. John Adams, (the late Predr 
dent) when in England, afierted, in my hearing, that the com- 
merce of America was the moft powerful weapon to attack 
Britain : and further declared, that if the United States would 
v.nlte m a n?.vigation act, that we could force the miniftry to our 
GWTi term.s. Thefe are fentiments which that gentleman vindi- 
cated when refiding at the Court of St. James ; he regretted 
that no Commercial Syftem was adopted by the American States, 
and often fpcke with a degree of enthufiajllc confdence on the power 
of this country to control the infolence of Britain. 

England, inftead of being omnipotent, is in the power of Ruflia 
and America, who could (in alliance) enforce their demands, upon 
the moil extenfive principles. Thefe two countries are the locks 
which invigorate the ftrength of this vindictive Sampfon ; a vig- 
orous determination to maintain their neutral rights, would 
operate too powerfully on the funds, the mamifaclurers, and the 
people at large, to be treated with levity. It would prefs with a 
ponderancy which could not eafdy be fhaken off, and the various 
interefts of the Britlfh nation would experience fuch a convulfion, 
as to alarm the miniflry for the political and commercial exiflence 
of the government. 

The treaty, lately concluded between England and Ruffia, 
fufficiently evinces the apprehenfions of England on the Northern 
Confederacy. Ruffia being the principal nation dreaded by 
Britain, the terms concluded on are highly favourable to the 
neutral pofition of that country. It is founded on liberal prin- 
ciples, and brings the bufmefs refpe6ling the navigation of their 
refpeflive fubjeds to a precife explanation ; it determines v/ithout 
any equivocation, the fpecific articles of contraband ; it declares in 
the mod exprefs manner, what characterizes a blockaded port ; that 
their vefTels fhall not be flopped but upon juft caufe, and evident 



i3o The Omnipotence of Britain, No. XLV. 

fa6i ; that the right of fear ch fhall be confined folely \.ofiip5 of wary 
and fhall never extend to privateers^ or any other veffels, though 
armed for the purpofe of war. Every precaution \% taken to pre- 
vent any ill confequences by the meeting of their refpeftive fhips 
of war ; they fhall keep out of the reach of cannon fhot, and the 
commander of the belligerent vefTel fhall fend a boat on board the 
convoying fhip, and the utmoft order and regularity are provided 
in proceeding on the examination. If there appears a reafcnable 
fufpic'ion for fearch, the commander of the convoy has a privilege 
to nominate and appoint one or more officers to afTift in fearching, 
which fliall be done in his prefence, conjointly with one or more 
officers named by the commander of the vefTel of the belligerent 
party. If juft and fufficient reafon appear for detention, the 
commander of the convoying fhip fliall have power to order an 
officer to remain on board during its legal inveftigation, which 
fhall take place in die uearejl and mojl convenient port, and proceeded 
to with all pofTible difpatch. If, upon further examination, It 
fhall appear that the faid vefTel was detained without jufl and 
fufficient caufe, the commander fhall be accountable not only to 
the owners of the fiip and cargo for a full and fatisfaclory com« 
penfation for all lojfes, charges^ damages, and expenfes, cccafioned by 
fuch detention, but fhall be liable to pumfiment for allays of violence 
or any other fault, which he may have committed. 

Thefe are the principal outlines of the Ruffian and Britifh 
treaty. The parties are feeured in their property by the mofl 
minute detail in all their procedure ; the contraband are fpecified j 
tlae fearch limited ; the term hlochade accurately defined ; and 
to prevent a wanton detention, the captors are liable to cofl, 
damages, and punifhment. 

Where now is the boafl of the Anglo-Federailfls in the United 
States ? In what particular has England gained an advantage 
over Ruffia ? Their trade is admitted upon the mofl extenfive 
principles, as it relates to the property of its own fubje<5ts ; noth- 
ing is left to chance in a court of lav/, nor depends on vague 
authorities, promulgated by interefled judges. The treaty flands 
on a permanent bafis, and the fubjec^s of both countries know 
how far to purine their commerce, by an inviolable guarantee, as 
to t^e ^.rticles of cojidemnation. 



No. XLV. The Gmnipofence cf Britain. l8i 

Thefe Anglo-Federalids, while exulting at the advantages 
gained by Britain over RiifTia, abiludly eulogize the bleffings of 
our treaty ivith England, If Ruffia is impofed on, vrhat muft be 
our fituatlon ? If their negcciation has increafed the power of 
England over the fea, what muft be the extent of our furrender ? 
Nearly every point which is explicitly laid do^^Ti in one, is omitted 
in the other ; ciir contraband articles are extended ; the term blcck- 
rule is undefined ; cur trade is expofed not only to Ihips of war, 
but privateers ; and to complete the whole, even if the capture 
IS unjuft, the poor American is obliged to pay cojls offuit. In fhort, 
to compare the Ruffian treaty with the American, will give us 
the ftrongeft abhorrence of this inftiument. 

We have not only furrendered thofe neutral rights guaranteed 
to Ruffia, but we have cxpofed ourfelves to innumerable diffi- 
culties, attached to other articles in this compact. We have re- 
trained ourfelves from laying any further duties on their m.an- 
ufadlures, without countervailing ones on their part ; we have 
fubjecled ourfelves to heavy demands for old debts, contiaded by 
private merchants ; we have placed Englifli fa(5lors and tempo- 
rary refidents on a footing w^th our own merchants. We have, 
in faft, not only facrificed our neutral commerce, but have fore- 
clofed ourfelves from ufmg thofe means, which the commercial 
refources of this country abundantly furni/h in cafe of future 
emergencies, — The truth is, we have given up all and gained nothing ; 
we have eftabliffied a pretended legal plea, which operates juft 
as the judges fee fit to ufe it. The treaty is the doonC s-day-hoohy 
by which we are judged, and its terrors are denounced in almefl 
^very tranfa<5lion fmce its adoption. 

The fubjecl is fo mortifying, that it is wounding to the feelings 
of an American to contemplate it ; yet, as it has produced confe- 
quences fo fatal, it is cur duty to lament over them, even though 
the reflexions are poignards to our bofoms. It is a curfe en- 
tailed on us and our children, and pofterity will execrate its re- 
membrance. 



jSs ' 'The Ralnhciv and Scalpmg-Kmfe* No. XLVL 



No. XLVL 



" THE RAINBOW, AND SCALPING-KNIFE." 



A 



FTER the Britifh treaty was read in the Bofton town-meet- 
ing, a refpeclable and venerable citizen inquired of the moderator, 
" auhdhsr that ivas the 'whole of it <"* On being anfwered in the af- 
firmative, he made this fhrev^^d reply : that " whiit he had heard 
was altogether in favour of the BritlfJj, and he v/as in hopes of 
finding fomething in favour of America*^^ 

It IS expected that Mr. Gallatin, in his report to Congrefs on 
the ftate of the treafury, will give a fpecific Jlatement of the expenfes 
attending the Britifh treaty ; how much money has been appror 
priated, and how much expended. We fhould be glad to hear 
particularly the ifTue of Mr, Gore's embaiTy. He went to Eng- 
land at the earlieft period of the treaty, and under the moft fan- 
guine expectation of fuccefs ; he returned to America, and has 
made a fecond 'voyage on this important bufmefs. To know the 
real bleffings of this inftrument, which was fo fu ongly advocated 
by certain individuals, it would be a gratification to ftate the debt 
and credit on this whole tranfaction. If there has been any benefit 
we would wifh to know it ; if the balance is in favour of the Uni- 
ted States, or if the merchants have received any compenfation 
adequate to the advances of government, we fhall readily pay the 
moft profound refpedl to the judgment of tliofe gentlemen. Till 
this is done, every citizen has a right to judge for himfelf, and a 
few publications, fuppofed to be written by EngTifimen, will never 
perfaade the people that the treaty is not, precifely, what the ven- 
erable Samuel Adams declared it to be, i. e. ^'-pregnant iv'ith evilJ^ 
The political forefight of this aged patriot will excite the plaudit 
of the hiftoyian ; while the contrafted, defpicable policy of its ad- 
vocates will equally roufe his indignation. 

As a proof of its deficiency (as it rcfpedts the aniiclpatlons of 
the merchants) we need only refer to the unfettled ftate of their 
claims, and the innumerable captures made of their property 
fince its adoption. At the Old South Meeting-houfe, the friends 
of the treaty urged its adoption as the immediate remedy for their 
grievances ; give us the treaty, (faid they) and you give us our 



a» 



No. XL VI. The Ralnhoiv and Scalphi^- Knife, i8| 

money. They placed the queftion, not as it related to a national 
eonceruy but as a controverfy between the merchants of America 
and the Britifh government ; the treaty and their demands were fo 
connected, that they confidered the oppofition to one, equally an 
oppofition to the other. When they had obtained the vote, 
they viewed it as a complete check on the bank of England for 
the full amount of their depredations, and the huzzas attending 
the decifion were nearly equivalent to " golden guineas" from the 
Exchequer. 

This is not an exaggerated ftatement of the expectations of the 
treaty-advocates, as I accompanied on that day many of them to 
the Exchange ; and their mutual congratulations on their fuccefs, 
were proofs fufficient to juftify my obfervations. Nay, fome of 
them condefcended to fpeak to me on the fubjefl, and wondered that 
I fhould be fo oppofed to their inter ejl ; that I fhould be fo cruel as to 
wifh to deprive them of fo many thoufands of dollars, which they 
fhould now certainly obtain. I could not, even at this zenith of 
exultation, but pity their folly and fmile at their credulity. 

But the moll curi-ous part of this farce, was xhcfublrme fpeech 
of Mr. Ames, in Congrefs. He rofe in that auguft alTem-bly, ap- 
parently under all the infirmities of a man in the laft ftages of dif- 
folution ; he introduced his obfervations as the dying legacy of a 
departing patriot ; fatigued and almoft expiring under the weight 
of his obfervations, he was obliged to ftop at proper periods, and 
renew his ftrength by the afllftance o^ 2. fmelUng-hottle. Under thefc 
impreflions he ran through the horrid detail of " Indian fcalping- 
knives ;" he portrayed with pathetic energy, the defolation of our 
fields, the conflagrated cities, the cries of frantic mothers and 
helplefs orphans. He almoft fhook the fun in its ftationary pofi- 
tion, and nearly arrefted the moon and ftars in their career ; after 
exhaufting his poetic fire, he at length vented his pathos on the rain- 
bonv, whofe thoufand tints were to expire under the agonizing 
expulfion of the Britifh treaty. Such a complication of natural 
diforders to arife from a political caufe, were unparalleled in the 
pages of hiftory. No wonder that the citizens were alarmed ; 
if the Britifh treaty convulfed the fyftem of nature, we cannot be 
furprifed that the inhabitants of the globe were interefted in its 
adoption. If the fun was to be darkened, and the moon and ftars 
were tkoI to (hed their light : if the rainbow (the aufpicioui har- 



iS^ The Rahihow and Scalping- Knife. No. XLVL 

binger of Supreme Benevolence ) was to lofe its radiancy, the con- 
fequences were too fatal to be fported with : If a weak, infirm 
man, juft tottering over the grave, thus prognofticated fuch direful 
events from the lejeflion of the treaty ; or, like a fecond Noah, 
prepared it as the only alternative for the falvation of his fellow- 
citizens, the folly of our decihon can be no otherv/ife apologized 
for, than the credulity attached to his infallibility. 

But, fellow-citizens, at this age of reafon, do we fuppofe tlie 
luminaries of heaven would have ftrayed from their orbits ? Do 
we apprehend that the planetary fyftem would have been derang- 
ed in its revolution I Do we think that the mllhy 'may would h.7iYQ 
confounded its brilliant pavement into chaos ? Or can w-e fjr.pofe, 
that the rainbow would have turned into a cloud of fmoke, and 
all the variety of its magnificent texture be reduced to a huge 
mafs of opaque atoms ? 

This portrait may be confidercd as a flrong colouring : but if 
V7t revert to the period of the treaty, we fnall find it perfedly 
within the original. As a proof of v/hich, read Mr. Ames's fa- 
mous fpeech ; read the debates in the Old-South Meeting-Houfe ; 
recur to the documents of that day in the Centinel and other fed- 
eral papers ; and though we may now laugh at the idea then fuggejl- 
ed, yet you will find them portrayed in all the publications which 
advocated the adoption of the treaty. Our judgment was not 
then the criterion of decifion, but our fearsy and a ftrange frenzy 
and political fanaticifm pervaded every part of the community. 
If a man talked about the moon's being turned into blood, or the 
rainbow perverted into an omen of terror, we vv^ere led to adopt 
the v/ildnefs and extravagance of his fancy. The treaty ! the 
treaty ! was all the cry, and none were eyen Chrijiians, but fuch 
as admitted its efficacy ; the pulpit, on many occafions, was the 
ecclefiaflical drum, to rally difciples, apoflles, and adherents. In 
iliort, the ratification was fo interefting, that circular-letters were 
forwarded to be read after divine fervice. 

The x.rQZX.j, federal gentletnen, you have obtained ; the republi- 
cans oppofed it J and now, firs, it is your duty to point out its util- 
ity. You faid that compenfation would be made for BritiOi depre- 
dations ; let me candidly afk you, whether you have received as 
much as you expefted ? You faid that our commerce would be more 
refpeded j pleafe to tell us wherein. Have not American veffsh 



No. XLVI. The Rainl/Gio and Sca/ping- Knife, 1 §^ 

been taken and condemned fince, and upon as imreafonable pleas 
as before ? Have not our failors been imprefFed ? Has not every 
impofition been equally pra<?tifed in the Britifii courts of admiralty ? 
' Tell us, federal gentlemen^ what remittances Mr. Gore has made 
you, and what account he gives of his embaiTy ; whether he is 
now in a way to liquidate your claims, and v^^hether you foon ex- 
peifl: him with biUs of exchange^ for the detention of your property ? 
Let us know what advice you have received from Mr. King, and 
tvhether Pitt and Grenville are obliged to Mr. Ames for fecuring 
the lullre of the rainbow, by our adopting the treaty ? 

If fuch favourable events have taken place, we are dellrous to 
know them, and we are willing to participate in your good for- 
tune, by reciprocating our congratulations. But believe vaQ^ feder- 
al gentlemen, when I tell you that the whole is a delufion, and that 
you will find a party has deceived you. Time will convince 
you, that the oppofers of the treaty hanje been, and noiu are your 
bed friends. Mr. JefFerfon's and Mr. Madifon^s political princi- 
ples would have helped you, but a junto led you to fpurn their 
proffered friendlhip. If you do not get compenfation, you mull 
blame the laft adminiftration. 

I did propofe, in this Number, to point out the impofitions on 
our neutrality by Mr. Ja^s treaty, but finding them fo innumera- 
ble, I have thought beft to call on its advocates to declare the 
commercial benefits they fo confidently contemplated, and even 
pledged themfelves would arife. If they are filent on this head, 
v/e are to prefume they have never realized their expedations, that 
the whole was a feries of federal deception, and folely calculat- 
ed to root out, by means of agents and faclors, every advantage of 
commerce, heretofore enjoyed by our citizens. The United 
States have been at a vaft expenfe to fulfil their engagements^ 
while we have reafon to think that the money expended has been 
abforbed in parade and diplomatic ceremonies. 

I would not luggell: that Mr. Gore and others have not done 
all in tlieir power to gain the five millions faid to be captured ; 
but the queftion is, what proportion of this fura has bona fide been 
received. 



1 86 Intrigues of the yunio. No. XL VI. I. 

"W— ." ■ , ' "'m .. . ■ ' I- ' • ■ • -, ' , , T 

No. XLVIL 

INTRIGUES OF THE JUNTO. 

LTHOUGH the fadlon in this country exclaim againfl the 
obfervations on the Britilh treaty (as being unnecejfary Jince its adop' 
konj yet the tendency of its operation ought ever to be held up 
with deteftation and abhorrence. This inftrument has been the 
fatal engine to deftroy every benefit contemplated on the faccefs 
of our revolution. We flattered ourfelves on the declaration of 
our independence, that our commerce would not hereafter be 
controled by Britain ; we then denied their right to lay even a 
three-penny duty on tea, and yet, within a few years after, have 
concluded a treaty fuhje<5]:ing our commercial property to their 
decifions. We are, if poffible, in a worfe fituation 71010 (as it 
relates to their marine mandates) than when we were colonies — ■ 
we then fought for our commercial rights, and, in alliance with 
France, obtained them ; but we have fmce furrendered the prin- 
cipal part of them, through the medium of an injudicious and 
impolitic negociation. 

To fay that we ought now to let the^reaty flumber in filence, 
or that it is an oldjiory, and therefore it is beft to drop it, are fen- 
timents which may be peculiarly pleafmg to the feelings of its 
authors and promoters, but *' the people" of the United States, 
who will have to pay thoufands to cancel Britifh demands, fhould 
keep it in remembrance, while the " tablet of their memory" can 
retain an impreffion, or their minds are fufceptible of indignation. 
It is fo involved in our political and commercial concerns, that 
its mifchievous properties will enfeeble the energy and vigour 
of our government. It palfies our exertions, and like a poifonous 
ingredient, contaminates the vital principles of our political and 
commercial exiftence. 

To fay that we ought to forget it, is to fay, that we ought to 
forget the fall of our firjl parents ; for if it is not original fm^ it is 
aBual tranfgrejfion* 

It is worthy of obfervation, that two of the g re ate ft revolution- 
ary charaders in the United States expreifed their difapprobation 
of the B;itifh treaty, nearly in fimilar language i- — Prefident 



No. XLVIi. Intngues of the Junto, X87 

Wafliino-ton faid It was ^^ pregnant iv'ith events" and Governour 
Adams declared It to be ^^ pregnant iv'ith evils." The Illuftrious 
Wafnington, In the earlieft ftages of the biiiinefs, was oppofed to 
its ratification ; but fuch were the exertions and machinations of 
the friends to Britain, that we have reafon to think this great and 
good m.an was deceived Into the meafure. He was encornpaiTed 
by a hoft of partizans ; though their importunities were preffing 
and urgent, yet he reful'ed for fome time his affent. At length, 
after intercepting a letter to Mr. Fauchet, under all the aggrava- 
tion which their almxoft blaPced hopes excited, they inftilled Into 
the Prefident a fufpieion and refentment which led him to fign It In 
a hafty manner. It Is generally believed, that Prefident Wafh- 
In2"ton would never have confented to Its ratification if he had 
been left foiely to his own judgment ; but the whole power of 
the party was bent to tliis purpofe ; he was furrounded with fo 
formidable a phalanx, that he muft have been more than a man to 
have v/lthftood their combined efforts. They rallied round him 
as their laft defperate hope, and by Intreatles, deception and hy- 
pocrify, It is flrongly fufpeded, that this patriot yielded, though 
reludtantly, to patronize this inftrument. 

The foregoing fuggqjllons may be conjectural, but it has been 
obferved by many who vlfited General Wafhington after his re- 
tirement, that he declined converfmg on all polltcal fubjefts, and 
that he appeared wholly difpofed for folltude and retirement. — 
The laji 'will of the General is a prefumptive evidence of his dlfap- 
probation of the treaty ; for, though the Integrity of his mind 
would not fuifer him to violate it, after It was ratified, yet he feem- 
ed to dread the expofure of his fucceffor to the Intrigues of a par- 
ty, in futuie diplomatic proceedings of a fimllar nature. The 
fentlments he advanced In that inftrument, were In many inftances 
in oppofition to the treaty, as the peace and profperity of the Unit- 
ed States were In his opinion foiely dependant on their own na- 
tional energies, unfhackled by any foreign Interference to control 
their political or commercial tranfaClIons. If he was thus againff; 
any connexion which tended to weaken this ftrength, ie^ a ftrong 
prefumption that he was not In favour of the Britifh treaty. 

" The conclufton of this whole matter is" — a pretended federal par- 
ty have, by various means, Intlced fome to accede to their in- 
irigtiing fchemes, to bring this country into an alliance ofFenfiv^ 



1 88 Intrigues of the Junto. No. XLVII. 

and defenfive with Britain, and thereby aid them in their projedls 
againfl France. Thev have exaggerated every tranfaclion of the 
French, and extenuated every adion of the Britifli ; they have af- 
fiimed the' ^arb of federalifrn, and been foremofl to refent the con- 
duct of the French, and to footh the pafTions as it refpecled the Eng- 
iiifh ; they pretended that the Englifh government was friendly to 
our commerce and independence, and often expreffed a concern 
for our happinefs and profperity. They w^ere ever bufy in our 
town-meetings, foremofl: on all public occafions, and when the 
COCKADE was the emblem of federalifrn, generally difpiayed a 
much larp-er fienal than their brethren of this blach order. But 
can any man fuppofe that fuch men were really friendly to the 
freedom, fovereignty and independence of America ? Can we fup- 
pofe that fuch men v/ere fnicere in their attachment to General 
Wafhington I Is it probable that all their former prejudice againft 
him, as the commander of our army had fubfxded ? that they had 
become real jfmericans, when many of them were receiving pay 
from the Britilli government, as oppofers of our revolution ? Can 
any man think, that the whole body of refugees had been convert- 
ed to the caufe of American independence, and that tliey viewed 
their confifcated eftates as lawful facrifices for its obtainment ? 
Could Prefident Adams, when efcorted through the country, or 
mto Bofl:on, confoie himfelf with a confidence in their integrity, 
when fuch a large number of the retinue were formerly his moft 
implacable perfecutors ? Adams and a body of tories were an 
unnatural affociation ? they miglit cry hofanna, or even ftrev/ the 
way with palm trees, yet when it was in their power they would 
carry him out of the city and crucify him ; they might drink his 
health in bumpers, but, like Judas, they would betray him imder 
the courtly falutation of a kifs. This difplay of friendfhip was 
never fmcere ; but was intended as a lure to facrilice him after 
they had obtained his confidence and efteem. 

This deceptive condudt, on their part, has been amply fhewn in 
the late election for Prefident. Mr. Adams's pretended friends 
were pla^.ning his overthrow, even while they were exalting his po- 
litical reputation. Some who were apparently the moft zealous in 
his favour, were in league with thofe who were infidioufly under- 
mining his popularity. Thefe fame men would entertain Hamil- 
\Qn and eulogize his virtues, when at the fame time they kne-^^ his 



No. XLVIII. The Folly of clerical Alarms. 

defigns to turn out Adiims and introduce Pinckney to the prefi- 
dency. It is fuprifmg how Mr. Adams fhould be deceived in fuch 
charadlers, when he had fuch conrtant evidences of their attach- 
ment to a man who had cakimniated him in epithets the mofl de- 
grading. If the charges of Hamilton were true, the hypocrify of 
this party was the more glaring ; if they were falfe, the infult was 
doubly aggravating to Mr. Adams — and yet amidft this inconfitl- 
ency, Mr. Adams appeared totally unapprehenilve of their deiigns, 
but in the laft ftages of his adminiftration appointed a great pro- 
portion of thefe perfons to important offices. They may thank 
him for his civility to them, but even this kindnefs would not fe- 
cure their afFecfiion to him. 

Thus, fellow-citizens, have our patriots been deceived by a 
fadion, and by others well knowni by the appellation of an " EJf^'^ 
junto,^* who have induftrioufly purfued their plans, by claiming ths 
prerogative of e:^clufive federalifts. Wafhington we have reafon 
to think difcovered their plots when it was too late to defeat them. 
His h'Jl 'will is a legacy which ought to accompany Prefidcnt Jeffer^^ 
fon's inaugural fpeech. In that inftrument he fpeaks like himfelf, 
uncontroled by any intriguing intruders. It is his death-bed ad? 
MONITION, when no furrounding m.inions and hypocrites difturbed 
his mind. It is an appeal to God, and his confcience, and not in- 
tended to be made public, till he was in the fruition of heavenly 
happinefs. 

It is a melancholy reflection that the arts of this faction have 
fo far involved our country in difficulties. They have tarniflied 
the fame of many refpeclable patriots. But we truft in that 
Being who often relieved us when in trouble, and we confole our= 
felves that he has raifed a JefFerfon, who like Jofliua will condu<5l 
us to the promifed land. 



No. XLVIII. 

THE FOLLY OF CLERICAL ALARMS; OR THE PLOTti 

DISCOVP^RED ! ! 

X HE various means ufed to efFe<5l fuch purpofes, as would af- 
fift the faction in their defiens to- involve tins country in a «njar %vif^ 



Kjo The Folly of clerical Alarms ; No. XLVIII. 

France^ are too Bumeroiis to be particularly recited at this period. 
Their aim Was not confined merely to this objed, but every mea- 
fure was taken to raife a jealoufy againft certain republican 
charaders wlio oppofed their conduift. For this purpofe the 
public mind was conftantly alarmed upon the idea of an invafiou 
from Fiance. Confpiracies were daily announced ; tailor-plots, 
tub-plots, and even lady-plots, ioUowed in rapid fucceiTion. Mr. 
Harper went fo far as to pledge himfelf on the difcovery of fome 
terrific plan, which had nearly arrived to a completion ; he faid 
in Congrefs, that he had the " clues,'* and prom.ifed foon to 
dilclofe ail the myileries of a treafonable combination. The . 
party went on from one fpecies of alarm to another, till at length 
the cry of danger became fo familiar, that the people confidered 
it as the mere chimera of a diilempered brain. Findinp* thefe 
projeds would not anfwer their purpofes, recourfe was at length 
had to the all-powerful weapon of religion. This facred caufe was 
brought into operation ; the people were told, that all honour, 
honefty and morality were to be annihilated ; that deifm, atheifm 
and impiety of every kind Vv'ere to predominate ; and to favour 
the deception, a few clergymen conjured up the exploded publi- 
cations of Robifon and Barruel, to forward their fyftem of fanat- 
icifm. The illuminatl was the ivatch-ivord of the party ; but the 
principal light arifmg from the fubject, ferved only to make a 
certain Reverend Doclor appear more confplcuouily ridiculous. 
Sermons were publifhed on this occafion, and marginal notes 
introduced, Vv^ith the Korrid ftoi:y of a defperate com.bination in 
Europe and America to overturn ail that is called godly. 

The illuminatl-Iiiiluenza laded about eighteen months, and 
at length expired with a few ilruggles, under the injudicious 
management of this clerical operator. — Thus have this party run 
through the feveral parts of their political drama, and now arg 
brought to their ne plus ultra, which is, that the Prefident is an 
ivjidel, and does not heiicve in the Chriftian religion. 

This is the only ground on which the party now ftand, and 
v/hlle they think the people believe them, they take the greater 
liberty in their calumny and dctA'a(5lIon ; they alternately call him 
deifl, infidel, and atheiil ; they reprefent him as having a defign 
lipon the religious eflablifhments of our country, and fomiC are fo 
feoHih as tp believe, that all the meeting-houfes will foon be razed, 



Nc^. XLVIII. er the Plots difcoversJ, 191 

the miniflers dlfcarded, and carnage and plunder become the 
*' order of the day." 

At this enlightened age, It is almoft an affront upon the good 
fenfe of the citizens of the United States, to reply to the many 
abfurdities written againft the Prefident on this fubjedl. If Mr. 
Jeiferfon is deftitute of thofe virtues which conftitute a Chriilian, 
or a citizen, where is the man who is pcireiTed of them ? If hon- 
efty, integrity, forbearance, humanity, benevolence and patriotlfm 
are the prominent features which defignate a Chriftian, certainly 
no man within the United States Hands more ccnfpicuoufly em- 
inent. So far from having no religion, he is a friend to all ; and 
inftead of contradling its influence, he is defirous of giving every 
citizen a right to worftiip God in his own way ; he is not a per- 
fecutor of any fe(9: ; he is not a defamer of any particular mode 
of worfhip ; he Is not a fiinatic, to fcourge thofe who do not believe 
in his tenets ; he leaves every confcience to its own bias, and 
inftead of controling men as the arbiter of revelation, he is 
anxious to place the adoration of the Supreme Being and his 
attributes, on that bafis of the human mind, on which alone it 
can or ought to be erefled. 

If this is the charafter of the Prefident, why Is he attacked 
with fuch feverity and indecency ? Why is he held up as the 
fuhverter of religion when he gives fuch ample fcope to every 
principle conne<5ted with its eftablilliment ? If he injures no man 
in his religion, why fliould others injure him in his reputation ? if 
he is an immoral man, point out his immoralities ; if he is defti- 
tute of the Chriftian virtues, let thera be fpecified in fuch a manner 
as the people may judge of his criminality ; if he has deftroyed 
any houfes of worlhip, or difturbed any pious aftembly, let the 
circumftances be related ; if he is profane, let the inftances 
appear. This mode of procedure would be candid ; but to 
defame the chief magiftrate under the vague appellations of deift, 
atheift, and infidel, is unbecoming the character either of a Chrift- 
ian, gentleman, or citizen. 

If fome of the clergy are oppofed to him, it would b? more 
honourable to ftate their charges. If he has violated the laws 
of fociety, why do they not come forward in an explicit manner, 
and give the public a narrative of the whole tranfadion ? This 
line of condutS would appear more manly than to attempt to 



igi The Folly of cleric aV Alarms / No. XLVIII, 

weaken the confidence of the citizens in his adminiftration by 
invidious furmifes. 

The condu<5t of Mr^ Jefferfon through life has been peculiarly 
amiable : His writings are fraught with benevolence, and folely 
intended to ameliorate the condition of mankind, and to lead them 
to an improvement of all thofe faculties with which heaven has 
bleiTed the human fpecies. His charafiier, in Europe, ftands in 
the moft elevated pofition, and it is degrading to our country to^ 
iind men, who affume the reputation of " the learned," demean 
themfelves by fuch grofs refieclions as are daily publiflied in the 
Palladium, Centinel, and other papers. 

If the clergy are alarmed at the decay of religion, can it have 
any falutary effetfl to reprefent Mr. Jefferfon as the oppofer of the 
chriftian fyftem ? Will it perfuade people to embrace the gofpel, 
by telling them that Mr. Jefferfon rejeds it r It rather appears to 
me, that it has a contrary tendency — no man will believe merely 
becaufe Mr. Jefferfon d'lfheUeves. His character as ^fcholar, philofo- 
pher, and reafoner, gives him a reputation too high to be made the 
negative of a principle, either of religion or any other fubje<5t. If 
the people are told, that the Preiident does not believe the Chrif- 
tian religion, it may lead many to conclude, that he knoivs more 
than they, and that he has good reafons for his difbelief. This kind 
of argument may be fatisfadlcry to fome, and thus, inftead of help- 
ing the caufe of religion, it may have a very unfalutary effe<5l:. The 
clergy in this particular are doing an injury to the caufe they are 
attempting to fupport, and it is the height of folly to expe<5l: to gain 
profelytes by propagating with fo much avidity the infidelity of 
Mr. Jefferfon. 

As Pre fi dent of the United States, he is not called en to make 
a declaration of his religious creed ; if he was, I am perfuaded the 
mod; orthodox would not condemn It. General Wafhington v/as 
peculiarly careful in this particular ; among the variety of his 
publications we find but little to lead us to a conclufion of his re- 
ligious tenets ; and as the conftltutlon does not even fuggeft any 
TEST of this kind, it is proper that the Prefident fhould not bring 
himfelf forward in any point of view on this ground. He is not 
called on to admlnifter any religious ordinances, and while he 
hitermeddles with no particular fe<5t, and promotes the rights of 



No. XL VIII. or the Plots difcovered, l^^ 

f 
all, neither the clergy nor other Individuals have a right to cenfure 
him for his own fentlments. 

Stippofe the Prefident fhould make a declaration of his firmi 
perfuafion of the truth of the gofpel, ftlll a difficulty would remain 
among his oppofers as to the particular tenets he maintained ; fome 
would fay, that he was a Roman Catholic, others that he was an 
Armenian ; fome a Calvlnlft — in fhort, Socinlans, Quakers, Bap- 
tifts, Unlverfalilts, Swedenbourgians, and Sandemanlans, would be 
clamorous to know to what doBrlne he adhered. His declaration, 
therefore, as to his belief in the Scriptures, would not remedy the 
evil, for points of faith are as often contended for, as the avowal of 
a general principle. If religion Is to be brought forward in this 
controverfy, the Prefident is perfectly right in keeping his creed to 
himfelf. 

But why is this apprehenfion excited, that Mr. Jefferfon Is op- 
pofed to the Chrlftlan fyftem ? No part of his adminlftration has 
had the moft diftant tendency to Injure It ; fmee his ele<5lIon " all 
things remain as they were" as It relates to the church ; we go to 
meeting with as much order as ufual, and return home without 
the leail moleftatlon ; our fabbaths are equally hallowed ; thejitjl 
znd fecond bells ring with as much folemnity and regularity as for- 
merly ; we baptize our children with as much reverence as ever ; 
the clergy are as much refpecled, as well paid, dine out as 
frequently, and In moft inftances frolic as often as under the late ad- 
minlftration ; ordinations are announced In our papers with their 
ufual reverence, and there Is as much good cheer on fuch occafions as 
in days of old. Where then is the mifchief ? Where the danger, 
when nothing has taken place to difcompofe the moft devout in 
their religious exercifes ? If v^^e are difpofed to religious duties, Mr. 
Jefferfon will not difturb us ; only let the clergy mind their buft- 
iiefs, and I doubt not he will mind his. If fome of then* do not 
choofe to pray /or him, it would be decent not to bray at him. The 
blefflngs of Providence are not partial, and though the enemies of 
the Prefident may not think proper to remember him at the Throne 
of Grace, yet we truft he Is not dependant on their clemency, 
(though clothed in facerdotals) but on the benevolence of the 
Supreme Being. To him we commit him, and it does not require 
A % 



1^4- ^^^ Thanhghlng', No. XL IX. 

the benedlcllon of" his adverfaries to fecure him a continuance in 
His holy keeping. 

While {peaking of the clergy, I do not mean to include the 
tuhoh ordery as being thus oppofed to the Prefident ; a large propor^ 
t'lon or them, I am perfuaded, reprobate the indecent publications 
which have appeared againft him. As an order in fociety I fhall 
ever refpect them ; but there are a few who have acted a part, 
which upon ferious reflection they cannot juflify to God, nor their 
own confciences. If fuch men would be 'more c'lrcumfpeci In their 
ocvn condufi, and attend more to the duties of their own profeffion, 
the caufe of religion would be more efFe(5lually fupported, than by 
their calumny againft the Prefident. When he is as inattentive to 
his duty as Pre/tdeni, as they are as clergymen^ it will be time for the 
people to find fault.. Mr. JefFerfon never gave fuch a ftrong evi- 
dence of his difbelief in fcripture as they have of the negligence of 
their parifi ; and if they are ferious to propagate the gofpel, it is in- 
cumbent on them to aft more confiftent with its principles. The 
Geography of this world is not the *' one thing needful," neither are 
the " graces''* of Chejlerjitld, an appropriate fludy for a clergyman ; 
lefs attenLion, therefore, to fublunary concerns, and more to heav- 
enly, are highly becoming a chriftian teacher. While fuch men 
are charging the Prefident with infidelity, they fhould examine 
their own condufi, and poffibly, upon refleflion, they would find 
the remainder of their lives cculd not be better fpent, than in cor- 
recling their former imprudencies. 



No. XLIX^ 

^ ON THANKSGIVING. 

**/» Is the Lord'j doing.^^ 

rT-1 

X HE benevolence of Providence, in its various difpenfations 
towards this country, is a fubje<5l which ought ever to excite the 
ferious contemplation of the citizens of the United States. From 
the firft fettlement of America, the kind hand of heaven has dire<ft- 
ed us in the way in which we fhould go. Next to the chofen nation^ 
America flands the peculiar care of the Supreme Being, and if 



No. XL IX. On Thanhglving. 195 

miracles have not been wrought In her favour, yet the interpofitlon 
of the Almighty has been fo ofcen difplayed, that we muft be loft 
to every rational refledion not to acknowledge his benignity and 
fuperintendance. 

On this day, citizens of MaiTachufctts, we ate requefted to ac- 
knowledge with thanhjulncfsf the kindnefs and protection of him, 
who governs the v/orld^ and who fo accurately adjulls its various 
operations, as to produce " feed-time and harveft, fummer and 
winter." By His goodnefs, v/e are furnifhed with all thofe com- 
foits which render exiPtence happy, and which confole us under 
every trouble and misfortune, incident to human life. This yeary 
in a particular manner, may we exultingly fiiy, " that the fig-tree 
has blolTomed, and that fruit has been in our vines ; that the 
labour of the olive has not failed, and that the fields have yielded 
their meat ; that our flocks have not been cut off from the fold, 
and that there has been an abundance of herd in the ftalls.'* 
While contemplating thefe blefUngs, may we all thankfully re- 
fpcnfe, — we will " rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of our 
falvation." 

While we adore the Supreme Being for granting us thofe 
fpecial bounties of his benevolence, may we be led to contemplate 
his mercies, as they refpect our national happinefs. That this coun- 
try has been expofed to the diftrefling confequences of war, we 
have proofs of the moll authentic nature. Mr. Tracy, in Congrefs, 
urged " a nvar of extermination ;" the queftion of war was folemnly 
debated in that auguft aiTembly ; the young men were called on 
to place themfeives in an hoftile attitude, and artificial means 
were ufed to make their " hlood bo'il,''^ to invigorate their prowefs. 
The tory party were adive throughout the Union, to kindle the 
torch of Mars, and every incentive which could roufe the paflions, 
was applied, with the mofl artful addrefs, to bring America into 
an open rupture with the French nation. An Orator in Bofton 
vaunted in his heroifm, and under the fmoke of public infatuation, 
and Inflated with his own vanity, declared, In his oration, that 
*^ peace mujl be obta'med at the point of the bayonet P* This was the 
" fpirit of the times" at the day of federal fanaticifm. If a pru- 
dent man paufed at the adoption of fucji violent meafures, he was 
cried down as a jacobin. The tories completely afTumed the 
whig ground ; they rejoiced at the profpecl of involving the Unit- 



y 



iC)6 On Thanksgiving, No. XLIX. 

ed States in a war with France, and conneding them in an alliance 
with England. 

But, it is the Lord's doingy that we were not plunged into that 
dreadful vortex, which fuch meafures would have quickly hurried • 
us. Suppofe Mr. Tracy's " war of extermination" had been 
adopted, or the heroic laivycr^s proportion, for " peace at the point 
of the bayonet" had been acceded to, what would have been our 
prefent fituation ? Inftead of rejoicing, we fhould have to mourn ; 
inflead of a thankfgivhig-dayy we fhould have been obliged, (from 
the prefent flate of Europe) to fet apart this day for ** fading, 
humiliation, and prayer." 

" A war of extermination /" gracious heaven ! Five millions 
of Americans at war with thirty millions of Frenchmen ! ! Not 
only fo, but probably with all the European powers in alliance 
with that nation. — " A peace at the point of the bayonet /" dreadful 
alternative ! that the flaughter on fuch a preliminary fliouid be 
the Jine qua non of our public quietude. How infatuated muft 
fuch men have been, to place America in fo barbarous a pofition-— 
five millions of people to demand the blood of thirty millions ! 
How defperate mufl have been our condition, that the whole 
nation of France muft atone for our refentment. 

In this conteft, what muft have been the fate of the United 
States ? After France had made peace with England, we alone 
muft have met them, confoMated in all their energies ? If Britain 
was alarmed at their invafion, what muft have been our apprehen- 
iions ? If the " wooden w^alls of England" were not a fecurity, 
what could we expecl from the few bulwarks we could oppofe to 
their incurfions ? Admit that the people of the United States 
would have defended themfelves on their fhores, yet the horrid 
carnage that muft have enfued chills the blood of the humane cit- 
izen to contemplate. If we are equal to every alfault from 
Abroad, yet the folly of thofe v/ho were delircus to plunge us into 
*' a war of extermination," or to make " peace at the point of the 
bayonet," muft be evident to every refleding mind. 

Under the fanatic impulfe of thefe times, none but the Supreme 
Being could prevent the dreadful calamity. It was " the Lord's 
doing,'' that we were thus faved from the horrid cataftrcphe 
of a war with France ; " if the Lord had not been on our fide,'' we 
OTay now fay, we fhould have been furrounded with dangers 



No. XLIX. On Thanksgi'ii'ng, l^y 

and diftrefTes from which we could not have been extricated with- 
out the greateft difficulty. HE has Appeared for our relief ; HE 
has fruftrated the defigns of our enemies, and rendered their 
machinations of no effect. Mr. Tracj was a reprefentative from 
Connecticut, but we hope the religious fentlmetits of his conftituents 
will not juftify him in his favage ferocity. Would nothing fliort 
of the extermination of thirty millions of the human fpecies fatisfy 
his fanguinary difpofition ? Muft the blood of a whole nation be 
filed to appeafe his vindidive indignation ? If France had dif- 
played the fame temper, and called for the extermination of enjery 
American, what mull have been the confequences of fo terrible a 
conflict ? Or if the po'werfiil Bonaparte had affumed the didato- 
rial language of the Bofton Orator, that " peace with America 
muft be made at the point of the fword," hov/ afilicling would 
have been the controverfy to decide the principles of an amicable 
negociation ? Such ignorance exhibited in Congrefs, and fuch 
folly in a Bofton town-meeting, by men whofe malignity of heart 
was die only criterion of their judgment, are expreffive of the rage 
of party, and evince the dreadful precipice, on the brink of v/hich, 
the fate of America v/as fufpended. The violence of the political 
agitation, urged on by the frenzy of a fa(51:ion, placed our country 
in the m.oft critical attitude. The crifis w^as important, and 
nothing fliort of the interpofition of Providence flopped us in our 
career to pafs the Rubicon, commence the horrid carnage of ex- 
terminating war, and make a " peace at tPie point of the 
fword." 

But, thank heaven, " the fnare is broken and we have efcap- 
ed'* ; the annual tribute of praife is now due to that Being, by 
whofe goodnefs we have been preferved. With thankful hearts, 
we offer Him our unfeigned love and adoration, for the bleflings 
v/e have experienced the paft year ; and though the deftroying 
angel has fwept away m.any of our fellow-citizens in other States, 
yet we have ftili the greateft reafon to exalt, and magnify His 
name. 

This anniverfary pleads ftrongly in favour of Peace, and 
every focial circle is a manifefto of the bleflings arifmg from it. 
See the venerable parent furrounded with his numerous family, 
T/hile joy, health aad plenty crown the feftive board ; the fprightly 



iqS Oh Thanksgiving, No. XLIX. 

amufements, the friendly converfatlon, the pleafmg harmony and 
reciprocal congratulation, — ajl, all proclaim, that the melodious 
accents of peace are more defirable than the hoarfe clarion of 
war. Let the mind for a moment contemplate the reverfe of 
this enchanting fcene — inftead of the focial circle, let us Introduce 
the mourning widow and fatherlefs children, deploring the lofs 
of -a hufhand and parent, fallen at " the point of the Jnuord^^ — in- 
ftead of the pleafmg endearments of domeftic conviviality, let 
the horrid tale of conflagration, flaughter and death (the dread- 
ful attendants of a " ivar of extermination^^ ) become the topic of 
converflition — inftead of the infant, prattling on the knee of a fond 
parent, let us portray the lifping babe mingling its tears with the 
difconfolate mother. Thefe are but the faint outlines of the dif- 
treffing picture. 

Here fancy intrudes her fuggeftions. During the fangulnary 
period of war, we might obferve the pampered contractor, whofe 
per centum ftands in competition with the happinefs of his country 
— the unprincipled fpeculator, who is living on the injuries of an 
unfortunate foldier ; a clan of favoured fycophants, who to obtain 
employment, would facrifice every principle of honour and honef- 
ty ; a group of myrmidons, who under pretence of fupporting 
government, would offer themfelves as tools to enflave their fellow- 
citizens ; a junto of proud officiates, who, rioting on the emolu- 
ments of their appointments, would, if poffible, overthrow the con- 
ftitution, if there lliould be virtue enough in the Prefident to dif- 
place them. Such circles might experience the benign efficacy of 
war ; and while the indullrious body of the people were groaning 
under the weight of taxes, the feflive board of fuch gluttons might 
refound with fongs of mirth, in adoration of their patron. 

As men and citizens, our devotion on this day naturally em- 
brace the fuperintendance of Providence. Under this im.prefEon, 
it is our duty to approach the altar with every exprefllon of grati- 
tude ; no party fpirit ought to difturb that chriftian tranquillity, 
which fhould diftinguifh its profeiTors. The pulpit, on fuch occa^ 
fions, fhould not become as terrible as Mount Sinai, but be ufed as 
the miedium through which the difcordant paffions fhould be al- 
layed ; charity towards each other, on religious points, fhould be 
exercifed ; no ccnfure fhould be cafl on a filler flate for their reli» 



No. L. Peace and Funds ^ w. Cnt'inel, Iqq 



to 



ious fcruples ; abufive epithets fhould be avoided ; union inculcat- 
ed ; the Conftituted Authorities refpected ; and thus, harmonizinp- 
in our thankfgiving and devotion, we may anticipate ^^ peace on 
earth, and good will towards men." 



No. Le 

PEACE AND FUNDS, verfus CENTINEL* 

** The national debt of Great-Britain is enormous on paper ; and has leeH 
a fruitful fource of materials for the jacobin Maglnnefles to deceive the 
public with. But nationally confidered that debt Is merely nominal. — 
It is due from the nation to individuals ; — 'and individuals form the na- 
tion. If the tntire debt luere paid o^ at this moment it ^wotdd not add 
a JhlUlng to the nvealth of the nation ; nor afenfation to the flock of Its 
general happinefs. On the other hand^ nvere it to he nviped off" entirely 
*with a fponge, it -ivould not caife fifty Individuals in the 'whole kingdom 
is retrench one meal a day in their fidfiflence.'* Centinel. 

** The intelligence of peace, received here a fortnight fince, has been quef 
tloned at the Southward, It is neverthelefs TOO TR UE.^^ ib* 

JLxLTHOUGH the moft violent acrimony and malevolence are 
difplayed in the tory gazettes againft the Prefident, yet it muft af- 
ford him the higheft confolation, that fuch publications do not 
originate in Bofton, but are taken principally from a paper which 
is confidered as the immediate fuccefFoi of Peter Porcupine.— 
That there is a fadion lurking in this metropolis, oppofed to every 
republican principle of the conftitution, is too apparent to be con- 
troverted ; but even this traiterous combination are obliged to 
keep themfelves concealed, and inftead of openly avowing their 
defigns, are driven to the " imperious necejfity^* of ufmg foreign means 
to effecl tlieir purpofes. It muft be admitted as an incontroverti- 
ble truth, that the obfervations in thefe gazettes are the expiring 
ftruggles of a fadion, and the republication of them in our papers, 
are the paltry ebulitions of a few unprincipled Editors, who, in the 



20Q Peace and Funds, vs» CcntlmL No. L. 

reign of terror^ wantonly pledged their credit on the validity o£ 
tlieir political predictions. Finding, however, tliat the Corfican hero 
has brought their ^Hejl of klngs^^ to fue for peace — that the con- 
tinent of France, (lands on a commanding eminence over the tjland 
of Britain — tiiat Citizen Otto is on a level with Lord Hawkefbury ; 
that the Tower guns as readily difcharge their fonorous exultations 
on the iffiie of the war, as when they refounded to the tune of 
" Rule Britannia, rule the waves" — that tiiey as readily announce 
the arrival of a French miffionary, to fettle the definitive articles 
of peace, as they formerly did to denounce the jacobins of that 
victorious nation ; and, that the Englifli " populace" as readily 
took out the horfcs and drew the carriage of a Frenchman, as ever 
they did that of one of the royal fcm'dy. When they find that fuch 
events have taken place, the Anglo-federalifts of the United States 
have recourfe to fuch fugitive obfervations as a defeated enemy in 
their retreat are pleafed to furnilli them. 

Thefe Britifh troops, refiding in America, are an-anged in vaii- 
ous dire(5lIons— -one part is affigncd to abufe the Prefident, anoth- 
er to calumniate Mr. Gallatin ; a few are foolifn enough lo fatter 
Mr. Gallatin, as if his integrity and knovv'ledge could be biafled by 
fuch fycophancy ; another detachment is rallied for the exprefs 
purpofe of cenfuring every removal from office ; fome to create a 
jealoufy betvv^een the northern and fouthem ftates, while others 
take a more extenfive ground by pretending to exult at the advan- 
tages gained by the Britifh in the treaty of peace. But not calcu- 
lating an uniformity in fentiment on thJs fubjecl, they unfortu- 
nately countera<5l each other in their ftatements — while fome repics 
at the event, others lament the tidings as " too true,''* RufTell takes 
the latter ground, and yet in the fame Centinel proclaims the 
" glorious news," that Britain has gained every benefit by the 
ifuie of the war ; that her flocks are in high eftimation ; that the 
Englifli " omnium" is more valuable than the French gatherum ; 
that the Britifli have " not loft a foot of ground ;" and yet, 
ftrange to relate, even in the midft of his boaftings on the advan- 
tages of peace, the Editor clofes his narrative with a mournful 
figh, Alas, it is " too true" ! 

If the Englifli have obtained thefe great advantages by the 
peace, why ftiould their friends exprefs an unsafinefs at the clofc 



No. L. Peace and Funds y vs, CentlneL 201 

of this European controverfy ? Why fhould they lament the if- 

fue of a war, provided the preliminary articles are altogether in 

their favour ? If Pitt is fatisfied, if Fox fays it is a good treaty. 

If the people of England have become a body of iUum'matt, by il- 

luminathig every capital city in the kingdom, why fhould the Ceu' 

tinel become the only mourner ? Rachel, weeping for her firft- 

born, could not exprefs herfelf with more difconfolate dejeftion 

than this poor Editor : in the midft of the univerfal hilarity, we 

hear his difcordant vociferation, Alas, it is " too true" ! Whilft 

thus " refufmg to be comforted," it was expedled fome emblem 

of grief v/ould have exprelTed his condolence ; whether a Hack 

cockade, or a difplay of black crape on the horns of the roajled ox 

in Liberty-Square, would have been exhibited by h-m and his dif- 

treffed ailbciates, were the doubtful fufpenfe of thofe who have 

long laughed at his ignorance and folly. 

How mud the fadion in America have been mortified, had 
they feeii Citizen Lauriften drawn in his coach by the Englijh mobility 
through the ftreet of St. Jan^es ! Alas, tliis alfo is " too true." 
How would they have ftared to obferve the populace in Briftol 
Welcome the London mail, which brought the pleafmg intelligence 
of peace, and, after taking out the horfes, drag it amidft the ac- 
clamations of thoufands to the Bufh tavern ! Alas, this is alfo 
*• too true," How would they have been terrified to behold the 
French convalefcents leap from their hammocks, and dance upon 
the main deck of their prifon fhips ! But above all, how great muft 
have been their mortification to find, that the " immortal" Peter 
Porcupine had his ojfice demolijhed, by the London populace, for his 
refufalto illuminate / Alas, thefe are all *' too true." 

Confiftency is a principal trait in a political chara6ler. The 
Centinel, even while deploring that war had ceafed, is gafconad- 
ing, that the Englifh 5 per cents, ftand at 95 dollars to a hundred ; 
that they have " not loft a foot of ground ;" that " the fliips 
taken at Toulon are not returned," &c. But the chagrin arifes 
amidft tliefe pretended congratulations on Britilli advantages, 
from the 15th article of the treaty, v/hich evidently ihews that the 
terms v/ere dilated in Paris, viz. *' The prefent preliminary articles 
JhaU\)^ exchanged at London in the Ipacv of 15 days atfartheft"^- 
Bb 



202 Peace and FanJs) vs. CeiitineL No. I*. 

—that ** plenipotentiaries Jloall be appointed to proceed to an ar- 
rangement of the definitive treaty, in concert with the allies of tlie 
contrading parties." Pray, inform us who are the allies on the 
part of the Britifh, to give their weight in the Convention at 
Amiens ? Alas, it is " too true," they will have but little help 
from this quarter. This treaty carries further marks of French 
fupremacy — the " Firfi: Conful of the Republic," ftands before 
** His Majesty, the King of the United Kingdoms of Great- 
Britain and Ireland." This certainly looks a little " /^«fl//y," that 
Citizen Bonaparte Ihould take rank of His Majejly George the Illd. 
AVho could dictate this Jacobinical arrangement in the articles ? Is 
IS probable, if the treaty was in the lead degree under the control 
of the Englilh minlftry, that they would have fuffered the name 
of a " Corfican ufurper," to be mentioned before that of their 
rightful fovereign ? This is contradicted in the Centinel, but as 
both the French and Englifh papers publifhed the treaty in this 
form, we have reafon to believe it is agreeable to the original. 
The farce, however, does not end here, for it is " done in London, 
on the 9th*Vendemaire, and loth year of the French Republic ;" 
thus obliging the Englifh to acknowledge, within the Britifli 
capital, the freedom, fovereignty and independence of the French 
nation. 

It looks then as if the glory of the Britilh nation was " burn- 
ing to the water's edge." How the " rainboiv^' will appear after 
this event, is apocryphal ; It may brighten, or It may lofe its 
luftre ; and as this luminary has heretofore been fummoned to 
take an adive part in our political controverfy, It Is hoped that 
the almanach-mahrs in the feveral States will defcribe with the 
utmoft accuracy In their next year's publications Its variation as 
to the extent of its arch^ or the brilliancy of Its rays. 

For my own part, I read the Centinel, Palladium, and Price 
Current, merely to obferve the chagrin of the Effex junto. Even 
their exultations are evidences of their mortification. If in one 
paragraph they ft ate the advantages of the Englifli by the treaty 
of peace, I am fure to find that the next will declare the falfity 
of their reafonlng. They ftraln every nerve to vindicate them- 
felves ; they amufe us with a pretty ftory about " omniums ;" 
tliey defcribe the Britifh funds as rifmg to an Immenfe value ; 
ibut before their readers are well prepared to join the chorus, they 



No. L. - Peace and FnnJsy vs. Centineh 20t 

blaft their own information b)'- anticipating fome terrible forebod- 
ings, which intirely deftroy the luxury of their repaft. " They 
build up with one hand, and knock down with the other." 

In the prefent flate of politics, I am almoft perfuaded to conde- 
fcend to afk Major Ruffell (this Necker of finance) to explain his 
farrago of the Britifh debt, when he fays, " if it were to be wiped 
off intirely with '<ifpoiige, it would not caufe fifty individuals in the 
whole kingdom to retrench one meal a day iji their fubfiilence." 
If this hypothefis is right, the Am.erican debt could be as eafily 
wiped off as the Britifh ; the national debt of both nations Hands 
on the fame bafis ; the doctrine advanced in the Centinel applies 
equally to both countries. What then will the flock-holderB in 
the United States fay to this Centhiel mode of fiiianceering ? How 
would they relilh \M'\s /ponging manner of fettling their claims ? — . 
If we fhould have publifhed a fimilar paragraph in the Chronicle.^ 
and inftead of Britain inferted America^ tlie 6 and 8 per cent, 
creditors would have reafou to reprobate the principle ; if fuch 
d'iforganl%ing fentiments had been advanced by the republicans, the 
anathemas of every flock-holder would have followed them with 
the moft clamorous vociferation. The Centinel, by the ignorance 
of its projectors, has funk too lew in public eftimation to require 
QiferiQiis refle6tion on its numerous absurdities. If we fhould hold 
them flriftly to their own declarations, the funds of the United 
States would be converted to very different purpofes than paying 
their creditors. 

As a friend to the honour and national characfler of Amerlcaj, 
I hope never to fee fuch principles operate in this country, as to 
place the creditors under the tyranny of a " fponge" — public 

CREDIT IS THE ENERGY OF GOVERNMENT ; republicans fhould 

ever attend to their finances in fuch a manner, as to give confidence 
to its citizens in their loan of money. Whatever contra(5ls are 
made on this bafis ought to be tenacioufly fulfilled ; the credit 

OF A NATION IS AS SACRED AS THAT OF AN INDIVIDUAL ; fo 

far from " fponging," I am for pundlual and honourable pay-? 
ment ; fo far from fuggefting that no injury would arife from 
annihilating the debt, I believe the greatefl injury would arife if 
fuch a meafure was adopted. 



204 I^eact and Funds, vs. CenthieL JJo. L, 

The obfervatlons made in the Centinel, on the public debt of 
England, are the very effence oi jacohinifm. The Editor, from his • 
arrogance, feems to fport with every thing that is held valuable 
in fociety ; he fpeaks of peace as a ciirfe, of the public debt as a 
chimera, and yet, under a political infatuation, he is fupported 
(by the very men whom he wifhes to ruin) as the friend to public 
credit and the advocate of harmouy and focial order ; while, on 
the other hand, the Editors of the Chronicle have been reprefented 
as .the deftroyers of property and the enemies to every moral 
virtue. 

The Chronicle has now come to an iiTue with the Centlnel on 
this ground, and means to maintain an oppofite do6lrin^. If the 
debt of England is a mere ignis fatuus^ the principle is equally 
operative in the United States. The republicans will not admit 
public credit to be expofed to fuch a vague decifion, but are 
willing in a juft manner, (by the burden falling equally on every 
clafs of citizens) to pay their creditors, agreeably to their pledged 
contra(5ls, any thing in the Centlnel to the contrary notwithftanding. 

Suppofe Mr. JefFerfon or Mr. Gallatin had advanced a fimilar 
dodlrine on the debt of the United States, as is advanced in the 
Centinel on the Britifli debt — fuppofe they had faid, that the debt 
was due from one individual to another, and, therefore, if a. 
** fponge" was applied to the fettlement, not more than fifty 
individuals would retrench one meal a day in their fubfiftence I 
If this is true of England, it is equally applicable to America 5 
and, provided it was adopted, how many fat, plump Jlock-hoUers 
would become as thin and as lank as a pack of hounds, after 
courfmg a whole day without any game to fatisfy their hunger. 
A.'W2.Y, cLW^Y with {uchjacoblnkal principles ; the Centlnel \& aiminrr 
to throw " public credit in the wind" to help its diforganizing ad- 
herents — but the ChrcnlcL'y ever fleady to its objecft, will purfue 
fuch renegadoes to their fecret holds, and expofe them to pubH<^ 
execration. 



N.c. 3LI. Rii'ta and War, 205 



No. LI. 



RAIN AND WAR 1 ! ! 



f* We ha'ue as much reafon to pray for the continuance of the War, 
in Europe, as the HuJbatiJman for rain in a time of di'oughtJ'^ 

Centlnel. 

jl\LTHOUGH perfonallties ought ever to be avoided, yet when 
an individual has the eflrontery to violate every principle of hu- 
manity ; difgraces his country, by holding it up as the refidence 
of barbarians ; agonizes the tender feelings of charity and philan- 
thropy ; and libels every dodrine of that religion, which breathes 
peace and good will towards men — the affront is fo enormous, 
that the man v»4io thus fports with every thing confidered facred in 
civilized foclety, fhould be arraigned before the public as a culprit^ 
whcfe crimes deferve the mod pointed reprehenfion. 

Under this impreffion, I am conftrained to inquire from 
whence does this fangulnary fentiment proceed ? " To pray for 
War as earnejlly as ive nvould pray for Rain /" Defolation, bar- 
barifm, and conflagration, mud iland perfonified in the author of 
fuch an infamous addrefs to that Deity, whofe attributes are im- 
mutably fixed on the bafls of benevolence. 

Where is the wTetch w^ho dares utter fuch a profane fenti- 
ment ? Has Cain returned to the earth, or has Judas efcaped 
from the confines of Lucifer ? Has ATE " let flip the dogs of 
war," and commiflioned an emiffary to enrage the voracious pack 
to gluttonize on human carnage ? Has Pandaemonium difgorged 
its demons, and difi:urbed the peaceful abodes of mankind with its 
infuriated refidents ? Have the favages of the wildernefs become, 
more vindi<flive in barbarifm ? or have the Algerines been inflated 
with a tenfold degree cf fatannic malignity : — No : — Even Cain,, 
Judas, Ate, Belzebub, the favages, Algerines, and Satan himfelf, 
muft reprobate with abhorrence the deteftable idea ! and colledled 
xa their ire, poiat the finger cf fconi at the mifcreant who thus 



2o6 Rain and War, No. LI. 

prefumes to violate every principle which is held facred even in 
tlie territories of tlic moft profligate. Who is the man who thus 
difgraces humanity ; who puts to blufh the apoftates in the infer- 
nal regions ;. and who raifes the indignity of the moft uncivilized 
of mankind ? The countenance of Cain muft brighten at the re- 
flection, that one man \yi\\ hereafter ftand more confplcuous for his 
depravity in the regions to which he is configned. 

'* Pray for ivar as earnejlly as ive tvould pray for rain /'* Gra- 
cious Heaven, let not thy wrath defcend on America for this hor- 
xld imprecation. It is the fuppllcatlon of a wretch, who has loft 
all fenfe of thy benevolence. It Is the intreaty of a " biped," who 
regards neither the fandlty of the Supreme Being, nor the happl- 
nefs of mankind. Let not the vengeance of Heaven fall on our 
country for this impious expreffion, as upwards of five millions of 
citizens unanimoufly condemn the defperado who thus violates ev- 
ery principle which harmonizes fociety, or renders life defirable. 
But If an atonement muft be made for this impeachment of thy 
benignity, let him ftand the fole vi(fl:Im of thy difpleafure ; and 
may the miferies which he is difpofed to Infllft on others, be heap- 
ed with manifold aggravation on his devoted head. Not that we 
would wlili to prolong his mifery to the extent of his crime ; but, 
in mercy to mankind, may he receive fuch a portion of affllftion, 
as that his name may henceforth be expreffive of every thing that 
is abhorrent, and his punifhment become fo far terrific, as to check 
fimllar exprefiions In fucceeding ages. In commiferatlon to the 
human race, may Satan be controled in executing the full ven- 
geance of his indignation, as the r'roaljhlp of depravity may excite 
thofe emotions of jealoufy, as to lead him to dread an ufurper of 
his kingdom. 

The profane fentlment, of Imploring Heaven to prolong the 
devaftatlons of war, muft ftrike every reftecfl-Ing mind w4th detef- 
tation. Can any man, whofe breaft is not callous to every hu- 
mane confideration, defire a continuance of thofe ravages w^hlch 
attend the progrefs of war ? Is there one citizen, who delights 
fo far In blood, as to petition Heaven to fpread the dreadful car- 
nage among the Innocent inhabitants of contending Europe I — who 
w^Ifhes to read the horrid detail of expiring millions, falling under 
the fword of an invading enemy r Is there one man fo abforbed 
in private Intel eft, as to make si ferlous application to the Delty^ 



No. LIi Rain and War. 207 

to diftrefs thoufands of men, women, and children, merely to pro- 
cure a market for his merchandize ? Let thofe Americans, who 
recolle(5t the battle of Bunker-Hill, who remember the conflagra- 
tion of Charleftown, who experienced the diftrefTes of forfaking 
their habitations during the American revolution, fpeak on this 
fubjedl ; — fay, fellow-citizens, what would have been your feel- 
ings, if you had read in an European paper, that the war with 
America was as defirable as " rain in a time of drought'* I What 
fhould we have thought of fuch a paragraph, even if it had pro- 
ceeded from the prefs of an Algerine ? But no fuch thing ever 
appeared during our controverfy ; the inhumane fentiment was 
refeived for the Ceniinel, and we prefume its Editor ftands alone 
pofiefTed of fuch a fanguinary difpofition ! 

He fays we ought to *' pray for war /" Gracious Heaven : 
in what manner are we to diredt our prayers ? Are we to affem- 
ble, as in a time of drought, and make our immediate application 
to the Throne of Grace, for the beftowment of this bleiling ? 
Mufl our clergy addrefs the Deity in a language like this : — 
" Father of Mercies, we befeech Thee to hear our fupplications, 
and may Thy children here below, who inhabit one part of the 
creation, be enabled to cut each other's throats, in order that the 
inhabitants of the other pait may receive the benefits arifmg from 
their wants and diftrefTes." Is this the form of prayer the Centi- 
nel would prefcribe ? Is this the pious ejaculation to be offered 
up in our refpedlive churches ? Horrid profanity ! and yet this 
is the purport of the petition recommended for your adoption. 

Viewing this fubjedt on the ground of Chriftianity, can tlie cler- 
gy approve of the principle ? Are they not in duty hound to bear 
public teilimony againfl the wretch who v/ould fuggeft fuch a 
meafure I Can politics fo far blind their eyes, as to pafs over 
unnoticed fuch an odium on religion, while they are lamenting the 
decay of every moral virtue \ This paragraph in the Centinel is 
a ftain on our national character ; and nothing can ever remove it, 
but the depravity of the author being as generally known through- 
out the world, as his infolence is notorious within the town of his 
refidence. 

If any one doubts the infidelity of this man, I would re- 
queft him to inquire, who it was that declared, upon hearing that 
the lightning bad jGbivered the mail of the Ihip George Walhing- 



2o8 The Ahol'ttion of Taxesi No. LIL' 

ton, " This is a d-~d jacobin Jlorm /" Was it not the fame perron 
who wifhes us to " pray for war P* Tliat laments the peace as 
" too true ?'' 

The above remarks are confined to the horrid idea of " pray= 
Ing for war.'' If the author is wilHng to acknowledge his error, 
and apologize for his impiety, the charity of republicans would 
probably throw a mantle over his criminality, under the injunction 
in Scripture, that " though thy bi-other offend feventy times feven, 
jet, if he repent, ye fhall forgive him." To this Chriftian charity 
we recommend the writer of the fangulnary paragraph. 



No. LIL 



THE ABOLITION OF TAXES.' 






X HE magnanimity, philanthropy and patriotifm exhibited m 
the meffage of Prefident JetTerfon, mud endear him to every repub= 
Mean and Chrijlian citizen, throughout the Union. His aflions 
miift have a much happier tendency to promote the caufe of 
religion, than thofe of our modern hypocrites, who, by profeffioi^ 
and habiliments only, defignate the charader of a Chriftian. 

When we refle(5L on the torrent of abufe, the deluge of calumny, 
which have flowed from his enemies ; when we confider, that 
every boundary of common decency has beeii overleaped, in vilify- 
ing his condudt ; when we contemplate the malicious difpofition 
difplayed in" thofe papers which have been J;he receptacles of flan- 
der and defamation, what muft we think of the man ^vho can pafs^ 
over in fdence this unbounded detraifVion, and regardlefs of the 
enmity of his antagonifts, urge the Legiflative Body of the nation 
to devife wavs and means to relieve the taxes of his fellow-citizens ? 
Human nature is peculiarly prone to retaliation for injuries. Mr. 
Jefferfon feems exempt from this frailty — even his enemies, when' ' 
reading the infamous publications in the Centinel, Palladium, and ij 
other fadious papers, are conftrained to fay, that fome govern- 
mental check ought to prevent fiich an intolerant fpirit againil the 



No. LII. T%e Abolition of Taxes, 209 

chief magiftrate ; but though he is the peculiar objedl of this difor- 
ganizing and Jacobinical temper, yet far from returning " railing 
for railing," far from calling down the fire of legiflative author- 
ity to confume his enemies, his conciliatory fpirit may be defcribed 
m the following language : ' 

Fellonv-citi'zens of the Senate and Hovfe of Reprefentati'ves : — forgive 
my enemies ; I do not urge your " blood to boil" againfl; them ; 
I defire no fedition aft to control their infolence ; my conduft: is 
placed on the foundation of public fcrutiny ; the republican fyftem 
is fixed on the bafis of univerfal inveftigation. Let my opponents 
fay what they pleafe — my aftions are fubmitted to the enlightened 
judgment of my conftituents ; to their opinion 1 am willing to 
appeal, and while afting in the executive department, I fhall never 
defcend to notice the fcurrility of an expiring faftion ; neither 
fhall I fcreen myfelf within the barriers of a fedition law, to pre- 
vent a fair and impartial examination of my charafter and condu<ft» 
But, ^^ fellow -citi-zens^^ I wave with pleafure all confiderations of 
a perfonal nature. The fubjecfls, to which I am defirous to draw 
your attention, are connefted with public utility and general hap' 
pinefs. Thus predicating my adminiflration on this foundation, 
let me afk yoti, whether the numerous taxes on our conftituents 
cannot be lefTened ? whether the excife and ft amp duties cannot be 
^ilpenfed with ? and whether the public debt (which, in moiiarchical 
countries, is confidered a public blefllng) cannot be difcharged 
fooner than has heretofore been contemplated, and with more 
facility to the American citizens ? whether an expenfive fyftem of 
judiciary (created under the profpect of an immediate dilTolution 
of legiflative ariftocracy) fhould not be annihilated, and this 
branch of government reftored to its former fimplified ftate ? that 
this laft effort of a party, to ajftmtlate the American government to that 
of England, lliould be defeated, and that the Prefident (hould not, 
in the laft hours of his political exiftence, organize a body of 
favourites, in a permanent ftation, to perpetuate his influence ? 

This is the plain, intelligible language of the Prefident's 
mefTage. While entering into office, does he ftiev/ the fame temper 
of fome, vv'hen going out ? Does he wifh to extend his popularity 
by official patronage ? Is he defirous to create offices to aid his 
own energies ? Does he recommend thofc meafures which might 
C c 



2 19 The Abolition of Taxa. No. LII-„ 

lead thoiifands to court his friendfhip, In expeflation of his lucra- 
tive difpofals I If we had feen him adive to originate a fyftem, 
which would fecure him the fupport of a formidable phalanx, we 
might doubt his fmcerity ; efpecially if we had feen him appoint 
men to office, .in the mofl facred connexion with thofe whom he 
had difplaced, we ihould be jealous of his integrity. Nothing of 
this kind can be alleged againfl Mr. JefFerfon ; he ftands before 
his fellow-citizens on the ground of republicanifm, and, confclous 
of his uprightnefs, is ready to fubmit his adions to public and 
private fcrutiny. 

The government of a free people never aflumed a more dig- 
niiied attitude. While monarchies are conftantly calling on the 
people for additional taxes — while a Britifh budget (like Pandora's 
box) is fraught with evils, to be dlfTeminated among the fabje<5i:s, 
in the furm of taxes and requifitions — while the miniftry are 
ftraining to the utmoft verge of extortion the fmall pittance in 
the hands of indudry — while the exchequer is the common de- 
pofit of the hard earnings of the manufacturer and hufbandman, — 
the American repiihlici under the wifdom and economy of its exec- 
utive, is officially urged to retrench their expenfes, and to lelTen 
the burdens which for many years have diftreifed the citizens. 

This country, from its firil fettlement, has been fated to the 
clamour and intrigues of a faction. The diftreffing fyftem of 
finance, which has convulfed Britain, and rendered her govern- 
ment the mere vehicle to impoverifh the many and enrich xhtfenv, 
was early adopted in the United States j excifes, ftamp duties, &c. 
have followed in quick fucceffion ; but, above a.11, a ftupendous 
fyftem of judiciary, which threatens to throw the life, liberty and 
property of the people, under the control of that unqualified 
inftrument generally denominated the common-latu, has been 
attempted. The judiciary of this country has already become 
too complex for the comprehenfion of the citizens ; the late 
eftabliftimcnt enlarges the boundaries., and gives a fcope to a 
particular prcfejjiony which muft eventually grafp within its control 
the privileges and property of the whole community. This 
extenfive machine, moving under the weight of a column of 
fupernumerary judges, attended with the Immenfe expenfe of 
their eftablifliments, it Is feared, would ultimately reduce the 
people to tlie moft abjed ftate of fervitude. Lawyers would 



No. LI I. The jlboMon of Taxes » 211 

g.enerate in tenfold proportion to other profeffions, and, in time^ 
this country would be as generally overrun by this " order," as 
Egypt with Mamelukes. 

Notwithftanding the Prefident has in his •c[\t({3.ge. given fuch 
a ftrong evidence of his attachment to the liberties and happinefs 
of his country, yet the voice of calumny is ftill clamorous againfl 
him. But, fellow-citizens, has he injured you in his recommen- 
dations to relieve you from taxes ? Are there any who wifh for 
the continuance of excife, ftamp duties, &c. ? If there are, let 
them /peak. If you want your internal manufadtures burdened 
with duties, come forv/ard and declare it. If you are defirous to 
continue the odiousjia??}p-a&, or \vilh to perpetuate the troublefome 
tafk of riding from town to town to buy a ftamp-paper, to legalize 
your common negociations, now is the time to gratify your deHres 
by petitioning Congrefs to difregard the recommendations of the 
Prefident. Ye who want to pay a tax on carriages (which prob- 
ably convey your family to the houfe of worfhip) -rally your forces, 
and fend circular letters, to be read in churches, for joining in a 
remonftrance againft the abolition of the duty. 

If the citizens are enamoured with the late fyftem of judiciary, 
and conceive themfelves threatened with an annihilation of their 
liberties, in cafe it fhould be revoked, let them come forward with 
a declaration of the bleiTmgs they anticipate on the creation of a 
phalanx of judges, and the retinue of lawyers which follow in their 
train. This is placing the fubjed on its proper footing. As the 
Prefident only defires to promote the public good, if he has miftak- 
en the means, he will cheerfully renounce the meafure. If the 
people fay taxes are defirable, he will endeavour to gratify their 
wilhes — but while he thinks the exigencies of government do not 
require their former latitude, he will ufe his influence to relieve 
and not burden them for the emolument of a few individuals. — 
He who is offended or injured by the Prefident, let him fpeak I 
He fiiall be heard with attention, and anfwered with candour. 



2iZ The BencDoknce and Dignity No. LIIL 



aa: 



No. LIIL 



THE BENEVOLENCE AND DIGNITY OF " THE PEOPLE." 






A HE fanguinary fceiie, of ^garments rolled in blood,' having been 
fo long and fo often portrayed to the public, it muft be peculiarly 
pleafmg to the philanthropic mind to contemplate the reftoration 
of peace, and the harmony of contending nations. Among five 
millions of republican citizens, it is poffible that one man may be fo 
deftitute of humanity as to " pray for war," and thus erefl: his 
name as a monument of univerfal deteftation. The olive branch 
is congenial to the feelings of benevolence, and though tyrants may 
realize advantages to themfelves amidft the calamities of v^ar, yet 
humanity will ever acquire an afcendancy when " the people" ex- 
ercife their inherent virtues. Under particular impreirions, the 
people may be deceived, and led into error, but tlieir good fenfe 
will eventually extricate them from the evils dengned by thofe 
who intended to impofe upon them. 

While confidering the nature of government, feme are too apt 
to fuppofe, that the magiflrates of a monarchy, or an arijlocracy, 
are exclufiVely inclined to favour the happaiefs of " the people" ; 
they foolilhly fuppofe, that the people are prone to evil, and gene- 
rally difpofed to violate every principle of focial order. The re- 
verfe however is the fa6l, as the people are naturally defirous to 
fubftantiate their ov%'n profperity ; neither are they inclined to op- 
pofe government, provided it is adminiftered with any tolerable 
degree of lenity. The Americans bore the oppreihons of Britain, 
till they became infuff^rable ; the citizens of France for centuries 
Submitted to the tyranny of their monarchs, and irnpofitions of 
their clergy, till the nation was nearly bankrupt by their extrav- 
agance and luxury ; the poor, unlrappy Irilh have, for many ages, 
dragged the chains of fervitude, while their tafk-mafters are daily 
increafmg their burdens, and wreftlng from the fupplicating hand 
oi' wret:hednefs the fcantv morfcl alloted for its fubhftence. 



No, LIIL of the PcopU, 912 

The fubjeds of one nation would live in continual amity with 
another, if they were not excited to a controvcrfy by the ambitious 
jcaloufy of their rulers. For example, would the people of Eng- 
land have entered into a war with France, if they hud not been 
ftimuiated by their king and miniflry ? Do we fuppofe that the 
foldiers, failors and militia of England would have armed them- 
izhiQi againft the French nation, if Pitt and his coadjutors had not 
promoted the warfare ? No : France might have changed her 
government m quietude, and not one man within the combined 
nations would have felt the leaft inclination to interfere in the con- 
trovcrfy. Do we fuppofe that a Dutchman, German or Engiiih- 
raan v/ould have troubled himfeif about what was doine in 

o ■ 

France, if the emperor, lladtholder, and king of thofe nations had 
been tranquil on the occafion ? An EngliHiman, Auflrian, and 
Dutchman have no natural hoftility to a Frenchman, unlefs pro- 
voked to animofity by thofe individuals who compofe their Icrds 
and majlers. Wars are not the operation of perfonal refentment 
betv/een fubjedls of diiFerent nations and languages, but in moft 
inftances are created and fom.ented by men, who are benefitte4 
by the conteil, from the emoluments arifmg in their official ca- 
pacity. 

During tlie American revolution, tlie lemiyolence m the people 
of England was confpicuous on moft occafions. Our prifoners 
were treated, by them, with the greateft liofpitality. The ^o'v-^ 
ernmental prifon-Jh'jps were the b.aftiles of cruelty ; but if an unfor- 
tunate American could take refuge among the people, he w^as furc 
of protedion, and every difplay of humanity was exercifed. The 
American people alfc, on the clofe of the war, received with cor- 
diality the enemies of the revolution, permitted the refugees to 
return, and .would to this day have embraced them with the ut- 
moft affe6tion, had they not found that almoft every old tory con- 
tinued inimical to the profperity of a republican form of government. 
As a farmer evidence of the benevolence of the people, I fhall only 
obferve, that our Saviour yvould have fallen a facrifice to the 
outrage of the rulers, chief priefis, fcribes and pharifees, much, 
earlier than he did, had they not been checked in their pro- 
grefs from " a fear of the people." The people cried " ho- 
iknna," and received him with the utmofl cordiality, but the mon'*^ 



514 The Benevolence and Dignity No. LIIL 

arch'icalf ar'tjlocratical and pnejlly authorities cried " crucify him ! 
crucify him !" 

At the prefent day, we often hear " the people" depreciated, 
and the rulers exalted ; we hear the mod degrading remarks on 
the commonalty.) and the highert encomiums on the " well-born." 
But, if Ave examine hi (lory, we fhall find, that war never arofe 
between nations unlefs fet on by the monarchical, arl/locratical, or 
clerical part of the government. 

To illuftrate my remarks, let us refled: on the fudden return 
of friendfhip between Frenchmen and Engliflimen. While the 
king and miniftry were carrying on the v.^ar, the name of Bona- 
parte, and the fans culottes of France, were held in the utmoft ab- 
horrence in England ; the public mind was raifed to fuch an ele- 
vation of refentment, againfl every thing which wore a Gallican 
appearance, that it was dangerous to lifp a fentiment in favour of 
the French in any public or private circle ; the theatres dared not 
to produce an exhibition that countenanced the revolution ; the 
Firft Conful was reprefented as the chief demon of Pandaemonium ; 
fongs were compofed to ridicule the Corfican ufurper ; the French 
citizens were reprefented on the flage as a group of affaffins or a 
band of defperadoes ; caricatures, expreffive of the moft degraded 
and ruinous ftate of the French government, were expofed in every 
pidlure-lhop in London. But, as foon as peace was proclaimed 
between the two nations, " the people" exercifed their natural be- 
nevoknccy and rufhed forth, like a torrent, to receive with open arms 
the meilenger of this joyful intelligence ; the city of London re- 
founded with " long live Bonaparte ! long live the French na- 
tion !" The horfes were difmiffed from the carriage, as being 
too flow in their progrefs, and the people became the promulgators 
of the glad tidings, by conducting the herald to the metropolis, 
amidft the acclamations of thoufands ; the city was illuminated ; 
joy was univerfally difFufed j the citizens congratulated each other 
with the warmeft" emotion, and there was not a gloomy manfion 
in the capital, excepting that of Peter Porcupine, the parafite of 
blood and conflagration. Here is an evidence of lene'Dolence, aris- 
ing from the people, which no man can controvert. The detefta- 
ble wretch, who " prays for war," muft be obliged, from this cir- 
cumftance, to deteft his own vilianous imprecation. 



No. LIIL . of the People, • 7-i$ 

From this ftatement of facrs, I muft afk the advocates for mon- 
archy or ariftocracy, what think YE of a government, in which 
" the people" have no control ? Would not the people of Eng- 
land have been at peace long before this period, if they had not 
been prevented by their arbitrary rulers ? Or rather, would they 
not have been obliged to profecute th^ war, if the energies of 
Bonaparte had not arreiied the farther exertions of the Englifh 
cabinet ? Would not the fwords of Englifhmen have been fcill 
drawTi to fhed the blood of Frenchmen ? and inflead of fraternal 
embraces being mutually exchanged, would not the violence of 
refentment have urged each of them to fpread the horrors of war 
in every city and village of the contending parties ? 

But, thanks to a benign Providence, the fcene is changed. In- 
ftead of conflagrations, we behold iUnminatlons. The soldiep.s, 
inflead of imbruing their hands in each other's blood, are clafping 
them together in brotherly affedtion ; the sailors, inftead of 
groaning under the cruelty of hnprejfments, are rejoicing around 
the plenteous board o£ refreJJomenfs ; the citizens, inflead of being 
alarmed at an hoflile invafion, are haflening to the fhores to wel* 
come the harbinger of public fecurity. The whole fcene of peace 
affumes a pleanng reverfe of war ; every freeman's breaft expands 
in tranfport at the beatific tranfition. 

Thus far the reprefentation of the lenevolence of the people of 
England is exhibited ; — but when we turn our eyes tov/ards 
France, the fcene glows with redoubled fervency. What more 
tranfporting and dignified fpeclacle can be exhibited than the fete 
in Paris, on the termination of war ? It is expreflive of all the 
benevolent fenfations of the humian heart. Inftead of a wild, fe- 
rocious efFufion of ungovernable pafiions, (inflated by military fuc- 
cefTes) the whole arrangement evinces the mofl perfeft fyftem of 
refined reflexion ; every part of the tranfat^ion leads to fecial, 
moral, and political improvement • — -" A temiple, dedicated to 
Concord, is eretfled, in. which hymms of peace and fongs of joy 
are to be fung, accompanied with a full band of muficians, pre- 
ceded by drums and trumpets. A pantomimic fpedacle is to be 
given, in which all the nations of the earth are to be armed again ft 
each other, with a full pidlure of the calamities of war ; on a fud- 
den, thefe dreadful evils ceafe, and a ferene light is fired upon the 
fcene, while the Temple of Peace is exhibited, accompanied 



21 6 The Jjencvoiencs and Dignify of the People o No. LIIL 






with the pleafing figures of the f.ne Arts and Commerce ; dm In 
this fcientiiic and eUgnifieJ re-pz^, the Temple of Commerce ariies, 
furrounded v/Ith a flotilla of boats, elegantly ornamented ; en 
board of which the feamen cf all nations embark, while the Temple 
refounds with the flourifhes of a full band of mufic, in all the ec- 
ftacy of joy and conviality. Each citizen is to illuminate his 
manfion ; the Thuillerics, bridges and quays are to be ornament- 
ed with trophies, expreflive of the bleiUngs of peace." 

What an exalted and dignified leilbn of focial liappinefs is incul- 
cated by this felllval ! Ye revilers of France, hide your heads in 
the dull, while calumniating a nation which even moralizes in her 
feftive exhibitions. The boifterous huzzas in London may be cal- 
culated to exprefs the feelings of Englifhmen, but the refinement 
of France leads to a more exalted objeft, as eonneded with the 
cultivation of the human mind. Dragging a coach may gratify tlie 
benevolent effufions of a well-difpofed London populace (deprefTcd 
by the tyranny of their mailers) ; but the citizens of France rife 
fuperior to fuch degrading fervitude. Under the patronage of 
tlieir government, they exhibit to the World the fam.e dignified de- 
portment in the celebration of peace, as they difplayed in the prof- 
ecutlon of v/ar. Every movement of the nation gives them an 
elevated pofition and lefpedable attitude ; if they were terrific in 
war, they are inllru6live in peace. Inftead of exciting a vindiclive 
temper againft their enemies, or the world, their liotilla is filled 
with the citizens of all nations, and a univerfal peal of congratula- 
tion welcomes them to ehaunt in chorus, 

^^ Blefs'd he the man, hy Heaven dcfign'd 
" To Jet the luorld from flavery free } 
" In every age, in every clime, 
** His fame JJjall live in ecfiacyJ^ 



No. LIV. Chief Priests and the Farmer. ilf 



No. LIV. 



CHIEF PRIESTS AND '^ THE FARMEr/* 



« 



My Kingdom Is not of this World,'' 



Scurrility and detraftlon have fo long been the topics in 
the tory papers that it has become derogatory to the caufe of 
repubhcaniim to nolice them, otherwife than by ridicule or fatire. 
It is rather pleafmg than mortifying, to obferve the paltry efforts 
of an expiring fa<5tion, to recover their loft ground ; and their 
ftruggles to regain that afcendancy, which had nearly brought 
our country into a ftate of ruin, are more diverting than alarming. 

If a man was inclined to write a farce, he could not take a 
fubje(51: more appropriate to his purpofe, than the ridiculous farrago 
i-vhich is conftantly exhibited in the tory gazettes. On one fide, 
we fhould find a " Sulpicius" roaring with the utmoft vocifera- 
tion, that the ivhole body of clergy were in danger of annihilation, 
and for no other reafon, than becaufe a writer over the fignature 
of a " Farmer." had declared thaty^^wz^ among the order had been 
more outrageous than circumfped in their political condudt. — Ad- 
mitting that the Farmer has faid this, yet it is a truth which cannot 
be controverted, and Sulpicius by making an uproar, will not 
perfuade the people that the charge is erroneous. When we read 
this clerical advocatcy we cannot but fmile at his folly ; he repre- 
fents the prieftly order as fhaken to its centre — he calls upon the 
religious of all denominations to rally round their fiandard — he 
portrays eight hundred of them as falling martyrs in the cauie 
of virtue and morality — ^we almoft anticipate the faggots and fire 
of extermination, and our imagination Is enlivened with the flames 
afcending towards heaven, while their expiring bodies are engulph« 
ed in'the horrid conflagration. 

To fliew the folly of Sulpicius, fuppofe the writer of a fares. 
ftiould, in the firft fcene, reprefent him porteivding, in ;i plirenfical 
D d 



2i5 Chief Priests and the Farmer. No. LlV^ 

attitude, the ruin and deJn;ru<5lion of the clergy — fhould deicrlbe 
on the ftage, the tortures and perfecutions of this refpedable clafs 
of citizens, and clofe the ad, with a defcriptive fcene of their ag- 
onizing diifolution. While this was exhibited, there is no doubt 
the audience would exprefs the higheft indignation at the cruel 
tranfadlion ; but, if in the next act, we Hiould obferve a large 
number of thofe individu.tls, W'ho are thus exclaiming againft 
perfecution (with Sulpicius himfelf in the group) arrayed at the 
expenfe cf their focieties, in their go^yns and canonicals, claiming 
precedency in the various circles in which they afiemble, and feated 
around almofi: every feftive board within their vicinity, partaking 
of the comforts of life in a fuperior degree to moil of their parifli- 
loners, we ihould readily turn our deteftation on the author cf the 
calum.ny, and laugh at the folly of thofe who apprehended their 
annihilation. 

We fhould readily Inquire in what inftance are the clergy 
perfecuted I "Did they ever live in more union with their pailfli- 
ioners ? Were they ever better clothed and fed than at the 
prefent day ? Is there one man of the clergy, who dreads the 
indignation of his parirhioneis in confequence of the remarks of 
the Farmer, provided he acts conformable to the duties of his 
office ? While he continues in the line of his profefiion, there is no 
danger of difquletude — the people are willing to hear go/pel truths^y 
though they may be difpleafed with political herefy. If he fo far 
violates his ordinatlon-contia-ft by preaching " the dod.rines ofmen^'* 
inftead of the precepts of the gofpel, he is no more entitled to pay 
from his parifh, than if he totally abandoned his pulpit, and 
purfued a calling foreign from his engagements. If the parifh- 
ioners pay three dollars a year to a printer for newfpapers, they 
are unwilling to pay ten dollars a year to a parfon for political 
difqulfitions. A printer and a preacher are two dlftincl: occupa- 
tions, and while the people give the former a fupport in the line 
of his bufmefs, they are unwilling to double the expenfe to hear 
a repetition of the fame fubj eels from the latter. When we read 
newfpapers, we expeft to find political contioverfies, and when 
we read or hear fermons we expedt to find religious differtatlons* 
When we fee a fermon turned Into a newfpaper. It Is as foreign 
from our expectations, as to fee a newfpaper turned Into a fermon. ; 
every performance ought to be analagous to the profefiion of its 



No, LIV, Ohlef P nests and the Funner, %\^ 

author. A printer to become preacher, or a preacher to becoine 
printer, is quite out of charader. A printer's devil* with his fmutty 
paper apron, in tlie pulpit, would cut a fmgular figure, and a cler«= 
gyman in his hands ^ befmeared with ink and beating the hlach hallsy 
would be nearly a^ laughabk a chara-'fler. 

The Farmer has -conildered the iubjeft on this rational 
ground, and he is attacked with the utmoft violence for this plain 
pofition. But who can contradid the affertion, that the duty of 
the clergy relates to fpirituals, and is totally diftindl from tem- 
porals. This is the dodlrine of our Saviour, who declared, 
" My kingdom is net of this ivorld.^^ If the clergy are his ambaif- 
adors, they ought to be employed about " their Madera's bufmefs." 
If " His kivgdom is not of this world," certainly his vicegerents 
cannot have a diftinft kingdom from him, under whofe comrniflion 
they officiate. The v/hole dodrine of fcripture exprefsly difowns 
every thing of a temporal nature. Revelation is founded on the 
declaration of the Supreme Being, that the powers of the earth 
iliall not prevail againft it. A real Chriftian increafes in his faith, 
by the oppofition made againft the fiat of Omnipotence- — the 
difciples and apoftles never reprobated Pilate or the chief prieflsy 
becaufe they were attempting to annihilate the Chriflan fyftem by 
their perfecution ; on the contrary, they exulted at the idea, that 
every attempt to deftroy its benign operation, would give celerity 
to the propagation. The martyrs at the ftake never bewailed the 
decline of religion by their facrifice, but, amidft all the torture and 
ridicule of their enemies, rejoiced in the pleafing hope, that " the 
gates of hell fliould not prevail againft it." 

If this v/as the faith of the difciples, apoftles and martyrs, why 
does Sulpicius or any of the clergy appear fo alarmed at the 
obfervations of the Farmer ? This writer, fo far from wiftiing to 
injure the clergy, only enjoins the fame docflrines promulgated by 
our Saviour and his apoftles. When Chrift was on earth the 
chief priefls were the moft powerful and vindi<5tive body that oppof» 
ed his miniftry. At that time, thefe priefls were interfering in 
political concerns. They were crying out — " he is not Caefar's 
friend." They perfecuted him in their ecclefiaftical capacity, 
-• 

* I beg pardon for thf exprejpon ; lut it is a technical term in th 
typographical profejfton. 



320 Chief Priests and the Farmer. No. LIV. 

becaufe they found he was deftroymg their political authority. 
Amidft this general outcry againfl him and his adherents, we 
find no diliruft of the extermination of the Chriftian fyftem ; but the 
commiflion was given, even in this " reign of terror," to go forth 
^nd preach the go/pel to all nations. Chrift's kingdom being not 
of this world, he rather promoted his caufe by the oppofition from 
civil rulers. Religion and civil policy were at variance, and the 
llrength of religion was evidenced by not meddling with civil author- 
ity. Is it not ftrange then, that thofe of the prefent day, who profefs 
to believe in the gofpel, Ihould be fo conftantly alarming the 
people, that religion is to be exterminated ? If they believe as 
they profefs, thefe men muft be afliarned of their conduct. Inftead 
of being believers in, tliey may more properly be ilyled revilers 
of, the gofpel. They doubt the authenticity of the declaration, 
*^ that the gates of hell fliall not prevail againft it," They en- 
deavour to gainfay what our Saviour has exprefsly declared, that 
*^ his kingdom is not of this world." Inftead of preaching 
politics, let them attend to Chriftian doctrines, and by that means 
put to fiience their opponents. 

Religion never gained a profelyte by a political argument. 
Propagating tales of iiluminati, will never convert a man to the 
Chriftian faith ; it rather leads him to doubt its authenticity, when 
he is told that there is danger of its being fubverted by a combi- 
nation of renegadoes in Europe and America. If the clergy are 
alarmed, it naturally makes the people timid, for if the foldiers 
who are fpechiHy cominijjtoned to " iight the good fight of faitli," 
are difcomfited, how can they expedl to gain followers when the 
caufe is confidered delperate ? If the apoftles had adled TLsfome 
cf our modem clergy do, they would have ruined in the firft 
outfet the whole fyftem of revelation. Sulpicius appears more 
alarmed at the Farmer, than the difciples v/ere at the anathemas 
of the whole Jewifli hierarchyo He has only given /o7ne of them 
a gentle reproof, and by the fubtlety of 3.fe'zv delinquents, they are 
attempting to bring into the controverfy the whole order. The 
difciples, when commiflioned to preach the gofpel, were ordered 
to take neither money nor fcrip ; but Sulpicius is roufmg the 
clergy under an apprehenfton, that if they cannot force the people 
to pay them, the Chriftian religion v/ill foon be obftterated. This 
temporal fiipport was but a fmall confideration with the primitivs 



No. LIV. C'Z'/f/' Priests and the Farmer, 221 

' Chriftlans, for St. Paul declares that if they looked for con- 
folation in this world, " of all men they would be the mofi 
miferable." 

Far be ft from me to leiTen their reputation, or take one cent 
from their decent maintenance. As a citizen, I willi to give them 
a proper eftimation in the public mind ; but if a few clamorous 
individuals are endeavouring to raife them to an elevation above 
that which is contemplated by feripture, it is prDper to conL'der 
this fubjecl on the primary principles of the gofpel. Our Saviour 
was bom in a manger : he had not where to lay his head ; he 
was perfecuted, and at laft crucified in the moft ignominious 
manner — his difciples followed his doctrines and experienced 
fimilar indignity. The Chriftian religion, however, prevailed 
3gainft every oppofition, and for the encouragement of faints, it 
will prevail till the confummation of all things. The " filthy 
lucre" of this world, is no way connected with gofpel truths, and 
and when we fee men rcufed to an improper refentment, on 
the fuggeilion of a decreafe pf pecuniary emoluments, we have 
reafon to doubt the fincerity of their religious profefiions. Such 
men are the greateft enemies to the caufe of real, unadulterated 
Chriflianity. It fhows they purfue the profefllon merely for the 
emoluments arifmg from it, and not for the glory of God. 

I acknowledge, however, that fociety requires every refpetfi 
to the clergy, and I Ihould be forry to have them depreciated in 
public eftimatio'a» A large proportion of them are worthy the 
highefl: confidence, and I hope ever to fee them miaintained witli 
a cheerful liberality. But, when we obferve too great a ftride 
taken to impofe on the public by fuch writers as Sulpicius, &c. 
it is neceilary to place the fubjecl on its juft bafis, and if any real 
Chr'ijiian contends the principles, he vv^ill be heard and anfwered 
with all that candour, which the im.portance of the controverfy 
demands. 

To conclude this difcourfe, I would briefly obferve, it is my 
fmcere belief, that the people of this country were never more 
difpofed to pay every refpe<5l to the clergy, in the line of their pro- 
fejfion, than at the prefent day ; and the only difficulty vdiich has 
arifen, is folely owing to a/^w of the order, who, from bigotry, 
pride and oftentation, have bufied themfelves in thofe things which 
^0 npt concera them, and thereby raifed a jealoufy which is 



2 23 Obsfr'vaiwns on the No. LV. 

difficult to remove. If fuch fanatics would hold their peace, 
and mind their fcriptural fiudies, inftead of revifmg Chejlcrjieldy 
and exciting falfe alarms, about combinations, mafTacres, &c. 
every difficulty would fubfide, and general harmony between 
minifters and people would be fpeedily reftored. 



No. LV. 



OBSEPvVATIONS ON THE HON. G. MORRIs's SPEECH 
UPON THE REPEAL OF THE JUDICIARY LAW. 



W: 



HEN declamation afTumes the garb of argument, it is proper 
to expofe the pageantry and exhibit the fubjed: before the public in 
its proper habiliments. When a Senator libels the people, we 
cannot but fmile at the tears he may llied, while bemoaning the 
annihilation of the Conftitution. The people being the fource of 
the Federal Conftitution, an attempt to vitiate the principles of its 
vitality deferves the mod pointed reprehenfion. 

While reading Mr. Morris's fpeech, we cannot but pity the 
man who facriiices propriety to fonorous periods, who vilifies 
that " popular will which brought him into political exiftence,'* 
and who deprecates " public opinion" as the quick-fand on which 
the ConRitution is to be wrecked. He feems to take a (land above 
all legitlm.ate control, and places himfelf and the " frail beings" 
around him, as the only barriers to maintain the dignity, harmony 
and exiftence of the American nation. 

"The people" are held in the utmoft flate of degradation, 
and under this impreffion, he exclaims with fuperlative confidence, 
that, " WE, we the Senate of the United States, are aiTembled here 
to fave THE PEOPLE from their mofi dangerous enemy ; to fave them 
from themfelves ; to guard them againft the baiieful effedls of their 
«-wn prec'ipltation, their pajjions and ml/guided %eal l" — A modeft decla- 
ration truly ! Happy, thrice happy Americans ! how enviable your 
fituation, that the Hon. Governeur Morris, Efq. and his " frail" af- 
ibciates fhould become th? fole guardians of your happIiicfs-=-on 



No. LV. Hon. Gr Morrises Speech, 22'^ 

what a permanent bafis are your liberties, lives, and propert]* 
founded ! — With this anchor ye can ride out the tcmpeftuous 
ftorm of your paffions ; ye can truft your treafures to their man- 
agement, and " throw your compafs and charts into the ocean," 
while the political fliip is direded by their fuperior wifdom. — 
How fublime the benevolence ! that a man fhould wreft the 
weapon from the hands of " the people," which is uplifted to 
commit the fatal adl oi fuicide. This virtuous Senator, like the 
angel of old, arrefts the fword juft ready to fevey every endearing 
bond which unites the paternal and filial afFedions of fociety. — 
*' Do thyfelf no harm," is the friendly voice of this guardian of 
our welfare — " paufe ! paufe ! for heaven's fake, paufe !" is the- 
fervent fupplication of this difmterefted and magnanimous patriot. 
Solicitous for our happinefs, he proclaims the glad tidings, that 
** WE, we the Senate of the United States, are alfembled here to 
fave the people from themfelves" ! ! ! — " We, we the Senate be- 
feech you to have mercy on your lives, liberty and property ;" 
*' 'tis for this purpofe that we are chofen ; elfe why are we defi- 
ed for fix years ; or why are we chofen by communities while the 
Reprefentatives are chofen directly by the people.'* After this pathetic 
appeal, can " The People" hefitate a moment to furrender every 
legiflative tranfaclion to the Senate ? Can they truft to their Repre- 
fenisit'ives luho are only direifly chofen by themfehes ? Can they be fo 
foolifli as to look for protedllon from men who receive no other 
commlffion than the immediate fujf rages of their fellow-citizens ? 

The voice thus calling on the people is rendered ftill more har- 
monious by a declaration of the ftrongeft attachment to the Con- 
ftitution. The fage and benevolent Senator, while imploring the 
people not to commit violence on themfelves, declares that he has 
been " twenty years 'Cutxr fervant."" Although he has been " a fer- 
vant" upwards of two apprenticefhips to this outrageous rabble, 
yet he now begins to vilify and abufe kis majlers. He denounces 
them as a pack of cut-throats, as committing outrages on themfelves, 
and reprefents his employers as infane and dangerous to be trufted. 
This is an extraordinary ftory for " a fervant" to propagate about 
his mafter ; after being twenty years in their fervice, a better 
report might have be§n expeded. It is rather fmgular to hear a 
^^fervant^^ infult his majl^r with fuch language— common decency 



2 24 Observations on the No. LV. 

might have •Cvarranted a more mild reprehenfion, from one who 
aillimes the courtly addrefs of a gentleman. 

How tlie Hon. Governeiir Morris fhould have more friendjhib 
for the people, than they have for themfehesi is a political paradox. 
The Conflitution, in the preamble, conveys no fach idea. It is 
there declared, " We, the People of the United States, in order to 
form a more perfeft union, eftablilh juflice," &c. — but, if Mr. 
Morris is right in his pofition, it ought to have run thus, " We the 
People, being difpofed to injure ourfelves, but having at this 
moment a Ihort interval of rejection, do conititute and appoint the 
Hon. Governeur Morris and his " frail" alTociates, the guardians 
and prote(5iors of our rights, liberty and property ; and more ef,- 
pecially to defend us againjl ovrfehes.'^ If this had been the decla- 
ration, inftead of being ^./ervatit, he would have been one of the lord 
high protedors of the people ; he would then have had a commiffion 
properly authenticated to denounce the citizens ; he could then 
with propriety have faid " that he loved the Conftitution — that he 
confidered it the bond of our union — that on it depended our har- 
mony and our peace — -that without it w^e fhould be plunged into 
all the hoiTors of a civil war- — that the country would be deluged 
with the blood of its inhabitants, and a brother's hand would be 
raifed againft the bofom of a brother." To be confiftent, he can- 
not love a Conflitution which is founded on the v/ill of men whom 
he confidcrs fo frantic that " we, we the Senators" are obliged to 
' fave them from their moll: dangerous enemies, viz. themselves. 
Or does he conceive that after they had exhaufted their w'tfclom in 
the mighty effort to create him a Senator, that they confequently 
exhibited their folly in laying a foundation to deftroy themfelves ? 
The " fervant" in this cafe becomes fuperior to his lord. How 
Mr. Morris acquired more attachment^o tlie intereft of the people 
than they have for themfelves, is a fnigular phenomenon. In what 
inftance has it appeared ? Where is the document vvhich gives him 
this pre-eminence ? On what occafion was it evinced ? Before a 
man affames this elevated tone, it is neceflary for him to produce 
the pledge of his fupremacy — we doubt his premifes, and it lies 
with him to fubilantiate his claim. 

Befides, what part of the people does he prefume to dictate ? 
Does he charge the luhok body as guilty of filicide ? Are federal 
and anti-federal all in league to deflroy themfelves \ It feems this 



No. LV. Hon. G. Morrises Speech. 225 

is his meaning, for he appears afraid to truft the Home of Repre- 
fentatives even to amend the bill. This fenatorial prote&or of our 
rights further declares, that " to amend the bill were to deftroy it ;'* 
" that even if it got back to the Houfe of Reprefentatives it would 
periili," and he is candid enough to declare that " we, we the 
Senate" " took the bill with all its imperfeftions.'* 

In this ftate of the bufmefs, Mr. Morris, I am difpofed to join 
you in your caution, of" paufe ! paufe ! for heaven's Hike paufe I" 
'Let the people who are thus reprobated by you, ferioufly demand 
why you was afraid to truil the bill to the deliberate decifion of 
the Houfe of Reprefentatives. Were not the refpe(5tive branches " 
of the Legiflature compofed at that time of a majority of thofe 
who are empha-tically ftyled federaViJls P Why was you at that time 
jealous, " if it got back to the Houfe of R.eprefentatives it would 
perilh ?'* Was it of fo dangerous a nature, that e7en the high- 
toned federalifls of the " old fchool" viewed it with an unfriendly 
eye I Could you not truil it in their hands, even for " an amende 
nieni'^ ? Was it of fuch a delicate texture, that to ainend was to 
defiroy P Indeed, honourable fir, your rhapfodies tranfport you be° 
yond your proper latitude— you carry too much fail for your bal- 
lad—you " throw the fhip into the wind" by your fuperlative 
aufterity, for while you level your attack on the people, you equal- 
ly denounce the whole body of federalifls who compofed one 
branch of the Legiflature ; you prefum.ed to fave them alfo froiri 
*' thewfcl'vesy 

To bring this part of your fpeech to ilTue, I would inquire of 
the Hon. GovemeUr Morris, w'hy he was afraid to trull the Houfe 
of Reprefentatives w-ith a fecond confideration of the fubjeft I 
Were not a large proportion of the m.embers high-toned federalifls, 
friends to Mr. Adams, and oppofed to Mr. JefFerfon ? Did they not 
appear in their night-caps and cockades to countera61: his elcvflion ? 
Why then, honourahk Jir, was you jealous that your favourite pro- 
ject would be defeated^ amid fuch a hofl cf federal fi lends ? If 
they put on their night-caps and the flill more formidable infignia of a, 
cQchade, to oppofe Mr. Jefferfon, it is probable they vrculd have 
difplayed equal fervor in fupport of the Judiciary fydera. Youi' 
declaration therefore, honourable fir, fiiUy evinces the fallacy of 

your rcafoning ; it proves that ^ven the f:fderaUils in the Houfe of 
L e 



22 6 Ohseri)ations on the No. LVI. 

RepT'^fentatives were unfriendly to the meafure •, tliat the Judlcia?* 
ry ail, if it was now before the fame men Avho conllitutcd the laft 
Houfe of Reprefentatives, would be defiroyed. In fhort, " We^ 
THE PEOPLE," defireno other evidence 'of tlic propriety of the re- 
?EAL than this frank and explicit declaration of the Honourable 
Governeur Morris. 

" Faufe ! paufe !" fellow-citizens, " for heaven's fake paufe,'^ 
before you truft your lives, liberties and property Into the hands of 
men who declare you in a ftate of infanity. If the people are not 
competent to fecare themfelves, or if they are to look folely to the 
Honourable G. Morris and his " frail" affoclates for protection, 
the Lord have mercy upon them. If the people would deftroy 
themfelves, vain Is their hope, if they look to him for refufcltatlon. 
I am> free to declare, I had rather ti'ufl to the people than to him. 
The Honourable G. Morris may be a wife man, a prudent man, 
an honourable man, and a patriot ; but however wife, prudent and 
honourable he may be, yet I truft the people will never be in fuch 
a delirium as to look to him as the fole guardian of their cbnllitu- 
tlonal rights. We, "we the people," are not difpofed to commit' 
fuiclde, and we muft paufe before we admit the idea, that the 
Senate are a body aifembled to fave us from our " inojl dangerous 
enemy y* to fave us from ourselves; 

OtheF remarks on this Speech will occupy the next Number. 



No. LVl. 



HONOURABLE GOVERNEUR MORKIs's SPEECH. 



VV HEN a man weeps over the Conftitution, it naturally excites- 
a degree of complacency in the public m.Ind to attend to his 
lamentations ; but after examining the caufe of his complaints, 
and finding It the mere rhapfody of a heated imagination; we 
«annot but fmile at the vehemsnce of his exclamation. 



No. LVI. Hon, G. MorrWs :Speech. 227 

A flranger, upon reading Mr. Morris's fpeech, would naturally 
feppofe that the fate of America was fufpended on the continuance 
of this judiciary fyflem .; he would think that upon its repeal, 
difcord, anarchy and a ftate of nature would be the immediate 
refult of the decifion ; that goyemment was diifolved ; that 
tjie Senate and Houfe of Reprefentatives were annihilated, and 
tliat nothing was to be expected but infurrections and every 
civil commotion. 

This lively dejfcription might well be expected from Mr. 
Morris, who feels fuch a ilrong attachment to this particular 
branch of government ; who declares it to be the " fortrefs of 
the conftitution" ; who, " like honeft Ajax, would not only throw 
a ihield before it, but would build around it a wall of brafs.'* 
When a man ftcps forward in fuch a commanding attitude, with 
** his fhield and wall of brafs," w.e ar^e ready to fympathize with 
him, fhould he fail to cffed his magnanimous purpofe. 

But, honourable fir, let us be cool on this fubjeft, let us thrccr 
afide all the parade of rhetoric, and appeal to the reafon, rather 
than the paffions of the people ; let us " paufe," before we decide. 
After this deliberate refledion, I hope even the Honorable Govern' 
eur Morf'is, Efq. will wipe away his tears, foothe the emotions of. 
his labouring mind, and fo far compofe himfelf as to lay afide his 
fliield and remove his wall of brafs, as ufelefs and unneceffary. 

Admit, honourable fir, that the repeal fhould take place, I 
would afk you, what difficulties would enfue ? Would the Confti- 
tution be annihilated by the repeal of a law, which you declared 
would not have paffed, had it been returned to the Houfe of Re-. 
prefentatives for amendments ? According to your own ftatement, 
it was a crude, undigefted fyftem — it was a child of fuch diftcrted 
features, that you was obliged to Vv'atch it like a godfather, in its 
cradle — you was afraid to truft it out of your hands — you dan- 
dled it on your knees, and could not truft it to walk into another 
room, left it fhould perifh In its progrefs. Can any man be fo fool- 
ilh as to think, that a fyftem fo incomplete in its fabrication, {o » 
weak in its compofitlon, and fo abhorrent even to thofe who gave 
it exiftence, fhould be the " wall of brafs'" to fecure the freedom, 
fovereignty and independence of our country ? This wonderful 
project was matured with precipitation, and organized at a mo-» 
ment, when the agents themfelves were under the ftrongeft parox^ 



228 Observations on the No. LVL 

ifms of their own di/ToIution — this being a fad, how is \t poffiblc 
that the welfare, profperit/ and happinefs of the United States 
fhould be fufpended on fach a frail, incoherent and undigefted 
fyftem. 

It is diverting to obferve the pathos of Mr^ Morris, when he 
exclaims, " if we lofe this charter^ never, never, ftiall we get anoth- 
er." I v/ould inquire, honourable fir, what charter ? Do you call 
this Judiciary act a charter, which, if we lofe, we " never, never'* 
can renew ? What Inighty boon do Vv^e obtain by the adoption ? 
What valuable acquirements are fecured to the people by this haf- 
ty performance ? Will a num.erous body of judges, with all the 
expenfes attending their appointment, be confidered " a charter" 
fo valuable, that if we lofe it, the lofs v/ili be irreparable ? The cit- 
izens, I believe, will never confider it fo effcntial to their happinefs, 
as to bemoan its annihilation ; more efpecially, when they know, 
that by repealing this a<5t, we are reftored to the fame fyftem, under 
which government proceeded during the adminiftration of WaHi- 
ington. By difmiffing your phalanx of judges, we re ft ore the old 
order of things, and if we were able to obtain juftice under the be- 
nign adminiftration of our firft Preficlent, why do you prefume to 
predid a diiTolution of the Conftitution, when we are defirous of 
giving the fame energy to the Judiciary as was experienced 
tinder him ? 

" Aw-ay, away, with all thefe derogatory fuppofitions" ; make 
yourfelf eafy, honourable ftr. If Wafliington was able to purfue 
the great purpofes of government under the former fyftem, is 
it not the higheft prefumption to fuppofe that it will not now an- 
fwer ? Even Mr. Adams had no other Judiciary than what is now 
propofed — neither could he need more. Were not the former 
judges fully competent to enforce the Sedition Law ? Did he find 
in any one inftance, that the judges were deficient in executing 
every federal mandate ? Were not the courts of law prompt in 
their decifions to aid every meafure which bore the feature of ex- 
ecutive patronage ? Did Judge Bee want any ftimulus in the con- 
demnation of Robbins ? The judges under the former adminiftra- 
tion were preachers of the glad tidings of prefidential infallibility, 
in every part of the Union. Produce, fir, one cafe, wherein the 
government was embarrafted from the delinquency of the judges I 
if the Judiciary were then adeqiiate to all federal purpofes, why 



No. LVI. Hou. G. Morris's Speech, 229 

3.re they nc^v deficient ? If Mr. Adams could profecute his mea- 
fiires under the old eflablllhtnent, why are you to fuppofe that Mr. 
JefTerfon is ftot equal to the fame undertaking ? Why fhould Mr. 
Adams on the night of his di/Tolution, wifn to force on his fuccef- 
for a more extravagant Judiciary than he himfelf had maintained ? 
Was it juft, tliat Mr. Jefferfon iliould be incumbered with fuper- 
numerary judges, and thereby bring his adminidration into difre- 
pute, by an additional expenfe ? V/hy fhould the wheels of govern- 
.ment be clogged with a new fyllem of judiciary^ at tbe moment 
Mr. Jefferfon v/as introduced into office ? "Why did Mr. Adams 
fuppofe, that his fucceffor could not profecute the bufmefs of the gov- 
ernment with the fame number of judges as were thought compe- 
tent from the iirft eilablifliment of the Constitution ? It muft rath- 
er appear officious in Mr. Adams to create a fuperauraerary body 
of judges, at the moment he was leaving Iiis office, and when in 
all probability the bufuiefs was decreafmg. It is fcmewhat fimilar 
to a man's placing a number of tenants in a houfe after the expira- 
tion of his leafe, and prefuming to give them 71 permanent refidence, 
l^i'itbout tlie advice or confent of the real owner. 

Mr. Morris exhibits fuch an enthufiaftlc frenzy in this debate, 
tliat he appears rather like an infatuated preacher, than a deliber- 
ate Senator. The epitliets are more expreffive of fanaticifm thart 
refiedion. In one inftance, he reprefenis himfelf in the flrong 
mufcular pofition of Ajax, throwing a fliield to defend the Judicia- 
ry, and with Herculean vigour building a wall of brafs around it : 
but after all his exertion in wielding his iliield and building his wall, 
he declares, " he is too weak to defend the ramparts againft the liofl 
of affailants." He however feems determined to purfue his enter- 
prize, for if he fails in military ardour, or cannot embody men 
enough for perfonal confiicl, he propofes to mount the ramparts, 
and with the utmoft vociferation call to " his affiftance the good 
fenfe, virtue and patriotifm of his opponents." The honourable 
gentleman mud have a fad tafl^ to perform in this fituation — his 
fnield thrown av/ay, the ramparts of his brafs wall totally defence- 
lefs, while this modern Ajax is mounted on the moft prominent 
eminence, and like Patience on a monument, calling aloud to his 
aifailants, «* paufe ! paufe ! for heaven's fake paufe !"• — This is 
truly an unequal conteft, and though we ir.ay think it a Quixotic 



3 3*' ^hervdfions on the No. LVI. 

controverfy, yet we cannot but applaud the herolfra of the 
adventurer, even if .we fappofe the meafure to be rafh and pre- 
cipitate. 

The Hon. Mr. Morris appears however to bewail the conftitu- 
tionality of the proceeding — on this part of the fubjedl I (hall offer 
a few remarks. It rauft be remembered that the Conftitntion is a 
covenant of -w oris ; every officer under it is affigned fpecial duties 
and fervices. Officers are not contemplated unlefs fervices are 
attached to them. Neither the legiflative nor the executive can 
wantonly create offices, imlefs there are fpecial duties to be per- 
formed. The pay goes with tliQ fervices, and if none is to be done, 
there is no pay flipulated. 

To apply this reafoning to the new judiciary fyflem. If the 
laft adminiftration in order to effedt certain puipofes took upon 
themfelves to annihilate the old order of things, and in a precipitate 
manner created a new fyftem, with a number of fupernumerary 
judges, totally unneceffary for the circumftances of the country, 
can it be doubted, whether it is in the power of the prefent admin- 
iftration to rectify the meafure ? The only queftion is, whether the 
former Judiciary fyftem was competent to the purpofes as it re- 
lated to the number of judges ; if it was, has the executive or leg- 
iflative a conftitutional authority to burden the people with an un- 
neceftary expenfe, or can it be confidered unconftitutional to repeal 
an act, or refufe payment to judges, when no adequate reajfon can 
be offered for the extenfion of the fyftem ? It is readily granted 
that a Judiciary Ihall be eftabliflied ; this was done at the earlieft 
period of the conftitution. The queftion then is, whether there 
can be no Iimkation in this eftablifhment ? Whether a legiftature 
juft expiring, and a Prefident juft going out of office, fhall com- 
bine to make twenty judges, when five are fully fufficient for all the 
exigences of our government ? Whether it can be unconftitutional 
to relieve the people from unneceftary taxes, when it is apparent 
that the eftablifhment was rather a fniecure to the judges. 
Though the Conftitution fays, that, " the judges fhall hold their 
offices during good behaviour," yet it alfo fays, that they fhall re- 
ceive for their ^^ fervices a compenfation." The Conftitution con-* 
tQmp\2.tts fervices ; and if none is performed, it is out of the power 
pf the bgiflative to grant them, any pay. The Conftitution mests 



No. LVI. Hon. G. Morrises Speech, 33? 

the oppofers more forcibly in granting compenfation to judges 
tv'hofe ^^ fervkes^^ are not required, than in the annihilation of the 
office. It being a covenant of ivorks^ the duties of the officers are 
effentially connedled with their falaries. It would be a violation 
of the Conftitution to grant compenfation to a mere nominal judge, 
when it is exprefsly declared, that he mull perform ^^ fer vices" be-' 
fore he is entitled to his pecuniary confideratioUo* 

Upon the whole, the honourable gentleman has miflaken the 
fplrlt and even the letter of the Conftituiion, when he enforces tjie 
tmconftitutionality of not paying the judges ; for nothing is more 
plain than that " fer vices" muft be performed, before one penny 
can be drawn from the public treafury. If fo, I would inquire 
VThdX fervlces the prefent judges have done, and if in the opinion of 
the legiflature there are none for them to do, whether by the fplrlt 
of the Confiltutlon they are entitled to any compenfation ? This ap- 
pears clear reafoning, for if the legiflature can grant pay to a 
a body of nominal judges when their duties are not required, or, if it 
is out of their power to modify the courts fo as to retrench, if 
neceffary, the number of judges, it is nothing more than an indi-* 
re(5t method to create within the United States a formidable pha-^ 
lanx of penfioners in direct oppofition to every rational and eco- 
nomical principle of the conftitution. The organization of the 
Judiciary being invefted in Congrefs, it follows that the fyftem 
muft ever be within their cognizance. Infallibility cannot be fup-* 
pofed more attached to the legiflature in this inftance, than m 
many others which are fubjed: to revifal. The conftitutionality of 
the repeal therefore is evident by the abfurdity of their being 
bound to adhere to a fyftem, inexpedient from our fituation, adopt- 
ed without mature confideration, in oppofition to the will of the 
Houfe of Reprefentatives at the time of paffing the adl, and from 
whence no efTential ^^ fervlcei^ can be rendered to the United 
Sutes* 



4> 



232 To Harrison G. Otis, Esq, No. LVIX.- 



rsE 



No. LVII. 



TO HARRISON G. OTIS, ESQ^ 

J\. PUBLIC avowal of political principles is a flrong proof of 
the Integrity of a man's conduct. As you, fir, often retail politi- 
cal fentiments in a caucus, and vaunt in your adroitnefs in llimu- 
lating a party, on the evening immediately preceding an election, 
it cannot be thought improper to compliment fuch an orator, by 
requePcing a copy of his fpeech for the prefs. 

As you, fir, have fuch ferious objedions to the adminiflration 
of the federal government, it is a pity that fuch cogent reafcns 
ihould not have a more extenfive circulation than within the fmall 
circle of a few devoted friends ; or that Vila's tavern fhould be the 
only theatre on which to difplay the magnitude of your patriotifm 
and the immenfity of your political talents. 

On Friday evening laft, a numerous body of citizens affembled 
at Faneuil-Hall, to felect proper candidates for Governour, Lieu- 
tenant-Governour and Senators. The republicans were called on ; 
the friends to union were invited. If, fir, you had any thing to 
allege againft the prefent adminiilratlon, it was Incumbent on you 
to meet your oppofers on equal ground ; if you had attended, you 
would have heard a requeft to men of your fentiments, in the pref- 
ence of two thoufand citizens, to oJQFer their obfervations. But fo 
far from any perfon on your fide of the queftion confronting their 
opponents, they declined the controverfy. 

If, fir, you was fmcere in y©ur remarks on fabbath evening, at 
Vila's, why did you not appear on Friday evening at Faneuil- 
Hall I Why did you clioofe to confine your obfervations within fo 
fmall a compafs, when you had an opportunity to give them a 
tnore extenfive circulation ? If the prefent adminiftratlcn has a 
tendency to produce the e-^'ils you fuggefted, it was 3'our duty, 
(as an honeft man) to give publicity to your apprehenfions. If 
the northern ftates are to be injured by Mr. Je^erfon, proclaim 



t 



No. LVli. To Harrison G. Otis, Esq, ^ i,^^ 

the reafons of your belief in fuch a manner, and in fuch afTembliesj 
is may lead to an impartial inveftigation of this interefting fubjed:. 
Do not vilify a government without giving an opportunity of re- 
plying to your charges,^ 

The defign of your fpeech feems calculated to raife a jeal- 
oufy between tlie northern and fouthern flates ; to deftroy the confi- 
dence of the people in the friendly difpofition of the prefent admin- 
iflration ; and to inflame the public to fuch a pitch as to difTolve the 
union. If fuch were your intentions, let me afk whether you have 
weighed in your mind the confequences of fuch meafures, as they 
relate to the various interefts of the merchant, tradefmen, and the 
holders of the public funds ? 

The merchant muft eventually be injured by fuch a feparation 
—the tradefman would immediately feel the diilreffing effecls of 
this mercantile embarraiTment — and the holders of the funds would 
experience a" iliock which would Ihake their quarterly payment to 
the center. 

If the northern and fouthern ftates fnould feparate, a new confiU 
tut'ton muft be adopted by the New-England flates. The high- 
wrought principles of the EfTex junto would be univerfally explod- 
ed, and though fome might think to impofe on the northern flates 
a conflituticn analogous to the Britifh, yet a convention of dele- 
gates, adling under the infiruclion^of their conflituents*, would baf- 
fle their expecflations. During the important period of adopting 
a new conflitution, the public debt would be fufpended between the; 
contending parties, and the creditors would be hawking their 6 and 
8 per cents, about our flreets (like the old foldiers) at 2/6 in the 
pound. 

Thefe remarks are not vifionary, but are too ferious to be 
fported with. Who then will thank the man that has agitated a 
fubjedl io uncertain in its confequences \ Will he be confidered as 
a friend to the general intereft who attempts to rend afunder the 
bands of union, fet afloat every fpecies of property, and thereby 
force the public creditors to feek an afylum amid the contending 
parties \ Thefe are queflions of importance, and ought at ieaft to 
check the fallies of difappointed ambition, left the evils fliould 
thicken too rapidly to be eafily diffipated. 
F f 



234 ^<^ Harrison G. Otis, Ejq. Ko\ LVIII. 

In order, fir, to bring this fubje<5l to a fair Inveftigatlon, and te 
try your arguments by a touchftone more pungent than the efFu- 
fions of Vila's hall, you are again requefted to publifh your phil- 
ippic againft the federal government, delivered on fabbath even- 
ing, and I pledge myfelf to anfwer it, with a fignature equally as 
explicit as the one you fubfcribe. 



No. LVKL 



TO HARRISON G. OTIS, ESQ^ 

HP 

X HE Bofton Gazette of the 5th Inftant, contains a few fketchtfs 
of your fpeech delivered at Vila's on the fabbath evening preceding 
the elecftion for Governour. It is declared, " that you have always 
acquitted yourfelf handfomely, but never did better than on this 
occafion.'* We have then, fir, before us, one of your hejl fpeechesy 
and though the reporter apologizes for his inability to do you juf- 
tice, yet he cannot forbear gratifying thofe who could not be in- 
dulged the pleafure of feeing and hearing you acquit yourfelf fo 
** handfomely.'''* 

The fpeech abounds witlifuchan energy of pathos, that it ex- 
cites a glow of fervency in the firft outfet. We cannot but ad- 
mire the brilliant fentiment in defcribing Vila's hall as a camp, in 
which was colle<5}:ed the main body of the federal army. Bona- 
parte could not addrefs his veterans in a ftyle more heroic than 
you did the moderator^ viz. " Hard Indeed, fir, is the fate of a gar- 
rifon, when the troops are not only obliged to Jleep upon their 
arms, but find it necefTary to make frequent failles to prevent a 
fiirprixe.''* If your troops were difpofed to meet their opponents, 
why do you complain of a " furprize," when on the Friday even- 
ing previous to your mujler, the republicans gave public notice that 
they Were to affemble at Faneuil-Hall ? Certainly, fir, there was 
no danger of a " furprize," when you had notice in the public 
papers three days before your meeting. Why did you not then 
fslly to the Hall, and like a bold general, bring your men into the 



No. LVII. To Harrison G. Otis, Esq. I'li^ 

field of battle ? Why, on that evening, did you fu ffer the garrifon 
" to jleep on their arms," or why did you choofe to defert the ample 
fpace of Fancuil-Hall, and croud your main body on 2.Jabhath even^ 
ing within the fmall compafs of Vila's hall ? Is it generous, fir, to 
complain of a " furprize," when the moil public information was 
given of the time and place of meeting ? If your troops have long 
" flept on their arms," why did you not roufe them from their 
Jlumbers, and march them in folid columns to confront their 
opponents ? I fufpe(5t, lir, the difficulty in your garrifon arofe 
principally from the want of ammunition, and that you thought a 
few vollies of mufketry, when the republican army was difperfed, 
would have a better effect than a general engagement? 

Your fpeech, fir, further defcribes, in pathetic language, " the 
inconveniences which the aged and fiber citizens fuftained on an 
ele6tion-day, by the noife and confufion of the jacobin baivlers, on 
Faneuil-Hall ftairs." Why is this charge againft the jacobins (or 
in other words the republicans) when your own caucus appointed 
a committee of one hundred and twenty men to diftribute votes 
on this occafion ? If you look over the names you will find 
among the number, fome of the moft noify, boifterous men that 
can be produced in the town. This committee arranged them- 
felves in fimilar order, in conducing the election, as the firewards 
make lanes to communicate water to the engines. The whole 
force of the federal party took pofTeffion of almoft every avenue, 
and every voter had to pafs an ordeal, under the minute infpedion 
of bank diredors, EfTex junto men, and fycophants hanging on 
their patronage. How then, fir, can you prefume to talk about 
" jacobin bawlers," when the caucus, in which you affumed the 
diredion, appointed fuch a numerous committee, as almoft 
drowned by their vociferation every articulation of the republicans ? 
Why then, fir, do you talk about the " engines of reafon," to ex- 
tinguifh the ^* furnace of your opponents," when you yourfelf 
blew the bellows of oppofition, and voted for one hundred and 
twenty men from Vila's, to influence the election ? 

Your refledlions on the choice of Mr. Jefferfon are unworthy 
notice. I do not, fir, clcfe with you on this ground, by admitting 
that your objeftions are valid ; but if you perfift in your caucus 
declamations, I am willing to meet you on this queftion, whenever 
your warm zeal fhall lead you publicly to fupport your obje(5lioiis, 



236 To Harrison G. Otis, Esq, No. LVIIL 

The foregoing obfervatlons are folely confined to the rhodo- 
montade of your fpeech, as it relates to the fublime fidtion of an 
army affembled in Vila's hall, the " jacobin bawlers" on Faneuil- 
hall ftairs, and the indecency of your afTertions as to rfie eledion 
of Mr. JefFerfon. I fhall now advert to your ridiculous pathos, 
on the meafures of the prefent adminiflration. From a " garrifon,'* 
Vila's hall is fuddenly changed to a boifterous ocean — the wreck 
of the conftitution is defcribed as floating on every billov/, " onr 
judiciary on one wave, our internal taxes on another, and our 
iate (landing army on another." You further fay, that " not 
only the doors but the vvindows of the temple of juftice have been 
burft open, and the building is filled with a banditti ; the pillars 
cf the temple are broken down, its roof has fallen in, and its 
foundation is undermined." What a deluge of ideas croud upon 
the mind amid fuch an inundation of rhapfody. In a hot room, 
thronged with a body of heated federalifts, how mufl fuch glowing 
fcntiments operate among them ? Waves and billows engulphing 
the conftitution—internal taxes bobbing up and down like drown- 
ing kittens— the Handing army, like wHarf-rats in a high tide, 
quitting their encampment- — the judiciary ! the judiciary, though 
reprefented by you as a temple, is neverthelefs defcribed as floating 
on a wave ; the windows' broken, the doors burft open, and a 
banditti thronging the building. If, fir, the old adminiftration 
have launched fach a foiid temple on the ocean, ^nd filled it, like 
the Trojan horje, with a banditti, it is rather miraculous to find it 
floating on a'wave ! I Ihould fuppofe it would fmk to the bottom, 
and that " its foundation" would not eafily be " undermined." 

I am fenfible, fir, that it is neceffary here to notice an apology 
which appeared in the Palladium ; but in juftice to your friend 
who reported your fpeech in the Gazette, I cannot think it pofiible 
for him to be guilty of fuch an error. Is is probable, that fuch 
a grofs miftake fhould arife from a man who pretended to give a 
^etch of the beji fpeech you ever delivered ; that the ** right of fuf- 
frage" fhould be miftaken for xht judiciary fyjlem /—-that he fhould 
abfurdly defcribe the " doors, windov/s, benches,". &c. of the 
** right of fufrage,'' No man in his fenfes could make fuch a 
blunder, and yet the editors of the Gazette endeavour to palm, 
through the Pailadiuni, fuch abfurdities on the public. They 



No. LIX. On the Measures, ^c. 2Vf 

took care not to expofe their folly in their own paper, and there- 
fore made the Palladium a " cat's paw" for the purpofe. 

In this controverfy, fir, nothing more is required than the 
truth ; if your friends have not done you juftice, affume the right 
to yourfelf ; let us have the tvhole fpcsch. If the waves of faction 
are fwalli)\ving up the conftituticn — if the pieces are toffed about 
on every billovsr — if the temple of juilice is filled with a banditti, 
and their honours are expofed to catch cold, by the windows being 
broken, and every door burft in, let us have the dreadful difafters 
defer ibed in plain language, and it is not doubted but every re- 
publican will lend a hand to repair the damage. 

It is equally as mortifying to nie particularly to addrefs you oiiL 
this fubjedl, as it may be condefcencl'mg in you to reply to my ob- 
fervations ; but the crifis of political controverfy is fuch, that it is 
proper to bring individuals, who volunteer themfelves in oppofition 
to the prefent adminiftration, to explain the motives of their con- 
di\xQ.. The object of my addrefs is to prevent an improper bias 
at the moment of an eledion, and if poffible to bring the leaders 
of the federal party to an explicit avowal of their fentiments, be- 
fore the tribunal of the public. The republicans are willing to 
fubmit their caufe to an impartial inve {ligation, and as you, fir, 
have prefumed to take the lead in oppofition to them, your Ulence 
will be confidered as an evidence of the imbecility of the caufs 
you efpoufe. 



No. LIX. 

ON THE MEASURES OF THE PRESENT ADMTNISTR.A* 

TION. 

What evil have they done P 

X HE political controverfy in this country is unparalleled in the 
hiftory of the v/orld ; a -government afiailed by the intrigues of a 
fadion who have no other pretence for their condud, than the at- 
tempts of the adminiftration to lefTen the taxes of the people, is a 
lingular phenomenon in fociety. This peculiar mode of creating 
animofity among the citizens, is referved for a wonderful event 



^^8 On the Measures of tVe No. LIX. 

of the prefent day ; it is a political paradox, and muft excite the 
admiration of Europe, as a circumftance of a peculiar nature. 

The calumny daily beftowed upon the executive and a majori- 
ty of the legiflature, naturally calls upon the citizens to inquire, 
WImt evil have they done ? Why are fuch conftant alarms excited I 
Why are the papers fo fraught with abufe and detradlion againft 
every man who appears defirous to fupport the prefent govern- 
ment ? Why is a party calling ,on the people to rally ? Why are 
they urging a feparation of the ftates, and endeavouring by every 
means to deftroy our confidence in the executive ? 

What evil have they done P is a queftion which ftill recurs. 
Where is the man who is injured by the meafures of government ? 
Is the merchant, trade/man or farmer injured by the decreafe of taxes ? 
Even the Jlock-holder has no reafon to complain, as his quarterly 
demands are as punctually difcharged as when the government 
horronved money at 8 per cent* 

Is it poffible then, that there can be a ferlous difpofition in the 
people, to oppofe the prefent adniiniftration ? If no man is injured, 
who is to begin the oppofition ? If no citizen is aggrieved, who is 
to rife in arms, and under what flandard are we to rally ? An ar- 
Hiy in the field, with all their military apparatus, in oppofition to 
a government which is relieving them from taxes, muft be as ridicu- 
lous as the vagaries of Don Quixote, It is poffible, however, 
that fome hiight-errant may contemplate fuch a whimfical crufade, 
und fome Sancho Panza ftand ready to attend him in his enter- 
prize ; but the good fenfe of the people muft ever hold fuch wild 
extravagances in the utmoft deteftation. 

Prefident Jefferfon, fmce his inauguration into office, has by a 
fyfteni oi economy y faved the United States upwards oi three millions 
of dollars ; and yet, ftrange to relate, has been abufed in the moft 
outrageous manner, for the very meafures which efFeded it ! In- 
ftead of which, had he made an addition of this fum to the ex- 
penfes of the laft adminiftration, his prefent calumniators would 
have been his warmeft advocates ; for it muft be remembered, 
that his opponents are of the ** feft,'* who hold the do(5lrine that 
** a public debt is a public bkjfing ;'* confequently, every dollar ex- 
pended is a pledge of that blejfing, and every {hilling faved is the 
ft)rebodin3: of a national curfe. If the Prefident, inftead of repeal- 
ing oar internal taxes, had augmented them — inftead of difcharg^ 



Mo* LIX. present Adminhtration. 239 

ing a numerous body of ufelefs officers, had increafed them — in- 
ftead of paying the ftockholders with the duties arifmg from im- 
poft only, had requefted a loan of millions, at 8 or 10 per cent, 
intereft : If he had done thefe things, the federal papers would 
have been crouded with congratulations on our national profperi- 
ty ; addrefles would have covered the prefidential tabic, and in 
all probability we fhould have been called on to revive the cockade, 
as the emblem of our attachment to his adminiftration. 

But, alas, it happens unfortunately for this clafs of gentry, that 
Mr. Jefferfon explodes the fentiment that " a public debt is a public 
blefling" ; he does not wilh to place the happinefs of his country 
on this foundation ; this " modern phtIofophy\ he difowns ; he ftud- 
ies the general welfare of his fellow-citizens ; and is not defirous to 
heap bleffings on one clafs of men, by curfing every other tuith taxes. 

This, fellow-citizens, is the evil <ivhich he hath done — he has lef- 
fened the burden from the fhoulders of his conflituents, and has 
pledged himfelf that he will purfue this line of condudl to the ex- 
tinguifhment of the public debt. Thefe are his crimes, and thefe 
are the fms of the prefent adminiflration — if any man is injured let 
hijn fpeak. 

Here, methinks, I hear a number of men exclaim, he .has turned 
us out of ojice, Alas, gentlemen, your cafes may be deplorable as 
to your particular private intereft ; but you muft confole your- 
ielves, that the Prefident is not to a6l by partial, but by general 
laws. If you have had the good fortune for many years to live by 
your offices, it does not follow, that you fhould continue in them, 
if the exigencies of the country do not require it. It may be a 
very ^^ pretty thlng'^ for you, to receive an annual ccmpenfaticn 
ariflng from the public taxes, but it would be a grievous thing to 
thofe who pay the?n, if your fervices are no longer needed. If you 
enjoyed thefe bleffings for a number of years paft, you ought rath- 
er to congratulate yourfelves that you have been fo far benefitted, 
than to cenfure and condemn the government for not continuing 
you in office. The citizens are grateful^ but not prodigal — we thank 
you for all the good you have done fmce your appointments, but 
you muft excufe us, if we are willing that the pay fhould ftop, 
when your labours are wholly ufelefs. — Though fome of you are 
difplaced, and others take your births, yet modefty fhould forbid 
you to exclaim againft th^ Prefident j for if he was ftrialy to 



54^ ^ On the Measures of the No. LIX, 

^* lay juftice to the line and righteoufnefs to the plummet" he would 
extend his removals to a much greater length ; for why fhould 
thofe, oppofed to his adminifLration, enjoy his particular patronage ? 
The fcurrility againfi: the Prefident is fo grofs, and the caufes 
of complaint are fo abfurd, that I conceive it necelFary to apologize 
» for ferloufly noticing them. The federal-party appear determined 
to place the United States in the moft derogatory point of view 
in the eyes of the European nations. While other powers are 
laying exorbitant taxes on their fubjefrs — v/hile England is bur- 
dening the people at the rifk of an infurresflion, the EfTex junto 
are endeavouring to raife a rebellion in America for Icjfening taxes. 
What can be the defign of this meafure ? The reaibn is obvious, 
they wifh to convince the world, tliat "The People" are never 
fatisfied ; that there is as much oppofition in the republic of 
America, for decreajing taxes, as there is in the monarchy of Europe 
for increajlng them. This faflioii are endeavouring to Confound 
all governments ; to riot on the earnings of the induftrious, ancj 
if any complaint fftould arlfe to bring America as the voucher to 
prove, that The People are never eafy. Their plans are deep and 
fubtle ; they are rallying to overthrow the liberties of mankind,- 
and every ftratagem is ufed to effe^Sl their diabolical purpofes. 
They wilh to prove, that the ^^ people are their greatejt enemies." 

To prove my pofition, I would remark, that there is no more 
oppofition to the Britifh miniHry for augmenting faxes, than there 
is in America for leffcning them ; the Englifh papers are not more 
fevere againft the Britifn government, under the prefTure of taxes^ 
than the federal papers againft the American government for the 
extinguifhment of them. Would it not then be a ftrange ftory in 
hiftory, if the people of England fhould rife in arms to obtain an 
decreafe of taxes, and the citizens of America fiiould at the fame 
time rally to increafe them ? It would be a curious chapter of 
accidents, for a recruiting fergeant in the city of London, to beat 
up for volunteers to feek a relief from f^.v^fj-— while in Bofton, one 
fhould, with equal ardour, hold out the tempting inducement of 
an additional nveight. This is a paradox ; but the " modern phi- 
lofophy'-' that " a national debt is a national hlejfing,'* is the only 
hypothecs on which fuch an abfurdity can be fubftantiated in this 
country. 



No. LIX. present Admhnsti-atlon, 241 

The EiFex fa(5lIon are, not contented to lay heavy taxes upon 
us, but they arc anxious for a dlv'ifion of the Northern and South- 
ern States. If this Ihould take place, what would be our fituation ? 
The fhipping of the Northern States muft lay at the wharves, 
and BritiHi vefTels would enjoy the exclufive privilege of the Car- 
ry'tng-Trade ; our fhip-carpenters would fpeedily be obliged to lay 
by the^f tools ; and every tradefrnacn in town, connected with 
navigation, fnuft retire into the country, or become an underling 
in the ftore of a Britifli agent ; our young men would be cut ojST 
from every commercial enterprize, and have the mortification of 
feeing Britifh fhips unloa.ding Britifh manufadures in the Northern 
vStates, and from thence fent to the Southward for a! freight of 
tobacco and other valuable produce. 

Let us then, fellovz-citizens, look around us, and inquire,' 
Tvhether an enemv is not do'in^ this ? Who are the men that are 
urging a feparation, and cenfuring the prefent adminiftration ? 
Tell me, whethei' among the whole number, there is an old tory 
who is not concerned in this bufmefs ? They pretend to call It 
ftdtralifmi but the truth is, it is Toryism in difgidfe ; it is the polfoii 
of the 0/^ /mw«," which threatened to ^"^ leaven the whole lump," 
during our revolution. The enemies of that day, ufed every 
effort to make us jealous of our patriots ; Hancock and Adami 
were then abufed fimilar to Mr. Jefferfon — our Congrefs v/ere" 
ftigmatized as a banditti — the temple of juHIce was then defcribed 
as having " every window broke and every door burft in" — the 
** fi lends to order" were then called on to roufe from their (lum- 
bers, and on the night of the 19th April, 17 75, (-when the unfuf- 
pelting citizens had retired to reft) they fallied out on the defence- 
lefs yeomanry, and ere the fun had rifen to Its meridian, embriied 
their haiKls' in the blood of our flaughtered coiintrymen. At that 
time they endeavoured to divide the Northern and Southern 
States — but " UNITE or die" was then our motto, and it is now as 
ftrong a pledge of our fafoty, under the guidance of heaven, as 
the ark, amidft the deluge of the old world. Let lis, then, fellow- 
citizens, be collected, be firm, and perfevering — rely on the good- 
nefs of your caufe and the rectitude of your condu<5t— depend on 
it, heaven vsnll never futler us to fall a prey to our enemies, after 
G ^ 



^4,2 ^^^^ ^^^ DehsionA No. LX« 

jfo manv miracles wrought in our favour, during the diftreffing 
period of our revolution. 



No. LX,' 
ART3 AND DELUSIONS. 

Jl Demand ! a Demand 1 

JlT mull be acknowledged that the junto have one valuable 
tVait in their political chara6ter, viz. to make the mnjl of every event 
nvh'ich ar'ifes in their favour. In this particular, they adopt the 
peculiar policy of the Britifh miniftry, during their eontroverfy 
with France ; every fuccefs obtained hy the Englifli (however 
iniignificant) was detailed in the government gazettes, as vidories 
of the highefl magnitude ; the people were led to believe, that 
every meafure of the nation was fraught with the mod happy 
confequences, by partial flatements of the defeats and difafters of 
their enemies. The tower-guns were often- fired to announce 
vidrories of the moil brilliant nature, v»'hen the cabinet at St. James's 
were in pofTefiion of documents of a very different complexion. 
The fpirit and enterprize of the nation were effential to the great 
object of their contention ; it has always been the invariable fyilem 
of the Engliih, to make the mod formidable appearance, when 
their affairs were in the moil defperate fituation. 

During the American V\''ar, this condud was purfued with 
alacrity ; the Englifli papers were conilantly filled with anticipa- 
tions of a complete conqucil of the colonies, and the capture of 
Burgoyne was precurfor'd with the vanquilliment of the American 
army ; Bunker-Hill battle was celebrated as the moll glorious 
difplay of Britlfn heroifm, and the poiTefTion of that eminence was 
defcrihed as commanding the moil extenfive fortreifes of America. 

During the French revolution, how often have we heard of* 
the total difaffe(5lion of the French army ? Bonaparte, has fuifered 
as many deaths, as Mary Magdalene had devils ; he has beer. 



No. LX. Arts cuul Xidmhns, 244 

affaffinated, eaten, famlfhed, drowned, frozen, poifoned, blown 
up, and burnt in his camp ; the Mamelukes and crocodiles- of 
Egypt have alternately triumphed over his carcafe ; and the rm^ 
fortunate Bonaparte has fometimes been buried in the fands, and 
at other times devoured by wild beafts and birds of prey, for 
the amufement of minifterial hirelings, and to deceive and gull 
the people. 

Thus have the Britifh purfjed a fyflem of delufion, and haye 
by thefe means urged the nation to profecute their chimerical 
projects, till even falfehood had loft its energies. 

The Eilex junto in this country have adopted meafures, fimilar 
in almofl all inft.ances vvith tiiofe of their adherents in Europe ; 
every ftratageni has been pradifed, every mode of deception has 
been profecuted ; plots and confpiracies were daily announced, as 
*W«(?j" to more difallrous ditcoveries. As fall as one falfehood 
>vas difcovered, another was immediately circulated ; our elections 
were ever attended with frefh details of alarming apprehenficns, and 
the people have at thefe periods, been excited to exercife their 
fuffrages under impreffions, that a " tub-plot" was about to blow 
up the continent, or that a body of Iliuminati were undermining 
«very church in the Union : foyne of the clergy feemed to apprehend 
that a Guy Faux was fecreted in every, avenue leading to the 
places of public worlhip. Thefe idle tales at length began to 
^row too ftale for belief, and their efFe(fts were loft among the 
body of enlightened citizens. True, however, to their defigns, 
the junto perlifted in their plans to roufe the fears of the citizens ; 
having exhaufted their ingenuity to create new ftories of *' Ocean 
malfacres," Sec. they at length rallied their whole force, and con- 
centrated all their efforts in the cry of a " French demand P* This 
was their ne plus ultra ; this was their mafter-piece of policy ; here 
they fuppofed they had touched the manly fpirit of the Americans ; 
a demand ! a demand ! was echoed and re-echoed through the 
Union— /2 demand ! a demand ! was proclaimed in every city, town 
and village within the northern ftates — a demand ! a demand / flew 
like eledtricity throughout Maffachufetts ; and on the day of elec- 
tion, though the tremor had fomewhat fubfided within the circle 
of information, yet the agitation of the public mind had not 
totally evaporated ; like a ftiock of an earthquake, it left an un- 
fiiflating motion, \vhich gave an opportunity to the proje<^ors of 



244 -^'"^'* ^"^ Delusions. No. LX. 

the report, to effecl: in an extenfive degree, the pernicious purpofes 
contemplated. Since thefe dillurbers of our peace have been dc- 
tedted in this diabohcal fcheme, they have given it a more favour- 
able appellation ; they have modeftly. called it a " loanj''' which 
wears quite a different afpect than what they endeavoured to 
imprels on the public mind by " a demand, ivith tiuel've fail of the. 
line to enforce it /'* 

This ftory, however, turned out a falfehood in every particular, 
as the French, fo far from demandhig a loan, (v/ith a threat of 
twelve fail to carry it into execution) have not even requefred a 
cent from our government. Thus falls to the ground the " mam- 
moth'^ plot of a " French demand.^* BafHed in every circumftance 
on this fubjedl, they are obliged to cover their deformities, by 
faying that " they intended, to requeft a loan." This, however, 
is a miferabie apology for the hue and cry of a " demand^'' and 
the terrors of twelve fail of the line to enforce it. If they intended 
to make this requeft, happy are we that the proauefs of the man, 
who *• prayed for war,'' has intimidated them from their requih- 
tion. 

The Effex junto, after being defeated lu all their de- 
iigns, have at length refumed courage by the election ii> 
Bolfon. They now run about the ftreets in frantic ecftacies, 
aiTemble on the Exchange with a majeftic deportment, and collect 
at. corners in an hollile attitude, for the purpofe of vociferating 
with Stentorian lungs, that federalifm is gaining an afccndancy 
in the refpe6tive States ; as an evidence of which, their hrft de- 
claration announced that Colonel Thomas was not chofen in 
Nev7-York ; hut in two days the Editor of the Centinel was 
obliged to contradict the falfehood in his own paper, by informing 
the good people that this fame Colonel Thomas obtained upwards 
of nine hundred votes majority. In this efiort they were fcon 
iruflrated, and there remains but on^ fohtary refort, viz. the 
dhBion in the metropolis. 

But the fallacy of this expedation will foo4 be realized. The 
idea that the people of Bofton have changed their political 
fentiments, is alfo fallacious ; the votes, either as it refpe<5ls 
Governour, Senators or Reprefentatives, are no tefl; of federal 
pruiciples, as the confufion and diforder v/hich arofe on the 
firft election by the throng paffing to the boxes, gave an oppca'- 



l<o. LX. yfr/j art J Ddusionf, 24^ 

tiiniuY for thofe who were difpofed to violate the equal fuftraees 
cf the citl/.eiiG, to put their plans into execution. The tumult was 
ib outrageous, that it was out of the po-ojcr of the feleBmen to prevent 
an improper crouding upon. them, and it is publicly afTerted by a 
rerpecftable tradefman, that he faw three men p.ut a handful of 
votes into the box, during the general fcramble. Tht; laft eledion 
was more orderly profecuted, the feleftmen have ever ihewn a 
difpofition to accommodate the citizens, but the difficulty which 
attends voting, and the time which it takes to be regularly 
checked, prevented a large proportion of the republican tradefmen 
from coming forward on the eleclipn of Reprefentatives. The 
choice, therefore, in this town is more owing to acx'uknt than any 
real change of political fentiment among the inhabitants. If any 
fpecific queftiou was- brought before the town, relating to the 
prefcnt adminiftration, there is no dojibt the junio would be 
left in the minority. They are always fearful of a public in- 
veiligation of Mr. JeJferfon's conduA, and choofe to confine their 
cauculfes within a fmall room, rather than to appear in the ample 
fpace of Faneuii-Hall. 

Notwithftanding all thefe evidences of the problematical date 
of the town, yet now, forfooth, the Repnefentatives of Bofton are 
going to raife the " fetting fun of fedej-alifm." The cry is, yio, 
have this great man, and that great man in the Legillature ; an4 
that the feat laft year was not honourably filled, we had no talents, 
no honefty, and that one hundred thoufand dollars tax w'as laid on 
the town by the inefficacy of the members ; but this year we fhall 
have honourable men, all honour able men, gentlemen of veracity ; and 
above all, we are to be honoured with a Speaker from Bofton., 
Thus every thing is planned with the utmoft accuracy for the a- 
dojTtion of the Legillature. Now federalifm is reviving, and the 
country members are under a forcible direction from the " head- 
quarters of good principles ;" if there are any oppofers it is proba-. 
ble they will be called a " contemptible minority" ; the " honoura- 
ble men^^ w^ill fet their faces againll them, and like Joihua of old 
will arreft lh.e fetting fun of federalifm. 

Here I would paufe and inquire what Is the real meaning of 

federaVifm, in oppofition to the adminiftration ©f Mr. JefFerfon I 

Does federalifm confift in an extravagant expenditure of public. 

nipn^y ? a ftaijding army ? an S per cent, loan \ a continuance of- 



246 To the " Tming Man-' in the Palladium. No. LXi. 

internal taxes, whereby ISIaflachui^^ris paid eighty thoufand dollar;;, 
and Virginia only forty thoufand doUais ? a. fupernumerary body 
of officers to create prcfidejitial patronage, and whofc pay exhauft- 
ed a large propoition of the income ? Is it federalifm to calumni- 
ate the Prefident, r.buic every officer of government, vilify the mar 
jority of Congrefs, raife the refentment of the French, and court 
'the fmiles of the Englilh ? to encourage thoufands of Britifh refu 
dents to monopolize the trade with England, and to ftarve cur 
young American citizens, to feed thofe who fcarceiy pay a iliilling 
tax, while they are vending the fame articles Im.ported by our own 
merchants ? If this is federalifm, it is impomble that itfhould long 
prufper — the young men will quickly feel the eifccls of this poli- 
cy. If this is federalirrn — if this is the " rifmg fun" which is 
vauntingly proclaimed as diiTufnig its benign efficacy, depend on it, 
,my young friends, that its genial warmth will never promote your 
liappinefs ; it will bafile your hopes ; your enterprize will be fruf- 
trated ; the cultivation of the foil will not extend your growth ; 
fhe harveih will redound to Britons, while you will be left in the 
field of commerce, like vegetables blafted by an untimely frofl. 



No. LXL 



TO TK£ " yOUisG MAN," IN THE PALLADIUM. 



1 HAVE READ your performance with confiderable attention^ 
ajid am forry you have difcovered {o great a degree of acrimony 
in joVlV obfervations.— Truth is of fuch a delicate texture, that it 
mud be fought for in the calm receffes of refieLi:ion, rather than in 
the turbulent efrufions of the paffions. The' ornament of a young 
man is mGdeJiy-i and when he overleaps the boundary of decency, 
?ie expofes himfelf more to pity than refpedful attention. If 
70U have any objed^ions to my remarks, ic would be more becom- 
ing to point out the impropriety of them, than to retort in a lan- 
guage which conveys an idea that your manners have not been im- 
proved by your education ; prefuming, boweverj that you have ve,n" 



No. LXI. To the " I'oung Man' in the Palladium. l^j 

tured in public in order to obtain information, and being unwil- 
ling to difappoint you in your Uudable defign, I fliall wave, for 
tlie prefent, my own reflections, on the ba-tieful tendency of Brttijh fciElors 
enjoying the fame rommerc'ial ben^Jiis lu'ith our onvn citizens,) and recom- 
^ mend to your cindid perufal the circular letter, written by feme of 
our moft refpedtabk mercantile charaflers in the year 1785. 

This letter has often been publifned, but as It contains fa6is of 
the moft intereftlng nature ; as it expiciTes the fentiments of men 
who are well acquainted with our commercial relations ; as the 
meafures recommended were the bafis on which our federal govern^' 
ment was founded ; as the debates in the feveral ftate conventions 
(during its adoption) principally contemplated the rieceffity of 
fome " checks and balances," on the European trade : For thefc 
reafons, I prefume it vrill not be thought Improper at this time to 
recommend this important document to your coniideration, or 
even to recommend its being read annually in our town-meetings» 
It is fo particularly defcriptive of ihe prefent Rate of our country, 
I flatter myfelf, while it communicates to you that knowledge of 
which you appear at prefent fo deftitute, it v/iil ferve to revive 
thofe fentiments among the citizens at large which actuated the 
merchants of Boftoii at that eventful period. 

However, " young man,'^^ If the letter fnould fail to convmce you 
of your error, I fhall only requeft that your refentment will hereaf- 
ter be levelled on the gentlemen who dlffeminated thefe principles 
by a circular letter, (even if fome of them have apoftatized) rather 
than on one who is only a profeiyte to the truths which it con- 
tains. 

When you arrive at the age of maturity, you will know the 
difference betv^een thofe induftrious emigrants, who arrive in Ame- 
rica for the purpofe of improving our manufadures, cultivating the 
foil, and whofe object is ^permanent reftdence^ and the mere tranfient 
hawkers who only refide in the commercial towns, for the fcle pur- 
pofe of vending their goods, to the injury of our merchants, who pay- 
little or no taxes, whofe refidence is fo temporary, that they are 
not afraid to hazard their reputation by erroneous entries in the ■ 
cuftom-houfe, and v.-ho will in time deftroy all the regular impoT- 
tation of our own citizens. • 

If the young men of the prefent day are m.ore enlightened and 
liberal than the merchants wh-ofe flgnstures accompany the Ad- 



3»4^ ^^^ poUtktil Phenomenon: No; LXIt, 

drefs, or if they are perfuaded they can rife fuperior to all the con- 
fequences anticipated by thofe gcntletnen, yet I am perfuaded there 
is fo much candor rending in the breafts of the youth cf this me- 
tropolis, that they will not confider me as " their enemy," though 
I may be thought too officious in warning them of the danger con- 
templated by fome of the moft diftinguiflied patriots at that alarm- 
ing crifis. 

If the young American, with his wife and family, feel difpol" 
ed to have a Scotch fa6lor or an Englifh agent enjoy equal com- 
mercial advantages with themfelves, it is a misfortune for which I 
am not anfwerable, or think that the man who deprecates the ten- 
dency arifmg from fuch evils is " their enem.y," I muft fubmit to 
the implication ; but let me affure fuch inconfiderate revilers, that 
the time will foon arrive v/hen they \v\]\.feel the effects of their fol- 
ly, and be obliged to acknowledge the man who forewarns them 
cf the evil as their bejl friend. 



No. LXIL- 



THE POLITICAL PHENOMENON; 

-1. HE prefent flate of politics rn this country, mufl: exhibit the 
United Stat-es as a phenomenon in the view of European nations. 
To obferve individuals in a republican fociety contending againft 
thofe vital principles, on v/hich its legitimate permanency muft 
exift- — to read publications fraught with the moft malignant 
calumny againft the man who is defirous to fubftantiate the full 
energy of thofe doiflrines, which have ever been c6nfidered as the 
bulwark of a free government — to fee papers v/hich are ftyled 
federal, proilituted to the bafe purpofe of diffolving the Union ! — - 
to find toads circulated around the feftive. board, tending to 
excite the moft abhorrent paffions, and countenanced by clerical 
charaflers, who profefs to inculcate the benign maxim of " peace 
on earth and good will towards men'* — to hear the full-toned 
organ (dedicated to hymns of praife and thankfgiving to tho' 



No. LXII. The political Phetiommon, 241^ 

great Ruler of the unlverfe) leading in difcordant notes to the 
iangulnary fong of blood and carnage among the citizens of the 
tefpedive States ! Inftead of the angel of peace, to portray 
" the amputating knife,'* in the temple of Him, who declared, 
that " whofoever drew the fword Ihould periih by the fword 1'* 
To notice the hypocrify of thofe, who, while they pretend to 
eulogize WaOiington, are deftroying the great Legacy of Un'wn^ 
which he bequeathed at the laft moments of his exiftence ! To 
obferve the bafe intrigues of men, who by falfehood and decep- 
tion miflead the honeil yeomanry and tradefmen of Maflachufetts, 
New-Hamplhire, and Connedlicut, to counterad the principles fo 
earneftly recommended by this departed patriot ! When, fellow- 
citizens, we view thefe xhm^s fyjlsmatkally purfued, have we not 
reafon to paufe and examine the characlers who are doing the 
mifchief I 

In the firft place, if we look tlirough the town of Bofton, can 
we find one man who was oppoled to the revolution, but what is 
a reviler of President Jefferfbn ? Or, is there one man among 
them, who was inimical to Wafhington, during the war, but what 
is now in oppcfition to Jefferfon r — Thefe m.en treated Wafliing- 
ton, during our revolution, in the fame manner they now do 
Jefferfon. Did they not reprefcnt him as the leader of an intol- 
erant fadion ? Was not his conciliatory conduft treated with 
every indignity ?- — Were not his attempts to relieve us from ititet^ 
nal Britifj taxes ^ confidered as infringing' on the prerogative of 
King, Lords, and' Commons ? — Was not his oppofition to the 
efl:ablifhment of a Judiciary, the judges of which were to remain 
permanent under the pay of the crown, denounced by the then Britifb 
fadion, as a violation of the Conjitlution ? Was not the declaration 
of independence, though fanflioned by the fignaturc of Hancock 
and enforced by the fword of Waihington, called the " fpeaking 
trumpet of rebellion" ? Were we not then called upon, in the 
faitie tone of energy which now defignates a Morris or a :6ayari, 
to " paufc, for heaven's fake paufe" ? Were not the patriots cf 
Congrefs denounced as a body of infurgents, and were not the 
Ammcan army deftined to the gibbet, in caie their prowefs had 
not been equal to the great obiefts of oui' Tfldcpcndeucs ir 
•►Hfc 



2J0 The political Fhmomenon. No. LXII» 

If we had not fucceeded, Samuel Adams, John Hancock, 
George Walhington and a hoft of heroes would have been handed 
down in the American hiftory, in the fame degrading point of 
view, as Prefident JefFerfon novr ftands in thofe papers devoted 
to a junto, who from the beginning were unfriendly to every 
republican charader within the United States j and fliould any 
prommerd charadler, in the time of the revolution, be novv* counte- 
nanced by this party, it would be only in proportion to his 
apojlacy from the great eaufe which brought him from obfcurlty, 
and gave him a political reputation. In every inftance, the 
EfTex junto have fupported the old revolutionary patriots fo far, and 
no farther than they have renounced their republican creed. 
Though a man might at thofe days oppofc a feudal frftem, yet if 
he is now In favour of an hereditary prefident and fenate, they 
will receive him into full communion. 

The prefent controverfy is not merely an oppofition to Mr. 
Jefferfon, it is no more nor l^fs than the outrageous effufions of 
the enemies of our revolution, againft republicanifm ; they may 
fweeten the pill with federalifm, to make it palatable, but depend 
on it the mod component parts are the poifonous ingredients o£ 
toryifm. Thefe people find that the Prefident is reverting to 
original principles ; they are anxious therefore to rally under 
falfe colours ; they cry out IVaJJoingtont and, like Judas, would 
Iklute him " hail, mafter, and kifs him," but, at the fame time, 
Would if in their power, crucify him and every man who profeffes 
to be his difciple. 

The tories alv.^ays fpoke one language — they do not argue, 
but declaim ; they do not reafon, but denounce ; they do not 
attempt to convince, but alarm. They declared In 1775 ^^^^^ 
we had broken the Conftitution ; that deftruftion would follow 
our oppofition to Britain ; that we ought to pay taxes ; that it 
was proper to have a ftanding army ; that a numerous body 
of officers, to live on the earnings of the people, were congenial 
with liberty ; that a republican government was a volcano, which 
generated in its bofom the lava of Its difTolutlon. They attempted 
..to dilTolve the union of the States, by fhutting up the port of 
Boflon, and giving exclufive privileges to the other fea-ports ; 
they fpread alarms among the people, and kept the continent in 



No. LXII. The poUtical Phenomena. 251 

one conftant ftate of perturbation ; they told us that Adams and 
Hancock were traitors, and that a permanent judiciary, paid by 
the crown, was the only bafis of Englifti liberty. 

Is it not neceffary then, fellow-citizens, to examine the deligns 
of thefe men ? Why is calumny heaped on the prefent admin- 
iftration ? Why is difunion advocated as the defideratum of 
public happinefs ? Why is the Prefident treated with fuch pointed 
difrefpeft ? Are you difirefTed by being relieved from taxes ? Is 
the repeal of the eicife on diftilled fpirits injurious, when on the 
commencement of this tax, Govemour Strong and Llr. Daltcn, 
Senators from this State, were oppofed to the meafure ? If ^ve 
now fay the repeal is unjuftifiable, we condemn Governour Strong, 
as he was, from the firft introduction of this adt, in the oppofition. 
Can it be difadvantageous to our citizens, when we paid 80,000 
dollars, and Virginia only 40,000 ? Can it be beneficial for us 
to continue a tax which took twenty dollars out of every hundred 
to fupport the various officers for colleding it, and which amount- 
ed to 1 80,000 yearly ; every cent of which is faved to the people 
by abolifhing the fyftem ? Every other part of the internal 
taxes fell largely on the New-England States, and yet the tory 
fadion are attempting to renew the fyftem, under the deceptive 
plea, that we are to- be benefitted by the meafure. 

The judiciary is another fource of complaint againft the Pref^ 
ident. But is there a man in the United States who wifhes to 
extend this department of our government ? Where is the man 
who candidly thinks that the bench and the bar, (though ref- 
pedlable as men) have not already their full preponderancy of 
weight in the community ? Ye who attend our courts, and ye 
who have caufes depending, examine the records and your own 
bills of coft, and then anfwer whether the liberties and happinefs 
of America depend on an extenfion of judiciary prerogative I 
The man who has a difpofition to abufe the prefent adminiftration, 
for this timely check of profeffional influence, muft have been 
peculiarly fortunate in not being obliged to pafs the ordeal of 
a. law-fuit, otherwife tlic evidence would have been too forcible 
on his mind and purfe to admit a doubt as to the propriety of 
the repeal. To illuftrate this remark, let the will of Wafhington 
fpeak ; as he therein declares, that all controverfies as they related 
to his ejlate^ ihould *' be decided by three impartial and difintereft-: 



252 7^^^-- political Phenomena^ No. LXII. 

ed iTien.'* This is the deliberate voice of him in whom "«// /^f^zrf^ 
untied.^' Who then can controvert the principle ? AVho then caij 
vilify HoNESTUS ? 

Have ye, fellow -citizens, gone to your homes, after attendinp* 
5 Circuit or Diftrid Court, and bewailed the weaknefs and imbe- 
cility of the judiciary, as it relates to any one officer v/ithin the 
whole department ? If it is true that the happinefs of our coun- 
try wholly depends on giving further energy to the judiciary, in 
the name of liberty and independence, let us rally round this 
negledled and enfeebled part of our government — let us anath- 
ematize the Prcfident and Congrefs-— let us comnience a crufade 
to WaOiington-City, and under the banners of the judiciary, to the 
tune of '* Rule New-England," let us entrench ourfelves within 
piftol-fhot of the LegiHative and Executive— thus embodied and 
embattled, let us fend in the articles of capitulation, and perem.p- 
torily demand an unequivocal compliance with our wifhes ! 

To fhew the unreafonablenefs of the attack on Prefident 
Jeiferfon's conduc^j let us fuppofe that he had been at the head 
of the adminftration the laft four years ; that the public debt had 
increafed, though the revenue had been fo abundantly produ(rdve 
from the European war ; that he had raifed an army evidently 
unnecefTary at the period of its eftablilhment ; that he had bur- 
dened the citizens with excifes, ftamp duties, and a direft tax ; 
that he had borrov/ed money at the unprecedented intereft of 
8 per cent, Suppofe he had purfued a fyftem of expenditure 
upon a fcale fimilar to the above item.s, in moft of his tranfaftions 
— fhould vre not confider it a happy event, if Mr. Adams had 
been chofen and in a few nionllis had adopted meafures exactly 
conformable to the prefent adminiftration ? Would not the 
people have thought it was a change for the better ? Would 
they not have reafon to be thankful, that the finance^ oi govern- 
ment were adequate to all our purpofes, while they felt ihemfelves 
relieved from fuch a number of burthenfome taxes ? This is a 
fair flatement of the queftion, and if the EfTex junto deny it, let 
them flate their obje<fLions. 

Why then, fellow-citizens, is all this rancorous temper excited ? 
How degrading mull we appear in Europe, to find us abufmp' the 
Txian, xvhofe whole conducT: appears dire6ted to the public good ! 
?t is impoffible,. that the real friends to our ccimtry are the 



No. LXIIK Sicddy IiLilils. %f^ 

authors cf that calumnj which dally appears In our pHpers— ^ 
ikey mild be enemies, hirklng in our lea-ports and interior, men 
who are baffled in their defigns to eftablidi fhemfelves and fam-. 
ilics on the ruin of our general profperity. Let us be collected, 
cool and deliberate, and by perfe'uenng in the glorious caule of 
repubiicanifm, we mufl obtain the yidory ; we iliall *' rife con- 
querors, yea jnore than conq-jerors," over the ditlurbers of our 
national quietude— »-we lliali nnally triumphantly fin?-, 

" Columhians never, never Jj: all be (laves P' 



No. LXIII. 



" STEADY HAEITS. 



5> 



In all controverfies, either religious or political, the parties gener« 
ally adopt fome laconic terms, which giv</ celerity and facility in 
profecuting their favourite tenets. Orthodoxy has had a wonderful 
efFedl in theological difputes ; for who can be oppofed to crthodcxy ? 
Who can be an enemy to the true faith ? The Calvlnift claims this 
appellation ; the Socinian enliPtS under this banner ; the Univer- 
falift pleads orthodoxy as the ground-work cf his prcfcffion ; and 
even the Shaker exclaims, " orthodoxy ! orthodoxy !" — Thus, in 
religion, we are oftentimes led by founds, without attending to 
realities. Controverfies have oftener originated from attachment 
to names i than from fpiritual improvement and information j abufe 
and fcurrility are frequently the weapons of oppolition, and the 
purity of the fubjed is commonly loll in the impurity of the 
language. 

Calumny never made a profelyte, though it generates hypo- 
crites ; a man who feeks popularity by facrificing principle, may 
accommodate himfelf to a leading party, but he who has no other 
monitor than his own confcience, views with the utmoft indiffer- 
ence the frowns of his enemies, and obferves with ineffable con- 
tempt the bafe defigns to injure his reputation. The whole hiilory 
fifths bible is fraught with fimilar fentiment, and when thofe who 



2-54 ^^^^^y ^^^tts. No. LXIIL 

pretend to profeft dotflrines contained in that holy record, calum- 
niate as orators and defame as politiciansj fo far from fubftantiating 
their belief in what they profcfs, are, (like the hypocrites emphati- 
cally defcribed in that facred volume) ^^ ^whitened fepukbresy* which 
" within arc full of all manner of uncleanlinefs/' If a man incul- 
cates the doflrine of our Saviour, " bleffed are the peace-makers," 
yet if he violates the injunction by liis praftice, the fmcerity of his 
faith becomes doubtful. 

In politics, as in religion, certain terms are ufed to accomplilh 
particular purpofes. " Steady habits,^* in Conne(5licut, have been a 
fignificant appellation to defignate the different clafles of citizen? 
in their political fentiments. When we hear a man in that flate, 
abufmg the Prefident, caluniniating the adminiftration, degrading 
every officer in the government, deprecating the repeal of internal 
taxes, and condemning the reftoration of the judiciary fyftem, he 
generally concludes his outrageous obfervations with this emphati- 
cal declaration, that he is a friend to '■'■ Jleady habits /" He will in 
the moft wanton manner vilify the charader of his neighbour, who 
differs from him ; violate all the benign attributes of candour and 
charity ; and after anathematizing his opponents as the mofl ab- 
je6t beings in fociety, he clofes his illiberal remarks with an ejacu- 
lation to heaven, to preferve ConneBicut in its *•*■ Jleady habits /" he 
praifes God that he is not a Jefferfonian repitblican, and that Connecr 
ticut is not like Virginia. 

How a man can apply the " fleady habits of Connedlicut," in 
vindication of his abufe to the prefent adminiftration, is a myftery 
too intricate to be explained. That flate, in all its governmental 
proceedings, purfues a fyftem t^e moft analogous to Mr. Jefferfon's 
of any in the Union, and yet, Vv^onderful to relate, are oppofmg his 
meafures, under the falfe idea that he is infringing on their ^^Jieady 
habltsJ^ The expenfes of their government are brought within 
the narroweft point of pariimony ; their ele<5lions are more frequent 
than in any other flate ; their judges are chofen annually ; the 
falaries of their refpedlive officers are provident to a proverb ; the 
people are induftrious, and " earn their bread by the fweat of their 
brow." Notwithftanding which, fuch has been the infatuation of 
many honefl, well-difpofed perfons, (owing to the deception prac- 
tifed by the junto, in league with a few over-heated clergy- 
men) that the very '- habits" of that refpedlabis ftate are brought 



No. LXIII. Ste:tJy mblt:^ 255' 

as proofs of the impropriety cf the prefent meafures cf govern- 
ment. 

Why fiiould Connedtieut be fmgled out in oppofition to Mr. 
JefFerfon ? If we analyfe his ccndufl, it exa(5tly correfponds with 
the economical " fteady habits" of that State. He has leffened 
public taxes — he has reduced the number of fupernumerary offi- 
cers — he has brought the public expenditures within the revenue 
arifmg from impoji — he has placed our finances on fuch a bafis, 
that an 8 per cent, loan, it is probable, will never ao-ain be re- 
quired — a land-tax cannot be expelled to arife under his adminif- 
tration — he has restored the judiciary to the fame Jlate in ivhich 
Wajlnngton left it, and has carefully avoided burdening the citizens 
wnth taxes for the fupport of unneceffary judges. Is it poflible, 
tlien, that a real difficulty fiiould exift in Conneflicut, when every 
meafure fo completely quadrates with their own fcale of internal 
policy ? The yeomanry muft be deceived, if they fuppofe the for- 
mer expenfive fyfiem was more calculated for their intereft and 
profperity. I would venture to appeal to every farmer, whether 
the economy of the prefent, or the extravagance of the laft ad- 
miniftration, is m.ofl congenial to his wifhes. 

The landed intereft is deeply connedted with economy ; other 
branches may flruggle under a weight of taxes, but the farmer 
muft eventually fall a facrifice, if his earnings are taken to fupport 
an adminiftration founded on the ** innovating^' principle, that " a 
public debt is a public bleffing." A public debt is no doubt a 
private hhjfing, by providing for a clan of lazy, idle fycophants j 
but the folly of an oppofite do6lrine muft be evident to men, who. 
from " habit," have become " fteady" in preferving am.cng themx- 
felves the principles of induftry and economy. 

It is rather laughable that the " fteady habits" of Connec- 
ticut fhould become appropriate to extravagant federal meaf- 
ures— a Conneflicut farmer in favour of a land-tax ! — a Connec- 
ticut manufa<fiurer an advocate for excifes ! — a Conneflicut mer- 
chant a profelyte for ftamp duties ! — a Ccnne&icut Chri/iian deplor- 
ing the repeal of a duty on his chaife, which conveys him and his 
family to the houfe of worlhip ! — a Connedicut citizefi lam.enting 
that an eight per cent, loan is not necefTary for the expenfes of 
government ! I Thefe firange abfurdities, however, have been the 
teft »f federalifm. A Conneif^icut clergyman, who prays for a 



256 Siea^y Habits. No. LXIil; 

Connexion between Church and State, may anathematize thofe \Vho 
have declared fiich " i/inovai'ions'' unnecefTary ; or a body of laAV- 
yers may anticipate a decreafe of bufmefs, in confequence of oppo- 
fite meafares ; but it is impoffthk) that the great b-ody of citizens 
ihoald confider as grievances a contrary Kne of procedure, unlefff 
the gro/Tcil deceptions have been praiflifed on their creduhity. 

Can it be fuppofed, that ConnedHcut citizens will approve of a 
JUDICIARY, which claims a control ovr^r the Lsgijlature, v/hen they 
are fo cautious of this branch of government as to choofe their 
judges annually ? Can they be in favour of a land-tax, whc'rt 
their whole intereil lies in this fpecies of property ? "Will they be 
in favour of an excise, vrhen their grain furnifm^s fuch a fupply 
for diiliilery ? Can they approve of the "innovation^* of an eight 
PER CENT. LOAN, wheu all their tranfac^ions are Witliin the old 
ellablillied ufage o£^x per cent, ? Or can the people confide in the 
Integrity of 2i.fcw federal clergymen, when they fee an Huntington 
facrifice every vellige of decency, and chriflian benevolence, in ca- 
lumniating a clerical brother, merely for political purpofes ? " Such 
things are," but coriimon fenfe forbids their continuance. It may 
anfwer for " half a timc,'^ but it cannot be durable, when infor- 
mation difpels the clouds of error and deception. The fafl is. 
the citizens of the moll republican States, have been' led to fup- 
port federal meafures, not from conviclion, but from- deluf^on. The 
honedy of the people has been praiftifed on by aft" artful, intrigu- 
ing, prieflly junto. Not that I do, or ever did, fuppofe that the 
clergy in general Vv'^qre oppofed to republicanifm, yet I believe, that 
t\i^ fuhtlety of a fenjij has in many inftances deceived many of the 
very eled:. Owing to an uncommon exertion of the federal 
party, the good peopls'of Conne(51:icut have httn forced to adopt 
fentiments contrary to every " fleady habit** imbibed by them- 
felves, and predecefTors. They have been deceived by fome 
i?piritual leader, to embrace political docftrines fubverfive "of all 
thofe legitimate practices, which have raifed them to their prefent 
opulence, freedom, and refpedability. A fyftem of admini ft ra- 
ti on profecuted dn the fime extravagant principles v/itli the lafl, 
would have proved ruinous to every agricultural State in the 
Union. A fi;anding army — a numerous body of excife men — a 
burdenfome judiciary, with all the connexions attendant on a 
particular profeffion, might bs advantageous to thofe who live by 



Ko. LXIIX. Steady Hahifs. \ £^7 

the labour o£ others, or to thofe who profit by litigious law-fuits 5 
but in a country, whofe profperlty depends on agriculture, com* 
merce and manufa<5lures, all fuch extraneous contingencies muft 
prove deftructive to the permanent happinefs of the people. 

From the firft fettlement of America, economy and industrIT 
\vere the " JACHIN and BOAZ" of txhe Northern States. In 
every Legiflature, we find that the purfe-ftrings were held with 
peculiar circumfpedion. ' In Mafia chufetts, the treafury depart- 
ment is watched with hawk-eyed attention, Rhcde-Iflandj 
Conne(5ticut, and New-Hampfhire, have their " fteady habits'* 
m guarding againft the inroads of extravagance. All money 
matters are confidered with the utmofi: accuracy ; they not only 
'voe'igh the gold iiTuing from the treafury, but alfo nveigh the meofures 
"^I'hich draw it from the place of depofit. An extravagant fyftem 
<rould never become popular in either of the Northern States. If 
any man ever took New-England ground, it is Mr. Jefferfon, and it 
only fhews the folly of the federalifts to expedl to raife afoimida- 
blc oppofition to him from this quarter. He conforms his mea- 
frires to our " habits ;" he purfues fuch a mode of conduft as muft 
be univerfally approved ; it is impoffible he Ihould fail of fuccefs, 
as he takes all our rules for his guidance and direction. Would 
a governour in Connedicut, Mafiachufetts, Rhode-Ifiand, or New- 
liamplhire become unpopular by reducing taxes ? Should we 
have tliought, if a Eritifli governour had impofed heavy duties 
before the revolution, that an Am.erican governour, by reducing 
them, v/as an enemy to our national happinefs ? If, under Hutch- 
infon, we had a fi:amp-a(5l, furely under Hancock we experienced 
the efiicacy of tlie repeal. Thefe refieclions are confonant to 
our " fteady habits ;" they are the teft of " Nev/-England feel- 
ings, manners, and principles ;" under no other regimen will 
" New-England rule" or be ruled ; they are the tenets of legiti- 
mate orthodoxy ; all other dcclrines are herefy, " inno'vationy"^ 
" modern phiiofophy," and poHtical " atheifm ;" it is the new- 
fangled creed of the Efiex junto, propagated by mifilonaries under 
the immediate patronage of their difciples ; it Is promulgated hy 
falfe prophets, aided by dife'w ignorant, fupercilious piielis ; com- 
mifiioned by a junto, who are planning the ruin of the country? 
I i 



253 Steady Hab'tU, ^ No. LXI2I. 

an anisnce with Srltain, a war with France, and the dlffolution cf 
the Union ! 

Fellow -citizens I — This controverfy is plain to every man's 
nnderftanding, and notiiing is wanting to reftore univerfal har- 
mony, but to read and judge for yourlelves. Have your burdens 
increafed fince the inauguration of Mr. JelFerfon ? Has not your 
public credit rifen to an uncommon elevation fmce that period ? 
Wherein then is the difficulty ? I will tell you — a few men, who 
have anticipated the exclufive benefits of the federal government, 
by pofts of honour and profit ; who, under the laft adminiftration, 
had a profpeft of aggrandizing themfelves and families, at the 
expenfe of the public ; fuch men, and their connexions, are difap- 
pointed, by ieflening the fources of their promotion, and the prin- 
cipal clamour arifes from them. Common fenfe didtates to us, 
that no real oppofitlon can, or ever will arife among " the peo- 
ple,'* while their government is adminiftered on the principles of 
economy ; they never will contend for a land-tax, a ftamp-a6:, a 
ftanding-army, or for a numerous corps of excifemen ; t/pey will 
not quarrel for fupernumerary judges, or for the increafe of the 
influence of the bar. The advocates for fuch meafures may cry 
aloud, but " THE people" will turn a deaf ear to all their accla- 
mations ; their " fteady habits" can never be deranged by luch 
*^ Innovating'^ projecls. We may refl afTured, that a New-England- 
man never will exchange his plough for a mufket, to enforce 
additional taxes ; fuch an abfurdity has never yet been pra(5lifeit 
among us, and I truft never will. 



No. LXIVc The Church m Danger, 



259 



No. LXIV. 



THE CHURCH IN DANGER ! J 



*"* SHOULD ihe in H del Jefferson he eleEled to the Prejtde7icyy ihf 
feal of death is that moment Jet on our holy Religion^ our churches 
ivill he projiraied, and fame infamous proftitute, under the title of 
the Goddefs of Reafon, ivill prejide in the SanBuaries noiv devo- 
ted to the Mojl High.^' New-England Palladium^ 

^* THIS unholy Jpirit of Atheifm has already deteriorated the polite 
zeal and moral condition of this country, and flill menaces our hopesy 
privileges and poJfeJfionsJ*. 

I^ir. Emerfon's 4th of July Oration^ 

X HE public mind has been fo long " deteriorated" by alarms 
and apprehenfions, that it is proper to arreft the attention of the 
citizens, to a candid reflection upon the above paragraphs. In a 
fociety, compofed of men influenced by the precepts of religion, it 
is natural to fuppofe, when the caufe of chriflianity Is threatene(^ 
with annihilation, that every ferlous member will be roufed in its 
vindication. No wonder the federaliils built their expedations 
on Connefticut and the Northern States ; for If the eledion of Mr. 
Jefferson was to " feal with death our religion, profl:rate our 
churches, and fome infamous proftitute was to prefide in the fanc- 
tuaries devoted to the Moll High," it was full time for every 
religious " fe<5i" to put on the whole armour " both of faith and 
pradice." This is a high charge againfl: the Prefident, but like 
all other effufions of fanaticifm> it falls by the preflure of its 
own weight. 

Fellow-citizens — Let us for a moment condefcend to reafon with 
thefe men, who thus deprecated the eledion of Mr. Jefferfon. He 
h^s been ele<Sed nearly eighteen Hionths, an4 I wouW alk theza 



t6o The Church In Danger. No. LXIV 



in what inftance has " the feal oj death been ftt on our holy religion^* P 
In what city, town, or parifh, has " the church been proftrated" ? 
In what ftate has " an infamous pvoftitute prefided in the fanc- 
tuaries of the Moft High" ? The pons Palladium faid thefe 
things would take place at " the moment Mr. JefFerfon was elecled," 
and yet he has been Prefident nearly eighteen months and not 
one particular has turned out in conformity tp Its predi(5tion ! 

The federalilts have of late become fo infignificant in their 
obfervations, and expofe therafelves fo grofsly by their abfurdities, 
that they are fcarcely worthy a ferious reply ; for my own part, 
they are not viewed as' antagonifts ; they are become rather the 
fport of fatire, than the fubjefts of argument. The controverfy 
is fo unequal, th^t It is rather condefcenfion that excites in me 
the common civility of refutation ; — would a man, who values his 
reputation, prefume to argue with thofe, who fo often expofe tliem- 
felves to ridicule ? 

The pith and marrow of the \vhole federal " feft" are confol- 
idated to the terrific charge, that Mr. Jefferfon's election will en- 
danger religion. This dreadful prediction, is proclaimed through 
the confecrated medium of the New-England Palladium. This 
infallible oracle receives an additional influence, by being edited 
hy a Conneclicnt genius, who lately difplayed his fcientlfic knowl- 
edge, by inferting a receipt to make a whortk-berry (vulgarly 
called huclk-berry y) pudding I While he is thus anxlour for a 
^ood pudding, we cannot but fuppofe he Vv-ill be equally attentive 
to the moral virtues. When, therefore, It is declared, in a paper 
which travels by the bounty of federal charity into the manfion 
of almoft every clergyman in New-England, that if Mr. JefFerfon 
is chofen Prefident, the cliurches will be proftrated, and that feme 
hag will prefide In the fandluaries of the Moft High, can- we v/on- 
der that a temporary infatuation has bewildered the well-difpofed 
citizens, and that a fadion of old tories, iliould have excited a 
tranfient difguft againft the man who penned that declaration which 
fevered America from the fangs of Britain ? 

I have endeavoured, fellow-citizens, to treat every fubjeft v-ith 
deliberate confideration ; but you m.uft excufe me if I indulge a 
humorous excurfton on the prefent occafion. Pray, pmis editor, 
from, whence did your diftreffing forebodings arife ? who were the 
pioneers, armed with weapons of deftrui^^^ion, to level the churches I 



No. LXIV. The Church hi Danger. 26? 

who were the notaries^ to fet the Teal of death on our holy religion ? 
who were the artificers, to fal]iion out the image of the Goddefs 
of Reafon, and who were the banditti to erecfb it in the temple of 
the Moft High ? The abfurdity of your declaration is evidenced 
by thefe inquiries, and yet you have folemnly told the citizens, 
, that " at the moment^ ^ Mr. JefFerfon was chofen, thefe evils would 
take place 1 Can you fuppofe that the people are fo ignorant 
as to credit your abfurdities ? Has there been any attempt to 
accomplifh your prophecies ? What church is threatened with 
proflration ? What reverend prelate is under bonds or imprifon- 
ment ? Is any fubordlnate member of the church fuffering per- 
fecution ? Are not your clergy as Vv^ell paid now as when Mr. 
Adams was Prelident ? Has any fociiSty lowered their annual 
falary ? Are the reverend paftors called- on to do more duty than 
formerly I or has the " arduous work of the miniftry" increafed I 
Have we heard of any " inno'vations^' to leffen the income of the 
church ? If thefe things have not taken place, what can be the 
meaning of the pious Palladium in denouncing tlie people as fub- 
verters of order and religion ? Since the fettlement of this coun- 
try, the clergy never lived eofier than at the prefent day. It is 
ungenerous then to be abufmg the people as atheills, delfts, and 
diforganizers, when their whole cpnduif]: proves the fallacy of fuch 
epithets. 

So far from churches being "/r.^^^r^W," new ones are daily 
eredling ; propofals for building mecting-houfes are more frequent 
in our newfpapers than formerly. In BoHon we fliall foon fee 
the New-North rife more glorious than the former temple ; if we 
proilrate an old churchy it is to raife a more fplendid ne^jj one in its 
place. Since Mr. Jefferfon's ele(5tion, v\-e find religion is as highly 
rated as ever ; Jome focieties are liberal in procuring pajlors, while 
ethers are as tenacious in eftimating them at ihtiv full value ; even 
the old-fafuioned pride is baniflied, of crouding all refpeBable families. 
in the broad-aifle and on the lower floor, and gallery ptixjs are now- 
fought for v/ith the greateft avidity. In fhort, every thing about 
the churches looks as flourifhing fmce the eledion of Mr. Jefferfoti 
as before ; inilead of beholding " an irfamous profiitute'^ prefid-.. 
ing in our fanftuaries, they were never more ornamented with, 
t ADiEs, comely in their attire, and attradive in their deportment* 



262 27^.? Church In Danger. No. LXIV, ' 

Tliefe things being fails, is it not furprifing that a man froni 
Connecticut fhould make a declaration fo contrary to truth ? that 
he fhould raife a falfe alarm, and put the whole Chriftian church 
into confternation ? Or, how can any man, clothed in facerdotah, 
ferioufiy affert, that " athc'tfm is deteriorating the moral and re- 
ligious condition of this country," when every appearance carries 
fuch ftrong conviftion to the contrary, and when he knows there 
is not one profejfed atheijl on the continent I How can we reconcile 
thefe declarations, when the revival of religion is fo powerful 
(ftated in the Evangelical Magazine) as to " knock doivn^' by the 
terror of the law, thoufands of men, women and children ? How 
are we menaced with an annihilation of all morality, when " whole 
forefts are illuminated with lamps- ' to guide the heavenly pilgrims 
to the place of worfiiip ? When men thus impofe on tlie public, it 
is but juflice to the caufe of virtue and religion to notice their ab- 
fiirdities, to expofe their folly, and hold them up as objedls of 
derixion. 

A trifling parade of afTumed confequence ; a pedantic difplay 
of clafncal erudition, interfpcrfed v/ith a few vitiated pronuncia- 
tioijs of the American dialed, may give a perfon a vaft idea of 
his own importance ; but men of cool reflection eafily difcover 
the gauze covering, which fcreens fuch pretenders from the pub- 
lic eye. 

It is worthy of obfervation, that every prediction of the feder- 
alills has proved falfe, as it related to Mr. JefFerfon's eleftion. 
They not only told us that religion was to be banifhed from our 
country, but that the public credit would be facrificed, and that 
commerce would l^e wholly unproteded. Iiiflead of which, re- 
Ugion has rifen to an uncommon elevation, if the accounts of the 
Miflionary Societies can be credited ^ the public Jloch are high- 
er than for many vears, and our remaining fliips of war have 
protected our Mediterranean trade, even beyond what they did 
when their numbers were much larger. 

Fellotv-citi%ens ! — Be no longer deceived ; affurne your wonted 
pofition ; let not fanaticifm on one fide, and apathy on the other, 
lead you from your duty ; a6c like 7nen in deliberation, and like 
brethren in decliion ; your enemies are fev/, though violent in their 
pppofition ; they buz like a difturbed hive, but their clamours 
inufl eventually ceafe. l^hcy want an expenfive government, an4 



t^o. LXV. The World turned Upside dowfti 26'^ 

the queftlcn is fimply this, jt^re the People in favour of taxes^ when 
they are not needed ? Let the queftion be taken throughout the 
Northern States — yea or nay — Te nvho are in favour of heavy taxesy 
pleafe to manifefl it ? If the t(5rles want to know the public opinion 
on this fubjed:, let them try it in town-meeting, or even at Vila's 
caucus. 



No. LXV. 



THE WORLD TURNED UPSIDE DOWN f ! 



** Xhofe men, <toho have turned the 'world upfde down., have come 

hither alfi:'* 

J-S it pojjibk) that the chriflian difpenfation fhould raife a formi- 
dable oppofition from men who pretended to difown ail worldly 
grandeur and emoluments, and who lived in expedation of a re- 
ward in another world ? But however paradoxical it may appear, 
yet the only antag.onifts which gave our Saviour or his difeiples 
any trouble, were thofe who profefied the greateft concern for re- 
ligion, and who lived within the purlieus of the altar. The whole 
hiftory of the chriftian fyftem is a narrative of the fcandalous treats 
ment of the chief priefts, fcribes, and Pharifees, towards its pro- 
fefibrs. They were followed by a body of perfecutors, who were 
conftantly exciting the public refentment againft them. The ene- 
mies of our Saviour profecuted their plans with fuch infidious art, 
as even to gain over, by bribery, one of his difeiples, to betray 
him. He was early purfued by Church and State : for Herod 
began his fanguinary purpofes by murdering the infants in Beth- 
lehem. When that failed of the objed contemplated, Satan, im- 
mediately upon his baptifm, in a courteous flrain of adulation, 
tempted him. After the powers of earth and hell had exhaufted 
all their ftratagems to enfnare and deftroy him, he began his mif- 
fion by preaching ^n the mount, and from th»t eminencg made a 



1A64 ^' The World turned Upside down. I'sty, LXV*, 

folemn decluration cf the benign principles of his miiTion ; he re- 
commended his mjniilration by a«5ls of kindnefs and beneficence ', 
healing all roanner of difeafes, and evidencing his divinity by figiis 
and miracles', which gave a luftre to the philanthropy of his char- 
a<Ser. Is it pojfthle, ^hen, that any oppofition could arife againft 2 
fyftem which difplayed fuch complacency in its Author ? Should 
we. expedl to' find among his opponerrts, tliofe who profeiTed to 
fludy the happinefs of mankind, or feemed devoted to the caufe of 
virtue and religion ? But the hiilory informs us, " that when the 
chief priefts, fcribes and Pharifees faw the thing.? which he did, 
they were difpleafed, and from that time fought to lay hands on 
him ; hut they pahd the people,''* The Pharifees alfo took counfel 
'*^ how they might entangle him in his talk/' They began their 
artifice by queftioning him, whether it was lawful to give tribute 
to C/Ti^sAR ? They were pieparing to entrap him that he was not 
Cafar^s friend ; but our Saviour, though thus furrounded by a 
junto f boldly began his oppofition, by denouncing them as hypo- 
crites and deceivers. The Sadducees next came forward, " who 
fay, there is no refurre(5^ion ;" thus combining Church and Staff ^ 
as it related to taxes to C^far, and the final retribution of man- 
kind. The money-changers^ it is probable, were greatly difturbed 
in confequence of being " whipped out of the temple ;" they 
therefore allied themfelves with the Sadducees, in order to form a 
federal connexion with this powerful *' feft/' The Pharifees feeme^ 
greatly alarmed, when they found he had put the Sadducees to 
filence, and they gathered together and deputized a lawyer to afk 
him a queftion, for the purpofe gi tempting him. 

i^fter he had cofounded this lafi tempter, {ixotri *' the bar,") no 
man was able to anfwer him a word, neither durft any man, from 
that day forth, afk him any more quePcions. As foon, therefore, 
as our Saviour had defeated the fcribes, Pharifees, Sadducees, 
chief priefls, Satan, and the lavvyer, he began to fpeak to the 
people and his difciples. He appears, at this period of his miniftra- 
tlon, convinced of the oppofition which he was to encounter, and 
therefore began his miffion by warning them of the deceptive arts 
of thofe who had long deceived them under the mafk of hypocri- 
fy. Matthev/, in his 23d chapter, (which I recommend to my 
readers to perufe) begins his narrative in a moft triumphant man- 
'aer : after defcribing the complete vidory of our Saviour over his 



No. LXV. The World turned Upside down. * 26 S 

antagonllh, he gees on, " Then fpake he to tne mnltitude (which 
ihews that he did not confider " the peopW^ as " wolves," or them- 
fehes as their " worft enemies") faying, the fcribes and Pharifees 
fet in Mofes* feat, but do not ye after their works ; for they fay 9 
and do not ; they bind heavy burdens, and lay them on men's 
flioulders, but they themfelmes will not move them with one of their 
fingers ; they love the uppermoft rooms at feafts, and the chief 
feats in the fynagogue, and greetings in the market place, and to 
be called of men, Rabbi, rabbi." After defcribing thefe perfons 
in their proper charaders, he goes on for 39 verfes, calling them 
hypocrites, devourers of widows' houfes, children of hell, blind 
guides, extortioners, whited fepulehres, ferpents, generation of 
vipers, perfecutors of <iuife men., and finally elofes with this tremen- 
dous denunciation — " on whofe head be all the righteous blood, 
fhed on the earth, from the blood of Abel unto the blood of 
Zacharias, fon of Barachias, whom they flew between the temple 
and the altar." 

The Chriftian fyftem being thus oppofed to all the hypocrify 
and intrigue of defigning men, to a phalanx of church andjlate, to 
allthofe who found it their intereft to deceive the multitude, (to 
whom our Saviour preached) can we wonder tliat they combined 
in 2. federal ciffociation to deftroy the efficacy of his dodrines, depre- 
ciate his reputation, and reprefent him and his followers as " turn- 
ing the world upfide down" ? Can we fuppofe that any cordiality 
could ever exift between Him, who told the people (whom they 
had before held in fubjedion and dread) that they Avere deceivers 
and apoftates ? No ; " for it came to pafs immediately after he had 
finifhed all thefe faylngs, that the chief priefls and fcribes affembled in 
tlie palace of the high p-icfi^t and confulted how they might take 
him by fubthtyy and/ kill him ; they faid, not on the feaft-day, left 
there be an uproar among The PeopleJ' In all this divine ftory, 
there feems to be two parties ; the people in favour, and the chief 
priejlsy &c. in oppofiiion. Till, at length, by the bafelt practices 
of bribery and perfecution, (as in the inftance of thrufting out the 
man cured of his blindnefs) they excited the fears of the populace, 
by crying out that religion was in danger ; that his followers were 
not Cesfar's friends ; and that he was a '* peftilent fellow." By fuch 
infiammatory declarations, they fo f^r perfuaded the people to 

K -k 



265 The World turned Upside down. No. LXV. 

confent to his crucifixion, as even to demand the releafe of Barab- 
l>as, rather than our Saviour. The " reign of |:errorj" at tha^ 
time, mud have been of the mofl vindictive nature ; for thofe who 
had experienced the efficacy of his miracles, were tn general afraid 
to fpeak in his vindication. Nicodemus (though a ruler) dare not 
make his vifits but in the moft fecfet hours of the night. Jofeph 
was cautious how far he acknowledged Him openly ; and not 
till after the higheft manifeflations of his divinity, did he dare to 
beg the body, to be placed in his fepulchre. 

Under this preiUire of clerical and c'l'vtl intereft, vre cannot be 
furprlfed that the multitude at length became the rcvilers of Him 
and his apoftles^ The clergy of that day, no doubt, preached fer- 
•jfiPions to influence the public mind. The mulitude were told, that 
he meant to fubvert all religion ; that he was a defpifer of ordi- 
nances ; that he abufed the <^.'hole body of the' clergy ; and that aU 
property, all the churches, and every veftige of piety and morality 
would be annihilated. On all public occafions, it is probable, the 
*' lavryer who tempted him" would be declaiming that the courts 
of juftice M^ould be abolifiied, and that he had denounced the 
whole fanhedrin of judges as hypocrites and devourers of widows* 
houfes. When He, iind his apoflles, preached up peace on earth 
and good will tow^ards men, the fycophants of the clerical party 
confounded every appeal to common fenfe, by crying out, " Great 
is Diana of the Ephefians." Such was their influence in exciting 
the public odrum, that even Paul and Silas were mobbed in Thef- 
falonica, as men " turning the world ztpjide down,^^ The enemies of 
the apoftles had fo far bewildered tlie people, that the charge of 
overturning religion was blended with the political herefy, that 
they did '* contrary to the decrees of CafarJ'^ All the beneficent ac- 
tions of the apoftles w^ere fly led " turning the world upfide 
down" ; all their exhortations were " modern philofophy,** or, in 
other words, deftroying thofe " fteady habits" long imbibed under 
the difcipline of pretended orthodoxy^ or *' blue law" efl:ablifh- 
ments. To raife an oppolltion to men thus circumftanced, was not 
a difiicnlt bufmefs to be accomplifhed, by their adverfaries ; a 
combination of fuch characters, all polfeffing an extenfive perfonal 
influence, afljfted with the ele<51rical watch-word that the church 
nvas in danger, was an onfet too powerful to be withftood by fuch 
weak *' mt^ionaries^' (without purfe or fcrip) as Paul and Silas^ 



No. LXV* The IVorhl turned Upside down, 2*67 

The foregoing obfervations are drawn from fads in the bible, 
vhich cannot be controverted ; they are mentioned to fbew the 
effects of a combination of men, when united in cppofitlon to any 
I2ieafures, however- beneficial to the general intereft of mankind ; 
efpecially if they have a tendency to weaken their influence, coun- 
terad their defigns, or leiTen their pecuniary emoluments. By cre- 
ating a conftant irritation in the public mind, th,ey will prejudice 
the well-difpofed, and, oftei:^times, the well-informed citizens, 
againll their bell friends.. They will perfuade many, that thof? 
who are attempting to relieve the burdens of mankind, are " tuni' 
ing the world upjide dcwn'^ ; or, in other words, that keeping the 
people upright, in defence of their national rights, is overturning 
them. They will, by a continual clamour, excite fufpicions againft 
men whofe moral characters pan In no inflance be impeached, and 
whofe political fentiments arc in unifon with the fundamental prin- 
ciples of the Conflitutlon. 

If thefe events took place under the mild miniflratlon of the 
chriilian fyftem ; if it was pofTible to roufe the vengeance of the 
people againfl the doctrines which inculcated peace on earth and 
good will towards men ; can we be furprifed, under a fimilar com- 
bination, they fliould now be under a temporary delufion, to mif- 
take their political, as they then did their religious, blefUngs ? if 
it was then in the power of a junto of interefted men to perfuade 
the people that to do juftice, love mercy, and walk humbly with 
God, were tenets deftrudlive of the harmony of fociety, and that 
the preachers of fuch rational maxims were ** turning the world 
upfide down" ; we can eafily perceive that the fame practices on 
their credulity might perfuade them, that lefTening the public tax- 
es, repealing a ftamp-act, removing ufelefs offices, abridging a fu- 
pernumerary body of judges, and difcharging the public debt, 
were equally as deftrudtive to the happinefs of the community ; 
and that the men who attempted to do thcfe things were alfo, like 
Paul and Silas, " turning the world upfide down." A judge 
Bajfett, like Demetrius of old, might, with equal fuccefs, cry out, 
^'^ the CRAFT is in danger J" 

I would here obferve, that fo far from wifhing to depreciate 
the character of the clergy, as a body, by the foregoing obfervations, 
they are meant to place them in that refpedable fituatlon to which 
their profeflion entitles them. The hiftory of the Chriflian relig° 



268 " The World turned Upside dotvn. No. LXV. 

ion juftly appreciates the Jtncere preachers of the gofpel. The apof- 
tles, and all true believers, were ever eflimated as the ^* fait of the 
earth." But our Saviour's denunciations were folel/ confined to 
certain men, who ftyled themfelves " chief prJeJIs'^ ; who affumed 
a control over church and Hate ; who were " bufy-bodies" ; who 
were blending the politics of Casfar with the prophefies of Ifaiah, 
Jeremiahy &c. ; men who claimed precedence in all proceffions, 
and who minded earthly, more thap fpiritual, things. The cler- 
gy arc a valuable body in fociety, and no man, who regards the 
welfare of his country would wifh to fee the mone grade below their 
juft eftimation. But thofe, who aim at the rank of chief prlcjis, and 
who calumniate (in fermons, orations, &c.) men much better than 
themfelves, muft, at this enlightened age, expeft to fail into difre- 
pute,^ unlefs they take more heed to their ways and become more 
circumfpedt in their manners. 

Neither is there any intention to refled on the lawyers, as a 
hodvy by mentioning one of the order as a tempter ; for if the Jev/- 
ifh fanliedrin could get but oncy (and no doubt he was well fee^dy) 
it is rather a compliment on the profeffion : And we candidly 
hope, they could not procure more than one at the prefent day. The 
knoivn piety of the "order," in tliefe days, would fecure-them from 
having this charge brought againft them. 



No. LXVL The Town-Clerk of Ephesnu 2.69 



sar 



No. LXVL 



THE TOWN-CLERK OF EPHESU3 1 



Text — ." And 'when the Town-Clerk had appeafed the people^ he fold ^ 
ye men of Ephefusy nxihat man is there that knoweth not ho<iv that 
the city of the Ephefians is a ivcrjjjipper of the great goddefs DiANAj 
and of the image ^juhich fell dotvn from Jupiter ? Seeing then that 
thefe things cannot he fpokeii againft, ye ought to he quiet and do nothing 
rajhly. For ye ha've hr ought hither thefe men^ nvho are neither robbers 
of churches, nor yet hlafphemers of your goddefs. Wherefore^ if Dem- 
etrius, and the craftfmeu nvhich are ivith hhn, have a matter againfl any 
mauj the la%? is open and there are deputies ; let them irrplead ons 
another,''^ 

m 

t 
f I 1 

X HE fcriptures were written for edification, and if we pra^ife 
the dodrines they inculcate, we are promifed not only the bleflings 
of this life, but that which is to come. If any book inculcates 
repuhlicanifm, and reprobates an arijlocracy, either civil or ecclfiojiieal, 
it is the Bible. The whole tenor of the facred writings runs in 
unifon with the rights of " the people,^' in oppofition to a certain 
** felf-created" body, who aiTume the power to didate and control 
public opinion. The *' multitude," and *' the people," are the on- 
ly obje(Sl:s contemplated in all the addreffes made by our Saviour 
and his apoflles. If they now were on earth their language would 
be lligmatized as jacobinifm and illuminati — if v/e heard them de- 
nouncing one monarchical m^agiftrate as a " whited fepulchre" — . 
if we faw them whipping out the money-changers — if we found 
them aflembling the multitude, fpeaking to the people, and in eve- 
ry inftance reprobating the chief prieils as hypocrites and deceivers* 
our junto gentry would be clamorous In vociferating " away with 
them, away with them" — " crucify him, crucify him." 

The ftory of PauPs entering Ephefus is a true reprefentation of 
^J^iurch infatuation, when fet in motion by a few interefted Individ- 



270 The Tonvn-CIerk of Ephesus, No. LXVI. 

U3.1s. On his arrival, and in order to counteradl Paul's miniftra- 
tion, the feven fons of one Sceva, *' chief of the prkfls,'^ attempted 
to exercife the miraculous power of calling out evil fpirits ; but 
though this fame Sceva could deceive the people, yet he could not 
deceive the devil, for the man in whom the evil fpirit was, *' leaped 
on them and prevailed againft them, and Sceya's l^yen fons fled 
put of the houfe naked and wounded." In this inftance, Satan 
himfelf fcemed to ad with fome generofity, for the evil fpirits re- 
torted on thefe deceivers with a degree of feverity — " Jefus we 
Jcnow, and Paul we know, but >who are ye r"* It is piobable this 
Sceva was an artful prieft, who had m5.de himfelf very bufy in ex- 
citing alarms among the people ; had told them that there was 
an organized body of illuminati, who were going to overturn all re- 
ligion ; had propagated (lories about mallacres, and that the world 
was going to be *' turned upfide down." Sceva, therefore, thought 
he was competent to fet up in oppofition to Paul, and, by a little 
ftratagem, could make h:s exorcifm appear the genuine difplay of 
evangelical influence. In confequence of thefe artful proceedings, 
he and his feven fons had gained to themfelves a high reputation 
at Ephefus ; and the people, acling under their infatuation, were 
kd to lay violent hands on the apoftles. The firfl attack on Paul, 
however, did not fucceed ; Scev^ was proved an impoftor, and 
his fons were obliged to flee out of the houfe naked and wounded. 

At length a more powerful antagonift appeared ; one Demet- 
rius, a fiher-fmithy who made fnrines for Diana, alTembled his fel- 
low-craftfmcn, and began a m.oft violent onfet, by crying out, 
*- the craft is in danger / great is Diana of the Ephefians 1" He 
further declared, if thefe men were fulfered to proceed, the proflts 
of his bufmefs would ceafe ; and emphatically concluded, " 21? 
hiow, that by this craft nve get our ivealih.^^ This hue and cry 
put the whole city in confufion ; fome cried one thing and fomc 
another, and for two hours was heard the inceffant cla^iour of 
♦* great is Diana of Ephefus !" Who could have thought 2ifihtr- 
fmith, in the city of Ephefus, could have raifed fuch a formidable 
party ? 

In this {late of things, what mud have been the fituation of 
Paul and his companions ! Sceva, and his feven fons, wounded 
and naked ; Demetrius, with his whole body of filver-god mak- 
ers, rpufing tb^e people to the higheft pitch Qi refentment ; the 



Ko. LXVI. The Tonvri'Clerl of Ephesm, 2ji 

v/hole city in uproar, againft two or three unarmed men ; and it 
is to be feared, if the Toivn-Clerk had not came forward at this 
critical moment, to appeafe the people, they would have been 
ftoncd, or put to death, by Demetrius and liis afibciates. 

In this part of my obfervations, the reflections, which naturally 
occur, are ; — that when any doctrine is inculcated, or any meafure 
purfued, which interferes with the intereft of men who praclife on 
the religious prejudices of the people, it is their cuftom to alarm 
them, that all their religious ceremonies are to be aboliftied ; an<i 
to excite a jealoufy and enthufiafm againft the men who are en- 
deavouring to relieve them from their impcfitions. This uproar 
was occafioned by Demetrius, not that he cared for the temple, 
otherwife than by making Ihrines, by which he and his fellow- 
craftfmen had enriched themfelves at the expenfe of tbe ignorant 
Ephefians. If the apoftles had propofed a number of golden or 
filver crucifixes, or had ordered a large paraphernalia of plated 
decorations for the altar, or copper-bottomed all the men-of-war at 
Ephefus, and had employed Dem.etrius to do the bufmefs, it is 
probable he would have been among the forem.oft to efcort Paul 
into Ephefus. No doubt there would have been a high cavalcade, 
confifting of Demetrius' workmen, priefts of the temple, and all 
the expectants, " more or lefs," of the apollle's patronage. Songs 
would have been fung in praife of Paul, and his religious fyftem ; 
addrelTes would have been prefented, from all the various orders 
of Church and State ; Sceva and his retinue would have been 
clothed in facerdotals, and probably would have delivered an ora- 
tion in favour of this mcxJern philofophy. A public dinner would 
have been provided ; a poet-laureat chofen, and poffibly all the 
young men been called on to celebrate the difTolution of the re- 
ligion of Diana, and the city would have been in uproar with 
« Great is Paul of Macedon /" inftead of " Great is Diana of the 
Ephefians.'* 

But it was not fo — the Chriftian fyftem offered no fuch excite- 
ments. Without purfe, without fcrip, the apoftles had to travel 
from city to city ; they were at war with all money-getting relig- 
ion ; they were not helping the magiftrate to impofe on the peo- 
ple, oi the prieft to attach tlie civil code to the horns of the altar % 
even the religion itfelf was offered " without money and without 
price." No ' Peter's pence' was connected with Paul's embaffy ; 



2^3 - The Tcnvn-Chrl of Ephesus* No; LXVL 

what he got by the fale of his tents, was the principal part of his 
fupport. Who then can he furprifed, that an uproar fliould be 
raifed at Ephefus, where the rchgion of Paul ftruck all the filver 
gods out of exiftence. If Paul's religion had fucceeded, how many 
temple -workmen would have been out ©f employ -^Poor Deme- 
trius would have been obliged to feek another mode of religion. 
Even though this filver-fmith might have been employedin cop- 
per, or yet might have turned his attention to the iron foundery^ 
(till the little filver gnds were a fure and lading line of bufmefs, 
and he did not know how long the other might continue. If the 
goddefs was deftroyed, all his other employment 'vTas uncertain ; 
he might have been permitted to fulfil fome previous contrail, but 
the temple ! the temple ! being annihilated, all the reft was as the 
" bafelefs fabric of a vifion.'* 

But the principal character in t^iis ftory is the Tov/n-Clerk. 
What an excellent thing it is to have a good Town-Clerk. 
Whether they chofe this officer annually, or whether he was turn- 
ed out the next election for the part he took againft the prieft 
Sceva, and Derftetrius the filver-fmith, '.ve are not told ; but that 
he a<5led like an honefl: mafi, on the prefent occafion, cannot be 
controverted. Amid the general convulfion of the citizens, and 
in oppofition to the prevailing party, he had the refolution to fpeak 
to the people, and caution them againft proceeding too rafhly with 
the apoftles. 

It does not appear that he concerned himfel-f about the wound- 
ed fons of Sceva, or addrefTed himfelf to Dem.etrius, but he made 
immediate application to " the people." He began his fpeech 
with " ye men of Ephefus," and in order to give the true m.eaning 
of what I propofe iu this Number, I will attempt to modernize his 
language, and apply my difcourfe through the medium ' of the 
Town-Clerk. 

" Ye men of Ephefus," why is all this uproar in the city ? the 
men whom you charge with deftroying religion, and robbing the 
churches, have in no inftance done as you have been inftruded. 
The churches remain in the fame ftate of quietude as before, and 
the funding fyftem (the modern temple of Diana) and all the 
other pecuniary eftablifhments, are more permanent than under 
your former eftabliihment. If Demetrius cannot get fo much 
profit by his craft, yet you get more for your fix per cents, your 



/ 



No. LXVI. The Town-Clerk of Ephesus^ ^1% 

bank flocks, and all other matters connedled with your fifcal ar- 
rangements. If you are relieved from your llamp-duties, land- 
tax, loans at an extra intereft, yet if Demetrius, by thefe meafureS, 
finds a drawback In his income, fo much money is faved in your 
own pockets. Why then are you difturbed ? What profit is it to 
you, to feed men who live by your earnings, and when every Ihil- 
ling they gain is a difcount from your living ? If the government 
is thus adminlftered for your benefit, why fnould you make a rioE 
becaufe a num.ber of hangers-on are Jloaken off, as incumbrances ? 
Do the wheels of government need a clog ? If five thoufand ra^vi 
can be fet at work to earn a living, without being burthenfome to 
the community (as excife-officeTS, ftamp-officers, &c.) is it any 
difadvantage to thofe who had to pay them ? If the Prefident 
tells you, he can anfwer all public exigencies without thefe taxes, 
why are you clamorous to burden yourfelves, when he fays he does 
not require it ? We have a great number of Demetriufes who 
live by the craft of deception, and when they are thrown out 
of bufmefs they will make a great nolfe and diflurb the city ; but 
what is Demetiius to you ? By feeding him, you flarVe your^ 
felves. While he is furnifhing filver gods at your expenfe, to 
biirnilh up the temple of Diana, you are growing poor, and de- 
priving your wives and children of the means of fuflenance. Of 
what fervice was a flamp-acl ? Did it make your property more 
fccure ? But if It is equally as fecure without it, why do you 
clamour at its lepeal ? Of v/hat fervice was a flanding-army \ 
While they were in exiilence, were your eflates or your lives in lefs 
jeopardy ? If they are new fecure, why do you need them ? Of 
what fervice was an eight per cent, loan ? Did gratifying a 
few ufurers, enrich you ? Of what fervice was a la^id-tax i* It 
ferved to create a hoft of officers, but the advantage was very 
fmall to thofe who paid it. If you can now ride in a chaife, with- 
out a tax,- is it not better to apply this money to fhoelng your 
horfes, and mending the tackling, than fupporting colle6lofs ? 

Why then, " ye men of Ephefus," are you thus uneafy .^ Why 
all this uproar ? Let Demetrius do as all honeft citizens ought to 
do, earn his living by induftry, and not by impofition. Support: 
the men who ai:e willing to relieve you from taxes ; and never let 
the great city of Ephefus be again dillurb&d^by a fet of ngify, lazy 
LI 



tJA The V/dhes, and the Noh'dity. No. LXVII. 

fycophxants, who only pay court to thofe who feed them from hon- 
eft men's pockets. BefiJes, why do you clamour in this incohe- 
rent manner ? Bellowing " Adams and Liberty," " Jacobin," &c. 
convinces no man. If you have any charge againfl your magif- 
trates,- is not the law open I not the unv.Trtten judiciary, not the 
vague common law of England, but the m)nften laws of the 
land. Impeach them before the conftituted authorities. Ye have 
deputies and lawyers in abundance j one half of the money you 
have given tov/ards paying unneceiTary officers, would be a hand- 
fome fee to the whok body of attornies. Act like men, " ye citi- 
zens of Ephefus," and do not become a bye-word and derifion 
among the citizens of the eartJi. 

And when the Town-Clerk had thus fpoken, each man went 
away to his own home, and the city was quiet. 



No. LXVIL 



THE WOLVES, AND THE NOBILITY, 



Text — ^^The love of I'lhrty (fays SamOel Adams^ is inkrioo'den: 
in the foul of man. ^* " So it is, (fiys John Adams^ according 
to La Fontai7ie, in that of a wolf : and I doiiht nvhether it he 
much more rational, generous, or focial, in one than in the other^ 
until in man it is enlightened by experience, rejleBion, education, and 
civil and political injliiulions, nuhich are firft produced, and con- 
ftantly fupported and improved hy a few — that is, by the 
NGBILITT,'' 

X H E epiftolary correfpondence between Mr. John Adams 
and Mr. Samuel Adaras is important, as it contains political prin- 
ciples which are highly interefting to the happlnefs and profperity 
©f this country. The Letters are written with that cordiality, as 
St relates to the opinion which they entertain of each other's integ- 
rity, that we are to view them as the eftabliflied tenets of two ol^ 



!Mo. LXVII. The fVohes, and the NohUify. 275 

civilians, who have made up their judgment from experience and 
reflexion. 

The extracts which I have taken, appear to comprize the ef- 
fence of the controverfy. On the one i\d.t, Mr. Samuel Adams 
lays, " the love of liberty is interwoven in the foul of man'' ; Mr. 
John Adams smfwcrs, " fo it is, according to La Fontaine, in that 
of a wolf" ; and further declares, that " he doubts whether it is 
much more rational, &c. in one than in the other, until in man it 
is enlightened by experience, education, and ci'vil and political hjii- 
tutionsf v/hich are at ^rji produced, and conftantly fupported and 
improved by a fe^i> — that is, by the ngbilily." 

Here, then, thefe two gentlemen are at iffue ; and it is a quef- 
tion of the higheft confi deration which of them is the mod accu- 
rate. If the love of liberty is not more rationally interwoven in 
the human foul than in a wolf, and if it wholly depends for exig- 
ence on being cherilhed by a body of men, which he is pleafed to 
ft-yle a " nobility," dreadful indeed is the fituation of fociety. Does 
the hiftory of mankind exhibit evidence, that a particular order of 
men, denominated nobles, feel thofe impreffions, or are endowed 
with that benevolence, as to produce, cherifh, and conftantly fup- 
port the liberties of the people ? Are the people as favage as 
wolves ? are they as ferocious and deftrudive, in their habits and 
manners, as this voracious animal ? or are they " their oivn <vjorJi 
enemies," unlefs the benign hand of a nobility is ftretched out for 
their protection ? In what inftance does this doiflrine apply to the 
citizens of America ? Were the fir ft fettlers of this country thus 
dellgnated ? Were our venerable forefathers as hoftile as wolves 
to each other, when they landed on the American fhores ? Was 
not the love of liberty interwoven in their fouls, when they forfook 
the luxurious foil of Britain, to feek an afylum in this defolate 
territory ? Did they fuppofe it neceffary to bring a body of 
noblemen, to protect them from devouring each other ? or did they 
contemplate the eftabliOiment of political inftitutions, with a 
branch emphatically denominated a nobility P Did this ariftocrat- 
ical part of the Britifh government give them any afliftance, while 
they were contending againft the arbitrary meafures of England, 
before their embarkation ? or did they receive confolation from 
the Houfe of Lords, after their arrival ? No ; the love of liberty 
w^s iaterwovea in their fouls, aud they formed political inftitutions 



2 7 6 The Wolves, and the Nobility. No. LXVII. 

founded on principles in every refpecl conformable to fuch feel- 
ings. Juft emancipated from the thraldom of a Britifh govern- 
ment, they were led to adopt a fyftem of political regulation 
which gave the faculties of the mind their utmoft energies, and 
never degraded themfelves to contemplate their little fociety as 
wolves, {landing in need of a fuperior order to check their fove- ' 
reignty. 

The fentiment advanced by Mr. John Adams, might have been 
expected from a crowned head in purope ; it might have made a 
fubiime paragraph in the writings of Burke : But that it fhould 
arife from a perfon who had been converfant in the hiftory of this 
country, and had been in our councils during the American revo- 
lution, is rather a furprifmg and alarming confideration. I would 
afk Mr. John Adams, in what particular are the citizens of Amer- 
ica in any degree analogous to wolves ? or in what inftance has it 
"been neceffary that our political inftitutions lliould be improved and 
fupported by a nobility ? Did the people fhew any favage difpofition 
in their conteft with Britain ? Was it not the love of liberty, inter- 
woven in the foul, that produced our oppofition to Britiih tyranny ? 
Our " town-meetings" were the pure effuhons of liberty ; our " Col- 
lege" fat that time) breathed the fpirit of freedom and the rights 
of man. The youth of that day, on commencement anniverfaries, 
were eager to difplay the manly fentiments of freemen ; the ora^ 
tions and exhibitions all tended to roufe the mind to contemplate 
political fubjecfiis on the broadell bafis of equal rights. Our patriots 
had the fupport of the people ; Faneuil-Hall and the Old South 
often refounded with the acclamations of citizensjcollefted to fapport 
the great principles of th§ir free conftitution. The tories, it is true, 
confidered the tovvTi of Bofton as a den of wolves ; they fuppofed 
it neceilary that a body of nobility fhould be created to check and 
control them, ; Hutchinfon and Oliver even wrote to the mii:ii{lry 
for this purpofe, and when their letters were difcovered, the gen- 
eral difguft of the people convinced them in what abhorrence 
they were held. 

Did not Mr. John Adams find that the fpirit of liberty was 
interwoven m the foul of the people, when^he was in Congrefs 
during our revolution ? It was this fpirit that originated that 
body. The people called for this affembly of the States ; the 
^tdiior\ of the members was the evidence of the fpirit of liberty 



No. LXVII. The Wolves y and the Nol'iUty, 277 

exifting within them. The, people had no idea that a body of 
noblHty was neceflary for their fecurity ; they chofe honeft men 
from among them, who were In the fame grades of Vi^q with them- 
felves ; they did not vote for my Lord Such-a-one., or Thike Such-a- 
one ; the candidates in general were fcarcely complim-cnted with 
the title oi ef quire. When this refpe(5l:able body a/Tembled, whom 
did they addrefs ? Were not all their applications made to the 
people ? Who formed the army i Did not tradefmen and farm- 
ers compofe the American phalanx ? Who ccm.m^anded and 
manned our fliips of war and privateers ? were they dukes, earls, 
or lor4s ? No ; the people — the people — the plain American 
citizens, whofe fouls were invigorated with liberty, imawed by a 
nobility, and who difdained to confider themfelves under their im- 
mediate protection ; thefe were the foldiers who fought our bat- 
tles ; thefe were the failors, who, even at that period, rendered the 
flag of America lefpeclable and dreaded. 

I cannot but wonder how a fentiment of the kind could be ad- 
vanced by Mr. John Adams. That the people are not more ra- 
tional in fapport of their liberties than fwohes, unlefs fupported by 
a nobility, — is, of all declarations, the mod extraordinary. In the 
days of- adverfity, Mr, John i^dams knew^ the obligation he was 
under to the people ; a fentiment of this kind, coming from a 
member of our firil Congrefs, would have raifed the continent to a 
flam.e. Suppofe it had then been faid, that the people cannot be 
trufted ; w^e muft have a nobility to govern ; we muft put this no- 
bility into a " hole/' and from this fub terraneous cell we muft rely 
for all our fuccour. The Britifh army would have been pleafed 
with fuch a vifionary oppofition ; Lord Howe would rather have 
heard of one hundred thoufand noblemen in a " hole," than 
twenty thoufand Yankees in the field. Biinhcr-Hill was not defen- 
ded by men thus in covert ; no, the citizens did not lurk in holes, 
but ftood on eminences. Warren fcomed to be hid in a cave, but 
ftood in the front rank, in defence of that liberty which was inter- 
woven in his foul, and in the fouls of his brave companions. The 
immortal Wafhir.gton looked to his comrades of citiz^n-foldlers ; 
he did not inquire whether there v/as a body of nobility to fecure 
his retreat. He did not view his chofen band as luolves, but con- 
fidered himfelf at the head of men, whofe fouls were invigorated 
v*rith the powerful energies of liberty. 



27S T^^^ Wohes, and the Nobility, No. LXVII. 

*If the lov^ of liberty (as Is declared by Mr. Samuel Adams) 
was not interwoven in the foul of man, it would have been impof- 
fible to have elFefted the Independence of America. What but 
this fuftained the fpirits of an army conftantly on fatigue ? What 
but this cheered the war-worn , foldier, when deftitute of clothing 
and the common neceffaries of life ? What but this animated the 
American veterans to contend againft the formidable troops of 
Britain, with fcarcely a cartridge for their defence, or a drop of 
cheering comfort in their canteens ? What fpirit fhort of this, 
•rallied the undifciplined troops of Starks, to attack and capture the 
boafting Burgoyne ? To what energy of the human mind are we 
indebted for the furrender of Cornwallis ? Was it the refined 
fpeculations of a nobility groping in a hole, or was it the irrefift- 
ible impulfe of freemen, embodied to exprefs thofe feelings which 
were interwoven in every fibre of their fouls ? 

I would not wiih to put an uncandid conftru<9:ion on the par-r 
agraph felecfted from the Letters, but if tliere is any precife idea 
exprefled by Mr. John Adams, it appears to be this— that the 
people are as voracious, favage and irrational as 'wolves, unlefs 
they are enlightened by political Inftitutions, which are 2XjirJl pro^ 
duced, conftantly fitpported, and improved by a nobility. If I am not 
correft in my conclufions, I Ihall readily acknowledge my error ; 
but the Englifh language cannot convey a flronger idea to my 
mind of the real political principles of any individual, however dif-% 
agreeable may be the application. 

Admitting my premifes to be fubftantiated, how far does Mr. 
John Adams's declaration conform to our bill of rights, which em- 
phatically ftates, " that government is infcituted for the common 
good — ^that the people alone have an inconteftible, unalienable and in- 
j defeafible right to inHitute government — that the idea of a man 
born a magiftrate, law-giver, or judge, is abfurd and unnatural.'* 
If Mr. John Adams is right the conilitution is wrong ; for if the 
people are as untra<5i:able as wolves, without a nobility, is it not 
prepofterous for them to attempt to inftitute a form of govern- 
ment, which in no inilance recognizes that efTentlal branch which 
is to prefer ve the harmony of their focial compadit ? 

If a nobility is alone to preferve us, where in the name of com- 
mon fenfe are we to find our faviours : Are we to fearch for them 
among the Efiex junto, or are we to look for them among thofe, 



No. LXVIII. The NobU'tty in a HoU, if^i^ 

who confider the people as wolves ? Born In a land fettled by a fra- 
ternity of perfecuted republicans ; living under a conftitution and 
laws which embrace every citizen on the terms of equality, in what 
corner or hole of this extenfive territory are the people to look for 
help and affiftance detached from themfelves r After experiencing 
the bleffings of their o'ujn proteBlorii from the firft fettlement of the 
country to the prefent hour, is it poffible, that they fliould now dif- 
truft their own competency, irreverently denounce the guardian- 
fhip of heaven, and throw themfelves into the arms of a nobility ? 
We will not tlius affront heaven- — we Vvill not thus difhonour our 
forefathers — we will not thus entail mifery on our pofterity. 






No. LXVIIL 



THE NOBILITY IN A HOLE. 

Text—" The only way, God knows, is to put thefe Families Into a 
HOLE by themfelvesy and Jet two luatches upon them : a Supe- 
rior to them all, on one fide, and the People on the ether,' ^ 

Mr. John Adams's Letter to Mr. Samuel Adams, 



Wi 



HILE we read the political fentiments of Mr. John Adams, 
it is natural to confider them as the deliberate refie<5tions of a 
civilian, who has long been in the ftudy of government, and who 
has formed a fyftem, if not perfe6l, yet confident with his former 
avowed principles of republicanifm. But it is diiEcult to bring 
all HIS dodlrines to that point, by which we can draw a rational 
conclufion. 

The ftrength of his government confifts In political Inflitutlons, 
which he fays, " are Jirji produced, and eonjlantly fupported and im-> 
proved hj a nobility. '* — Thefe are the men to whom the people 
are to look for prote<5tion and happinefs. But after Mr. Adams 
had thus created his grand bulwark, and clothed his pre-eminent 
chara^ers with the moll estenlive powers, he feeziis to be ajhamed 



%^o The Nobility In a Hole. No. L^VIII, 

of the work of his ovra hands — for, ftrange to relate, this confer- 
vative body are to be *' put in a hole*' ; nay, he exprefies it more 
fiilly, by calling " God'* to witnefs> chat the " only way is^ to put 
them into a hole by themfthcs" 

Fellow-citizens, — Fancy to yourfelves that the United States 
fhoiild l>e under a government fimiiar to what is recommended 
hj Mr. John Adams. In the firfl place, you muft depreciate 
your own characters, by admitting yourfelves as incapable of gov- 
erning without this nobility, as " wolves." — -You mud view 
yourfelves in pofleilion of all the ferocious, voracious and extermi- 
nating paffions of this favage of the wildernefs ; you mull vicv.'* 
each other as a band of robbers, freebooters and rufiians ; you 
muft totally renounce every humane faculty of the foul j your 
fingers you muft confider as claws, your hands as fangs, your 
•teeth as daggers, and the former harmony of your voice, when 
afTembled to deliberate, as the terrific yells of the moft fanguinary 
beafts of the foreft. After you have thus brought yourfelves to 
this depth of degradation, you are to feek among a particular num- 
ber of families, a body of men, on whofe protcdion you are to re- 
ly, and whd are to take you under their " holy keeping^ But the 
farce is not yet complete — for after you have clothed them with 
this extenfive power, and arrayed them in their gorgeous robes, 
you are to depofitthefe highly refpefl'ed dignitaiies in a " hole," 
there to lernain hidden from the public eye ; and thus in fecref 
to work out the falvation of the people. Surely there muft be 
fome magical operation to communicate thefe bleffings, otherwife 
thcfe fubterraneaus confervators muft be puzzled to diftribute thofe 
benefits, as they mature them within their cells. 

I am not difpofed to treat the fentiments of Mr. J. Adams 
with an indecent feverity, by diftorting his propofitlons ; but I 
am perfuaded, if fuch a plan had been publifhed in a newfpaper 
as a ferious fyftem of government, and the name of the author was 
unknown. It would have excited unlverfal derifion.— For admitting 
Mr. Adams's premifes to be right, that a nobility is neceffary, 
and that they are to " pfoduce, fupport and improve the political 
inftitutions," for the good of the people, yet nothing can be more 
unfeemly than putting fuch a refpeclable body in a " hole.^^ If 
they are ferviceable, why fhould they be hid ? Why fhould they 
not be in a commanding fituation to view the " whole ground^ ^ 



No. LXVlir. the Nobility In a Hole, %Zt 

Why fhoTild they be withdrawn from the view and mfpe<5lion of 
the people, while they were fo affiduous to promote their welfare ? 
It may be confidered a: puerile play on words, in commenting 
ib minutely on this exprefTion j but to ufe Mr- Adams's own 
words, " God knows" what he means by a hole, unlefs it is 
to place a body of men intirely out of the reach arid fovereigntjr 
of the people. It is true, he is for placing " two watches upon 
theni ; a fiiperior to them all, on one fide, and the people on the 
other ;" but here the fyftem clafaes, for if the people are as 
ungovernable as " wolves," v/ithout this nobility, there appears 
an abfurdity that they fhould have any voice in checking them. 
If this nobility are io enlightened as to ^^ produce ^ fupport, an<i 
improve our political inftitutions," and the people are fo deftitute 
ti felf-prefcrvatlon as to be incapable of governing themfelves 
without them, it muft certainly introduce a jargori in the fyftem, 
if they fhiDuld ultimately have authority to comitera*5t thofe eftab- 
lifhments which this well-informed body had fan<5lioned. 

The premlfes laid down by Mr, John Adams deftroy his con- 
clufions ; for he places the people as deftitute of natural propen-- 
fitles to eftablifh political inftitutions, while at the fame time he 
makes them (in connexion with another unnamed power) the 
final compeers in the bufmefs. If they are not adequate to thefe 
purpofes in the firft inftance, how do they become equal to the 
final decifion ? They rem.ain '* fcuohes" through the whole 
procefs, as we cannot fuppofe this body, depofited in a hole, can 
create in the people any new properties which- they did not 
pofTefs in their primary ftate. This " modern philofophy" Is a 
compofition of ftrange, incoherent ingredients ; the abfurdity is 
evident when we analyze it; and in order to fhew the folly of fuch 
a fyftem, let us fee how far the doiftrine would have held during 
our oppofitlon to Britain. 

Suppofe Hutchinfon and Oliver had eifeded tlieir purpofes 
when they applied to the Britiili minift.ry for a fimilar mode o£ 
government ? The nobiiicy of that day were the families of 
Hutchinfon, Oliver, ValTals, &:c. This nobility v/ere to be" placed 
in a fituatlon fomewhat fimilar to Mr. Adams's " hole ;" that is, 
in a place where the people could not come at them. Theie 
* well-born* individuals were to *'^ produee^ fupport- ^vid imprQ^ve the, 
M m 

\ 

\ 



%Z\ . TLe NohUiiy m a Kale, . No. LXYIIL 

political rnftilutkns^^ of America. The " fuperlor" power, at that 
day, would have been tlie king of England, Under this organ- 
ized fyftem, had the Congrefs of the United States aifembled, 
and difapproved of the meaXiires of this king and nobilitr, the 
queftion is, how far thefc two branches of the government would 
have ^^ fxipported and improved^'' the meafures of yGhn Mancoci, 
Samuel Adams, George Washington-, Twomas Jefferso;^, 
John Adams, &c. who condituted the power which arofe from 
the people ? Rebels ! Rebels ! Wolves ! Wolves ! would have 
been eehoed and re-eehoed through the continent, and probably 
John Hancock and Samuel Adams would have been profcribed 
as the moft ferocious- animals in tlie whole pack. Certainly Mr. 
John Adams v/ould n-ever have been elevated to the Chief Exec- 
utive of the United States ; he might have remained a pleader at 
the bar, but it is highly improbable he would have had the au- 
thority to appoint a whole bench of judges, or have placed himfelf 
in a fituation to propofe a form of government, . which embraced 
the leading features of' the Britifh conftitution. The king of Eng- 
land, and the nobility in the hole, would have controled all pro- 
ceedings which led to our revolution ; and provided Congrefs 
had had refoluticn to raife an army, and appoint Wafhington as 
commander, even the Congrefs, army, and Wafnington, would 
have been configned, net merely to a " hole," but to the bottomkfs 
pit. Principles muft be founded on fa<5^s. — Speculative whims are 
not re,qulred in this country ; w^e have gone through a conted 
which fully explains all fuch controverfial points — we know what 
a king is, we know what a nobility is, and we know what the 
people are ; and I w^ill venture to fay, that notliing fhort of the 
immediate interpofitit)n of heaven can maintain their rights, but 
thetvfehes, and the man is- lunatic who fays they are " tlieir own 
worft enemies." The enlightened ftate of this country does not 
require men in a hole to govern them ; the people are not only 
fovereign by inheritance, but fovereign from information. 

Citizens of MafTachufetts ! — Are you not competent to yoi>r 
political concerns I When ye meet as a legiilature, do you require 
a body of nobility to make your laws, or to draft your refoives I 
Are ye inadequate to vote falaries to your governour, judges, 
and others I Do ye require a body of nobility, with the extra 
€omp?nfations for their titles, to carry on the meafures of the 



No. LXVIII. The Nohinty In a Hok. 283 

Commomvealth ? Will the hoale of reprefentatives declare 
themfelves incapable to tranfadt the bufinefs which annually comes 
before them, unlefs they have a body of nobility to produce and 
improve their civil inftimtions ? 

Citizens of New-Hamplliire ! — What fay ye ? — are ye v^riUing 
to Surrender your rights, and fubmit your welfare to a body of 
men thus organized aud authorized ? Will ye truft the falary of 
your governour, &c. to men in a hole ? 

Citizens of Conne(n:icut ! — What fay ye ? — does a nobility 
accord with your " Heady habits" ? Where are ye to feledt your 
dignified order ? Wlio among you have fuperior knowledge to. 
alter and improve your economical fyftem ? In what hole in 
your State, can you depofit a Connefticut nobility ? Are Simfbury 
mines the place of refuge ? 

Citizens of Rhode-Ifland ! — Come forward, and produce your 
nobility ; — where are the highly favoured families, who have a 
claim on your gratitude, fo far, as to furrender your privileges 
e:^plufiyely into their hands ? We prefume there are none ; we 
trud that you have been, now are, and ever will be competent to 
regulate yourfelves. The fteady habits of New-England rife 
indignant at fuch new-fangled doftrines, and we hope the enfuing 
election will convince the ad'Docates for a nobility, that not even a 
defcendant from them, muft ever expe6t to receive the fuffrages of 
independent eledors ? Let us convince the world, that Americans 
are not wolves, by fupporting a government which is not accurfed 
with a nobility. 

Citizens of the Northern States ! — Let me afk you, how far 
you can conne<5l tlie politics of Wafhington with thofe of Adams \ 
The former never degraded the people with the appellation given 
them by the latter ; Wafhington ever revered the people, and 
confidered them capable of protecfting themfelves ; he never advo- 
cated the eftablifliment of a nobility to fupport their rights ; how 
then can we cry " Washington and Adams" ? Let us not be 
deceived by names, but let us examine principles, and when we 
find that Mr. John Adams is derogating from tlie fovereignty 
of the people, and is for placing a nobility above them, we cannot 
confiftently attach his name to that of Wafhington, who in every 
inftance was oppofed to fuch pernicious dodrines. It is but of 
very little confequence whether we formerly had a nobility jpalmed 



284 ^^ President Wash'mgtot^s No. LXIX. 

Upon us by the intrigue of Hutchinfon, or it now iliould be effect- 
ed by the plaufibility of Adams. In either cafe, our ruin would 
be inevitable. The fail is, the plan propofed by Hutchinfon and 
Oliver, to the Britlfh miniflry, was in unifon with that which 
Mr. John Adams advocates in his Letter to his friend. He, and 
he alone, who is in favour of a nobility, and who wifties to 
degrade the people, can fubfcribe to the ppjitical tenets of Mr. 
John Adams.' Wafhington and Jefferfon accord with more mel- 
ody in the ears of rt 'ublicans. Let us then be true to our 
principles, and not facrince them to pride, oftentation and folly. 



Noo LXIXc 



ON PRESIDENT WASHINGTON'S PROCLAMATION QF 

NEUTRALITY, 



X RESIDENT Wafnington's proclamation, on the principles of 
*' impartial neutrality''^ agreeably to the " modern law of nations,*' 
was confidered at the period of its promulgation fo interefting to 
the commercial part cf the United States, that a great majority of 
the feaports afiembled to difcufs the inilruniento This town, in 
particular, expreffed their fentiments on the fubjecv. The word 
" impartial* yvas objeded to by fome, but the confidence placed in 
the determination of the executive, to fupport our commerce on 
the broad bafis of the modern law of nations, even qualified this ex- 
ceptionabie expreffion. 

I would here inquire, whether every man in the town-ineeting 
did not confider his property then at fea, and all he faould hereaf- 
ter fend, as completely guaranteed upon the principles of the pro= 
clamation ? Did any merchant, at that time, (after the moil fol= 
emn affurances of the Prefident) conceive that his navigation was 
floating upon an uncertainty whether any meafures v/ould be adopt- 
ed, by the federal government, to prevent the violation of that neu- 
trality declared by the executive ? Did any man induls;e a fufpicion, 



No. LXIX. Proclamation of NeuiraTif^^ 28^ 

fliat the Britifh officers would be permitteil to int€rce|^t cur legal 
trade with the powers at war, while our cargoc: ccnfifled of fuch ar- 
ticles as were exprefsly declared In the *' modem lanxj'^ as not fubjed 
to capture \ Or could any citizen fuppofe, that our government 
would fubrnit to the arrogance of Eriti(h orders (iiTued immedi- 
ately after the proclamation) to take all American veflels bound 
to France, ** let thir cargoes be zuhat they maf f 

Impofiible, that this fhould be the idea of any man : but on the 
contrary, every one felt Tifecurify that the power, which had pledg- 
ed itfelf upon the " modern lanv" of nations, would poffefs that na- 
tional confiftency, as to defend the citizens againll any wanton 
breaches of its fundamental principles. They certainly could not 
expe(5l, that tlie authority which had promulgated the dodrins 
would ever relinquifn it. 

It may here be replied, that the Preiident intended t© vindicate 
this right, but the Brltjjh nation not having confented to the modern 
law we were unavoidably expofed to their depredations. But, if 
we examine the proclamation, we fliall find, that the Prefident 
pledged our commerce even againjl the Britijh ; for, among the 
powers enumerated, " Great-Britain'' Is exprefsly mentioned. 
There was no exception to any of the belligerent pov/ers ; but the 
proclamation v/as a deciiive manifeflo to tliem alU that the com- 
merce of the United States was guaranteed by the executive upon 
the modern law. of nations. If Great-Britain was not confidered as 
being hound by ity tiie wifdom of the Prefident would naturally 
have led him to an explanation on this point ; and unlefs he had 
intended to vindicate his proclamation againil the depredations of 
this nation, his piudence would have cautioned him not to excite a; 
falfe hope in the merchants that their property would be fecured 
againft them. The Prefident knew, that lye had made a declara- 
tion of his determination to all the powei's at war, and, ;^s far as his 
proclamation went, he had taken a refponfible part in the Euro- 
pean controyerfy. It was 3fi executive passport, to all eur 
merchants and feamen, proclaiming in the moft e:v:plicit terms 
their fecurity under it. 

The proclamation was iffiied by the chief magiftrate of an in- 
dependent nation, and as fuch, was a public, unequivocal manifef- 
tatlon ofihis difpofition. It was taking a fide, as it refpe<n:ed the 
|>articular advantages to the United States, arifmg from the con- 



£S6 On President Washington's No. LXIX. 

vulied {late of other nations. It was commencmg a commercial 
war, in cafe any poivsr attempted to violate it. To fay, then, that 
t/je Brttijh were not bound by it, and that we muft fubmit to 
them, is no more than declaring, that the Prefident had made a 
proclamation which he had not fally confidered ; and that he had 
pledged himfelf to the belligerent powers to do that, which he 
could not maintain. In either cafe, the cenfure is too pungent on 
this fuperior character, and thofe who argue thus, reflect too fe- 
vercly on his wifdom, prudence, and foreOght, 

The proclam.ation (if I may ule the expreflion) was fometh'mg 
or nothing. If it was fometh'mg^ the fubflance of it ought to be re- 
tained : If it was nothing, the alTembling of the merchants, to ap- 
probate the meafure, was a *' found, and nothing elfe.*' 

As an individual, I expelled, on the meeting of Congrefs, that 
this proclamation would have been the ground-work of all our po- 
litical deciiions ; that the friends to the Prefide7it would have nour- 
ifhed the principles which it contained, and made tliem the polar 
liar of all their proceedings. But fo far from this, thefe ncmitial 
friends to the Prefident confidered it of little moment, and their 
fpeeches, inftead of advocating this official inflrument, rather con- 
demned it in every paragraph. The modern law of nations is 
fcarcely mentioned by them ; but attempts to palliate the Britifii 
fpoliations, on the ancient laivy feemed to be the whole tendency of 
their arguments. 

It is worthy of remark, that thofe members in Congrefs, who 
were advocating a fyilem to give efficacy to the proclamation* 
we;-e immediately denounced in certain papers as enemies to the Pref- 
ident ; as attempting to drive this country into a war ; as friends 
to anarchy, and enemies to the federal government : — Vvhereas, 
the proclamation naturally led thofe perfons into the meafures they 
advocated, as being the only remedy they coijld adopt, to prevent 
the violation of the modern law. Mr. Madifon contemplated the 
iiibject on this principle. He confidered the ftaple refources of 
this country, adequate to all the important purpofes of the procla- 
riiation. If the ground v/hich the Prefident had taken was tenable^ 
he was affiduous, as a member of the Legiflature, to fubilantiate it 
by every poflible exertion, and national eifort. The more effedu- 
ally to do this, he had recourfe to that impregnable fortrefs, the 
COMMERCE of the United States — ^ fortrefs which has evei bee;i 



No. LXIX^ ProcIamatiGn erf Neutra}*ty. 2^8-7 

conlidered as our strong hold, by all the writers on the Britlft 
■trade. His fentiments are in unifon with the patriots of the fev^ 
eral ftate conventions, and with the merchants of this, town in 
1786, as the fpeeches and votes will fully teftify. The fame mea- 
fures were pwdvocated by Vice-Prefident Adams, while refiding at 
the Britilh court. This gentleman decl?.yed, at that period, that a 
fyft'ematic reftriclion on the Britifh commerce would efiecl ther 
higheft advantages to this country. Mr. Dayton, and Mr. Clark, 
alfo enliftcd in the contioverfy, and commenced champions in de- 
fending the proclamation, by propofmg fuch energetic meafures 
as would place America in that forcible fituation as to command 
indemnification. Thefe gentlemen knew that we had' neither an 
army, nor a navy, to carry into operation the purpofes of the erecu- 
tlve, but that the " ftrong arm of the Union" confiiled principally 
in commercial exertions, and contending with Britain on the 
ground of mercantile retaliation. 

By this reprefentation of the bufmefs, can the citizens hefitate 
who were the real friends to the Prefidcnt ? Whether the men who 
were fupporting the meafures of the Britifh on the ancleni laiv, or 
thofe who were condemning them on the modern ? Thofe who 
were palliating the hoftile proceedings of the Britilh, while acting 
in diredt oppofitioir to the Prefident's proclamation, or thofe who 
were attempting to counteract them I Thofe who have advocated 
a treaty which has deftroyed every principle of the proclamation, 
by annihilating the modern law, and reviving the ancient ; which 
expofes our commerce to capture, our feamen to imprelfment, and 
abandons the merchant to feek indemnification, at his o<wn cojl, to 
the Biitifh courts ; or thofe who have uniformly endeavoured to 
vindicate our national rights, upon the mod folemn pledge that 
could be given by the Prefiden^t I Gn thefe queftions, let the im^ 
partial citizens judge. 

The conclufions from the above premifes are, that the Prefi- 
dent, in the plenitude of his patriotifm, attempted to promote the 
commerce of the United States, upon the modern law of nations. 
His nominal friends y^ by their meafures, defeated his intentions^ by ad- 
vocating the ancient law. His real friends endeavoured to fupport 
him, by having recourfe to the commercial refources of the 
country. They were alfo baffled in their exertions. The princi- 
ples of the pro«^amatioa are totally deftroyed by the treafy, and 



388 Cotjimenial Comparison No. LXIX. 

fc merchants are now obliged to look for Indemnification to the 
Britifh government, inftead of holding to the Prcfident's procla- 
:fnation, on the JIalility cf luMc/j they originally ventured theit 
property. 



tOMMEF^ClAh COMPARISON BETWEEN FRANCE ANL'^ 

ENGLAND. 



IN looking over the ftateiiient of Mr. Tench Cojre, of the 
exports to the feveral nations of Europe, I find that the amount 
to the Britifh is 9,218,540 dollars ; and to the French", i2,-653,635 
dollars. As It refpecls the amount to tlie two nations, the French' 
lioid the advantage of about three millions. But it is obferved 
on this ftatement In the Centinel, " that tliele exports is a powerful 
proof of the blefTmg.^ we have enjoyed from our neutrality, not- 
withftanding the many fpolla'tions on our comm.erce." I v/Ouid 
■a"{k, how this Is evident, as it relates to ths Brit!//:) ? We have 
exported upwards of nine millions to Britain, but by the ftatements 
of the merchants, in their late reprefentation to Congrefs, the 
Britifh' have captured upwards of five millions. How thc'n do the 
bleffings appear on the lide of Britain, -wh'en they have captured 
above one half of the amount of our exports ? The principal 
controverfy on the fubje<5t of our commerce is, how far our *' im- 
pairtial neutrality*' has been beneficial from the amity of the Brit- 
ifh ? Their condu6t is brought to a decifive point, for v/e have 
the ftatement of Mr. Coxe, as to the exports, and the reprefenta- 
tion of the merchants as to the copiur:s. The bleflings are there- 
fore known by deducling the la;tter from the former, and we find 
that the balance is ap-ainfl us. 

Befides, in the calculation of the blefUngs, we are to confider 
the captures made Unce the ratification of the ti-eaty, not only of 
our property, but of our feamen. In this eftimate, therefore, we 
may fairly allov/ that the largell fum exported to this aiilicably- 
difpofed nation has b^eii captured. 



No. LXIX. between France and England, 289 

To calculate the real blefllngs, we mufl: take into confideratlon 
our imports. Whether the imports from France have been more 
beneficial than from England, let us confider the cargoes from tha 
different powers. From France, we have received the principal 
part of our h"ard money. The banks have been moftly fupport- 
ed by the depofits from French voyages. The returns, from this 
quarter, have enriched the merchants and farmers. But I will 
defy any man to fhow the advantages from the Englifh importa- 
tions ; unlefs a cargo of their manufa(5tures, confifling of every 
fpecies of luxury, can be put in competition with solid coin. 
The balance of trade with England is greatly againft us. Mil- 
lions of dollars are exported, by Mr. Jefferfon's report to Congrefs, 
to pay our arrearages, whiie our trade with France has enriched 
the country with an immenfe circulating medium. To fet this 
bufmefs right, and that the people fhould not be deceived by par- 
tial ftatements, let Mr. Coxe give the imports from the feveral 
countries, and the contents of the cargoes, and we fhall then be able 
to judge as to the benefits of our commerce. 

A furtlier confideration is, that notwithftanding the im- 
menfe advantages to the Britifh by the American commerce ; 
notwithflanding our declared neutrality, and the pains taken by 
our government to prevent every impofition being pra(5lifed on their 
trade, yet they have lleadily purfued meafures to injure us in 
every diredlion. Since the treaty was figned have' they Ihewed 
us any particular favour ? Has our commerce been more free 
from embarrafTments ? Have they fhowed the leaft difpofilion to 
convince the Americans of their friendship ? 

If we could obferve the fmalleft evidence' of Britifli amity, ws- 
might conclude, that our conduft was the effed of political policy. 
But if we mujlfubm'it, upon the principles of Mr. Ames and Mr. 
Sedgwick, becaufe the Indian tomahawk will becom3 the umpire 
of decifion, we may go oa, till every trait of our national char- 
acter is obliterated. Let us at leaft take fome political pofition, 
otherways the Britifn will inevitably reduce this country, to the 
humiliating fituation of colonies. The fpeeches of the foregoing 
gentlemen, lead us to this point, and the difpofition of the Britiih 
is fuch, as will pufli them to the accompliihment of tiiis obje(5t. 

Thafe fpeeches are but httle fhort of a declaration ®f the furrender 
N » 



SpO Clerical Address No*- LXXi 

of our fovereigaty and independence, and that we muft hereafter 
depend on the mercy of that nation, for the fupport of every 
bleiling acquired by our revolution. 



No. LXX.* 

'CLERICAL ADDRESS TO PP.ESIEPENT ADAMS/ 

To Mr, David Ofgood, Moderator^ and Mr. Jed'idiah Morfe^ Scrlhc, 

of the Convention of Min'tjiers, 



" Al 



S MINISTERS OF THE Prince OF Peace," the addrefs of 
the Congregatwnal Clergy to Pieiident Adams claims the particular 
attention of your fellow-citizens. 

The political fituation of this country in connexion with the 
republic of France, calls on thofe who profefs to be actuated by the 
benevolent fpirit of religion, to exprefs their fentiments with th«it 
moderation^ as will convince the ivorld Xh2it party zeal forms no part 
of their chriflian character. Candour and benevolence are traits 
more congenial with the religion you profefs^ than invedlive and 
indifcriminate cenfure. 

" As minifters of peace, affembled in annual convention," (to 
adjuft no doubt your particular profeffional concerns) what could 
lead you to pafs your anathemas on the citizens of France, 2S 
*' atheiftical, licentious, and diforganizing" ? As having " pro- 
duced the greateft crimes and miferies, in their own country, and 
diiFufmg their baneful influence even to diftant nations" ? 

Indifcriminate charges ill become men of your ftation in foci- 
ety. I v/ould requeft you, gentlemen, to reflect on the ftate of 
religion- in France, previous to the revolution : and then you will 
be able to judge, hov/ far the' fl:ate of the chriflian fyfiem is chan- 
ged from that purity which it formed under the monarchy. It 
cannot be fuppofed, that you will pretend to advocate the princi- 
ples on which religion was then founded ; when the mind was fet- 

TMi , 1 ^--- ^^ ^^ ^ ji— I - ir -1—1 — — — 

* ThiSi and the foregoing Numherf were not originally pnblijhed under 
the fgnature of Old-South* 



No. LXX. to President Adams» 2/).y 

tered with all the abominable tenets and dogmas of the popifh 
hierarchy ; when the deluded citizens were bound to fubmit to the 
mfaU'iUlity of priejls ; and when thowfands were immured in con- 
vents, to groan under the tortures and impofitions inflicted on 
them by a herd of rapacious monks, and voratious friars. Was 
the ftate of religion in France, of that evarigdical nature^ and fo 
confonant to the 4i<^ates of the Chriftian fyftem, that you now de- 
plore the change ? Do you feci affli(5led that the Supreme Being 
has overthrown an ecclefiaftical tyranny, which for ages has been 
confidered as a fcourge to the church of Chrift ? whofe maffacres 
and crimes have rendered the page of hiftory a fcene too abhor- 
rent and fanguinary for the human mind to contemplate ? Can yo\j 
arraign the wifdom of heaven in thus deftroying that man of Jin, 
w^hom God himfelf had declared fiiould be thrown into perdition I 
qr do you fympathize with /iis hoUnefsy that the predidions of the 
gofpel have been verified in his downfal ? Surely, gentlemen, if 
you make the bible your ftudy, or if you believe In the prophets, 
your pious reflexions would carry you to adore the juftnefs of the 
Supreme Being, in thefe important events, rather than to vent your 
refentment againfl: thefe mjlruments which he has been pleafed to 
employ. 

But, gentlemen, you fay, they are now Jeijical : You appear 
concerned that the work is not done fo your approbation. In this 
particular, however, you have aflumed an inquifitorlal authority, 
unbecoming your charad:ers, either as A7nerican citizens, or Chrif- 
tians. — As Americans, what right have you to interfere In their 
religious eftablifhments ? While you are peaceably worfhipping 
in your own parifhes, what have you to do with the religion of 
France ? No French prlefts moleft your devotions ; why then do 
you IfTue your bulls againfl: them ? No convention In France, at 
their annual meeting, have charged you with baing diforganlzers, 
or deftroyers of foclal order ; why then fliould you place your- 
felves as arbiters of their Chrlfl;ian concerns ? 

The fad]: Is, gentlemen, the religion of France is efi:abllflied on 
the broad bafls of catholiclfm, which admits every man to worfliip 
God, according to the didates of his confclence. They have 
emancipated the human mind from that thraldom, with whlc|i 
domineering prlefts have for centuries fettered it, Each citi- 
zen judges for himfelf, on his eternal concern?, and is now left to 



2^2 Clerical Address No. LXX. 

pay his adoration to Deity, undeterred from the refentment of an 
arbitrary pricfthood. The various fe<5ts of profeflionalifts purfue 
unmolefled their religious devotions, and every man (let his relig- 
ion be what it may) can attend a place of worfhip with equal fe- 
curity and proteiflion as in any town or city in the United States. 

That fome philofophers in France are deifls, Is not denied. 
But, gentlemen, where are not thefe characters to be found ? In 
England, and in America, we find men of this principle. Great 
flatefmen, and men of benevolent minds, have been philofophers of 
this defcripticn. But your candour, it is prefumed, will not con- 
demn either England or America, becaufe fome men of this pro- 
feflion have differed from 3'ou on this fpeculative point. 

You have, gentlemen, been mifled as to the principles of the 
French government, in matters of religion. The Britiih papers 
have chiefly been the medium of our intelligence, on this fubjedt. 
They have pictured the deiftical ftate of France, juft to fuit their 
particular purpofes \ and under cover of thefe deceptions, they 
have attempted to raife the prejudices of their own fubje6ls, and 
the deteftation of the American citizens, againft the nation. But 
let an Impartial man read the hjflory of England, during their 
wars : The horrid devaftations they have fpread in all thofe 
countries they have conquered : The perfecuttons of the clergy of 
your order, even in England : The martyrs who have fell a facri- 
fice to the fanguinary edicts of their government : The deftruc- 
tion which their armies fpread In America, and which w;is pecu- 
liarly aimed at tl^e houfcs of nvorfiyip. Charleftown can teRify to 
their conflagrations, and the citizens of Bofton have witnelTed their 
facrileglous proftitution of our religious temples. Your abhor- 
rence, then, ought not to be confined to France, and your cenfures 
ihoLild not be particularly aimed to defame this nation. In exclu- 
fion of Britain. 

If, In your zeal, you are deploring the ftate of religion, or If 
your convention aflembled x/\xh *' fervent wifhes and prayers for 
the untverfal extenfton of national Ubertyy focial order, and chriftian 
piety," why were you wholly confined to vent your invedlves 
againft France ? If umverfal extenfion of national liberty was your 
fervent wifh, why are you filent while you hear the groans of the 
aj^ided Irifh ? Their murders^ ravages, and defolation, cry 



Nft. LXX. to President Aiiams, 295 

aloud to the God of Sabaoth ; and, as his vicegerents, deploring 
the unhappy ftate of mankind, your prayers ought to accompany 
their agonizing complaints. 

You, gentlemen, in particular, were advocates for the Britifh 
treaty ; but, li religion 14 the fubjedl of controverfyy how could you be 
fo defirous to commence a connexion with that nation whofe .vindic- 
tive rage firft drove our forefathers to the wildernefs of America ; 
andy from that period, has been ailiduous to eftablifh an hierar- 
chy to undermine thofe congregational ejlablijhments on which yours 
are founded ? Has Bonaparte, like archbifliop Laud, and other 
ecclefiaftics, in his addreifes to the clergy, fpoke the language of a 
ruffian I Has not the former, rather preached to them of righ,- 
teoufnefs, charity, and beneyolence ? Has he not told them tQ 
follow- the precepts of the Mafter whom they prefume to imitate \ 
In what page of the Englifh hiftory can you find the conqueror 
thus exhorting the conquered to adls of kindnefs, patriotifm, and 
philanthropy \ 

Eut, gentlemen, it may be faid, that, as a go'vemment, the 
French have reprobated the principles of religion. This certainly 
does not appear, while they tolerate religion of every defcription- 
The Jews, and the various orders of devotees, have perfedl liberty 
in France to purfue their refpeclive modes of worfhip. The 
French, in their conftitution, allow the fuperintendance of the Su- 
preme Being. It is thus introduced : " The .French people pro- 
claim, in the prefence of the Suprime'^Being.'* This is more 
than is acknowledged by the federal conftitution. The conftitu- 
tion of the United States begins with " We the people.'' No 
mention is made of the Supreme Being, nor no acknowledgment 
of his government, diresflion, or blefling. It would be judging 
hardly of the citizens of the United States, if any power in Eu- 
rope^ on this account, fhould object to an alliance with us, a^ 
atheijls. The Dey of Algiers inquired of our minifter, whether v/e 
were Chrijilans ; and his anfwer was, that the conftitution made 
no diftinflion between Chriftians and Mahometans. The Dey 
was pleafed with the idea, and sfteemed our connexion the more 
valuable on that account. 

The defultory converfation in the French convention, on relig" 
ion, no doubt, produced many fpeculative opinions : and if a de- 
bate in pur Congrefs, on this fubjecS:, fhould take place, it is proba* 



294 Clerical jiddress to President Adams. No. LXX. 

\f\t fome deiflical opinions would be broached by certain high 
federalifts. But would it be candid for the clergy of England to 
reprobate the Americans as deifts, for the imprudencies of a few 
individuals in Congrefs ? Or would it be right in them to fup- 
pofe, that a general decay of religion had prevailed in America, and 
that we were all turned deifts, becaufe a particular body of the 
clergy, " in and about ^Cambridge,'* had publifhed an addrefs, rcr 
prefenting a general nan-attendance on public worfhip ? An ad- 
drefs of this kind was publifhed in our public papers, about a year 
lince ; but no king, potentate, prieft, or prelate in Europe has 
anathematized America on this account, nor thought it of im- 
portance to ifFue their bulls againft that fountain of fcience, (Cam- 
bridge) from whence have iffued fo many ftreams to make glad 
the city of cur Q^od. 

The French, it is true, have no ecclefiaftical titles, as Right 
Reverend Fatlier in God, His Holinefs, or Reverend. Thefe 
form no part of the religious vocabulary. Neither Aaron, th« 
prophets, apofdes, nor evangelifts, arrogated to themfelves thefe 
attributes ; and it is a ferious confideration, whether the clergy, 
who have fince affumed thefe appellations, will not have to anfwer 
for their prefumption to a jealous Gody on the great day of retri- 
bution ! «* Holy and Reverend is HIS NAME.'* 

1 fhall conclude, gentlemen, this lengthy addrefs with my fer- 
vent prayers and wifhes, that you v/ould attend to that important 
Work for v/hich you are ordained ° To be lefs attentive to-the 
amufements, recreations, and politics, of this world : To endeav- 
our to foothe the paffions, rather than to inflame them. For " as 
minifiers ofpeace^* it becomes you, at your annual convention, to fludy 
:hofe things that lead to reconciliation, rather than to urge the 
people by partial reprefentations into a war. 



No. LXXI. To Theophilus Persons^ Esq; J? 95 



No. LXXL 



TO THEOPHILUS PARSONS, ESQj^ 

.£\S you have withdrawn the pl^a, which you folemnly pledged 
yourfelf to the court to argue, the public are not furniihed with 
the documents on which you predicated your appeal. As you 
have thus left the queftion in this crude ftate, there is nothing 
remaining on which to animadvert, but the impropriety of your 
conduct. s 

A gentleman fo long in the pradice of the law, it is prefumed, 
is well acquainted with the importance of the judiciary branch of 
government. In this department are fufpended the lives, liberty 
and property of the citizens. Public confidence therefore is 
efTential to its adminiftration, and every wanton attempt to dero- 
gate from its refpe(5tability, muft be acknowledged as highly rep- 
rehenfible. 

When the judges affemble, impannei the jury, and the crier 
announces, the organization of the court, it is taken for granted 
that the jurlfdiclion is authorized by the conflitution. At this 
period, if an individual fhould arreft the proceedings, by a plea 
which ftrikes at its exiftence, it is an a6l of aflumption which de- 
mands the higheft authority for his condu6l. The judiciary, thus 
moving in a legal and formal diredion, is as facred as the ark of 
old ; and if any man attempts to impede its progrefs, he is as 
amenable to the lav/s of fociety, as the difturber of the ancient 
building to the penal fandion of the Supreme Being. As citi- 
zens, we have a right to inquire, by what authority any part of the 
bufmefs of the prefent court was fufpended by your interference I 

It is underftood, fir, that your plea involved in it, not merely 
the jurifdidlion of the court on a particular adion, but ftruck at 
the foundation on which the judiciary fuperftrudlure was raifed^ 
The judges, with the utmoft condefcenfion, referred your queftion 
U be argued at 10 o'clock eo Uie next day. In tlie interim the 



2^6 To Tkeophiliis Parsons, JBsq» No. LXXI. 

court was adjourned, and certain adions were fufpended till you 
had ofFered the arguments Tn fupport of your allegation. 

During this intermiiHon, the public mind was agitated ; the 
courts of law were confidered as , palded ; the aftions depending 
were hung up as doubtful In their ilTue ; the jury were retarded in 
the aecomplifhment of their bufmefs ; in fhort, the laws of the 
country, for tv/enty-four hours, if not annihilated, were judged by 
many as progreffing to a dilTolution. 

The hour arrived, fir, in which this interefting queftion was to 
be argued. The court affembled, and fat in folemn fufpenfe, whe- 
ther they were, or were not a coiiflitutional jurifdi^ion, competent 
to the purpofes of trying all caufes which were prefented on the 
docket. At this awful crifis, it was announced, that you had 
waved the confideration of the queftion, which the day before you 
had pledged yourfelf to urge — -or, in plain Englifn, that Theoph'dus 
Parfonsy Efqiiire^ had permitted the court of juftlce to proceed on 
bufmefs without any further interruption ! 

An individual thus to trifle with a court of juftrce, is an In- 
decency, in m.y opinion, of the greateft magnitude. If, fir, you 
bad previoufly weighed the fubjed:, ('which undoubtedly it was 
your duty to do) why did you not appear at the hour affigned, 
and offer your reafons in fupport of your plea ? Why did you 
not decently come forward, and beg pardon for your temerity, or 
boldly maintain the controverfy ? Is there not a rel^efl due to 
the judiciary, when a lawyer prefumes to challenge its jurifdiiflion ? 
or ought he thus fport with the court by evading the queftion ? 
Are the public to depend on the flexibility of your nerves, or do 
you confider yourfelf as the pivot on which the tribunals of our 
government are totum ? Do you afliime an exchifive jurifdidion 
to ftop courts, or fet them In motion at your pleafure ? Are you 
the organ of a difaffefted party to convulfe the United States, on 
the fubjedt of ^he judiciary, or have you a confervative power to 
control the national government ? How can you anfwer for the 
fufpenfion of the powers of this court, while you have no other 
apology for your condud, than the fovereignty of your own will, 
by which you checked its legal progrefs ? Can you compenfate 
for the inconveniences attending fuch fufpenfion, to thofe whofe 
\ caufes were involved in the declfion ? Anfwer, fir, as a citizen 
and a lawyer. 



No, LXXI. To Theophihis Parsons, Esq. ^ 297 

A particular body of men, of late have placed themfelves in 
an attitude which appears calculated X.ojiop the ivheds of governmenf* 
They afTume an arrogance of deportment to which no free gov- 
ernment ought to fubmit ; they feem to fport with the conftituted 
authorities, and the laws of Congrefs are treated by them with 
the utmoft difrefpec^. The executive In particular Is abufed with 
the groifeft calumny ; every officer of government, fanflicned by 
the Prefident, Is the Immediate obje(5^ of fcurrility and defamation ; 
no man, but whom the junto approve, efcapes with impunity. 
They appear to arrogate legiflative, executive and judiciary au- 
thority ; the 2.&.i of the legiilature are denounced, if they are not 
agreeable to their principles ; all meafures of the Prefident are 
anathematized If they do not conform to their wlflies, and even 
juftice is Ihakcri in its feat, unlefs the fcales are held in a direction 
graduated by them. 

If, fir, you mean to take' a bold ftand, come for\<^ard in a 
chara<5ter equal to the magnitude of the fubje^f?^, and mark pre- 
cifely your lines of entrenchment ; do not fpcrt upon vifionary 
motions and pleas, on which you are cautious of rifking 2. perfonal 
refponfih'ility ; do not trifle with courts of juftice, but if you are 
fmcere in youf oppofition, fubftantiate your obje61ions by argu- 
ments addrelTed to the under {landing, rather than by fuggeftions 

which you are unwilling to avow before a tribunal proper to try 
their merits. 

As you have been indulged by the judges to offer your plea, 
in " oppitgnation^^ to a jurrfdiction, which they had legalized hy all the 
ufual forms attending our courts of judicature, it is expeded^ 
after you have thus abruptly abandoned the ground, that this 
authority will not fuffer Itfelf to be retarded by any further pro- 
ceedings of a iimilar nature. They will not hazard the tran- 
quillity of the country to gratify the refentment of a few difap- 
pointed partizans. 

After your formal parade in offering your plea and exciting 
the attention of the public, to Rumble at the threfhold, and Ihrink 
from the arduous undertaking, irruft leiTen you in the eftimation 
even of thofe who have heretofore appreciated your talents. The 
palladium of juftice is not to be violated by rufhing precipitately 
into its fanduary, and in a wanton manner to proftrate its attri- 

O o 



2()S To Theophilus Parsons, Esq, No. LXXIL 

butes. When a man contemplates fo Important a tranfaclion, it 
is incumbent on him to paiife and deliberate with the mod folemn 
circumfpection, before he ventures even to fudged his intentions j 
he fhould refle<5t on the conlequences before he agitates the quef- 
tion, and not aftewards become terrified at the magnitude and 
danger of his propofitions. 

I will venture to inquire o^ you, fir, if fuch a procedure, 
(analagous in all its points) had taken place in England, wlicther 
it would have pafled over v/ithout a fevere reprimand from the 
bench ? The ^prudence and moderation of the judges, in the 
prefent ftate of politics, It is candidly fuppofed wa« tlie only caufe 
which prevented a fimilar repreheniion. I am not for abridging 
the privileges of the citizens In their appeals to the judiciary, but 
I mufl repeat, that when a man enters the fanclum fandorum of 
juftice, with a folemn remonftrance againll its jurlfdisftion, it is 
incumbent on him to conlider maturely the ground of his objec- 
tions, and the confequences arifatg from them, before he ventures to 
difturb the harmony of the fyllemi. It is but a poor apology, fir, 
that you reflecfled afterwards more ferioufly on the fubjeift, as the 
time to confidcr the plea was of much longer duration previous 
to your entering it, than the hour afligned to argue it. I am 
willing to admit your apology, but muft hold to my firft pofitlon, 
that your condufl was ind'ijcreet and indecent. You may think, fir, 
to evade an anfwer with as much indifference as you abandoned 
your plea, but depend on it your over-raied talents will not fcreen 
you from further animadverfions. 



No. LXXIL 



TO THEOPHILUS PARSONS, ESQ. 

X HE mortification which you have fuffered, in not being able 
to fupport your plea, may be an apology for not noticing the re- 
marks made in my laft Number. This, however, is but a feeble 



No. LXXIL To Theophilus ParsDns, Esq, 299 

excufe for a man, who has ventured to arreil a Court of Juftice 
in its legal operations. If you do not anfwer, your caufe goes by 
default i and you ftand ccnvivfled, before an impartial public, of at- 
tempting that which you could not fubftantiate, and of retreating 
from a controverfy on which your profeffional talents were 

Your reputation, as a lawyer, had arifen to the higheft eleva- 
tion ; but " there is a tide in the affairs of men." You have been 
fufl'ered to fport with the character you had acquired, and have at 
length by your temerity brought yourfelf to that ftandard, which 
is the only " check and balance" to an unbounded vanity and am- 
bition. You vainly thought that your plea was fufficient to con- 
vince the people of the unconftitutionality of the court, without 
refle(5ling that it would excite on the next day, the curiofity of a 
crouded audience, to hear the arguments urged in defence of the 
ground which you had prefumptuouHy occupied. Your nerves, 
it is probable, were ftrung at the moment of your appeal, to an un- 
.common tone of energy ; but a few hours of more deliberate re- 
fledlion had relaxed them to that ftate of debility, which palfied 
thofe efforts adequate to the magnitude of the undertaking. 

I would wilh, fir, to reafon coolly on this interefting fubjed. I 
would afk you, whether your plea was not a dire<5l impeachment 
either of the integrity or legal knowledge of the judges ? The 
court was opened and formally organized ; prayers were made to 
heaven to folemnize its proceedings ; the marfhal, ccnftables, and 
every fubordinate officer, were purfuing their lifual rotine of bufi- 
nefs : — ^Was it not then the highefl: adl of impropriety to flate a 
plea which flruck at the conftituted authority of the United States, 
thus folemnly and formally moving within its judiciary orbit ? — ■ 
What was the language of your plea ? Was it not to this purport ? 
♦ May it pleafe your Honours, /, Theophilus Parfons^ come forward, 
clothed with the majefty of my own pre-eminence, to inform the 
court, that they do not know the duties of their office ; although 
they have taken an oath to fupport the conftitution of the United 
States, yet they are adting in violation of it ; that they are purfu- 
ing meafures vrhich expofe them to an impeachment ; that they 
are ignorant of the laws which they prefume to execute ; that the 
prayer of the clergyman on opening the court, is a libel againll 
the governmeiit, and an affront to heaven ; that the jury are only 



goo To Thecphilus Parsons, Esq. No, LXXII. 

aiders and abettors of treafon and rebellion ; and, that your mar- 
shal and conflablcs are in league with a body of infurgents, who 
have affernbled in this hallowed place of juftice toproftrate all the 
facred attributes of the judiciary— ~I, therefore propofe, at 
lo o'clock to-morrow, to convince your Honours of the legality 
of my charge ; and, if you are honeft men, you will diffolve the 
court, and retire to your homes, under a full convidion of the inde- 
cency and impropriety of your conducl !' 

This, fir, appears to me to be the plain language of your plea ; 
and after you had thus come forward, I muft declare as my opin- 
ion, that the court ought to have held you to prove your charge, or 
obliged you to ajh pardon for your prefumption. 

I would afk you, fir, whether you had fully confidered the con- 
fequsnces of ycur conduft ? — Suppofe a vefTei had failed for Europe 
on the day you offered your plea, and it was announced in Eng= 
land, France, Holland, Ruffia, and other commercial nations, that 
the courts of juftice were about to be flopped in America — do you 
know, fir, what effec^l this migjit have had on the commerce of 
this' country ? AVould an Englifhj Dutch or Ruffian merchant 
fhip goods, while the courts of law were thus fufpended ? Would 
not every European merchant have been cautious how far he 
anfwered the orders of his correfpondents ? Would not a general 
dift rare haye arifen on the Exchange of thefe refpet^ive nations ? 
Would not an univerfal dread have been flamptd on all mercantile 
concerns, as they related to the United States ? efpecially, if it was 
afferted that the giant of the laiv had thus arreded the courts of juf- 
tice, and had only required a few hours to complete the difTolu- 
tion ? Thus the flrength of your talents proves the weaknefs of 
yciir conducT:. ' . 

As a lawyer, you may think to trifle 'within the har^ but re- 
mem.ber, fir, that what is fport to you, is death to the chara(51:er of 
the country. The property of the merchant, in his foreign con- 
nexions, is of the mofl facred nature. You ou^ht alfo to be re- 
minded, that the commerce of America is dspofited in almcfl ev- 
ery port of the habitable world, and that your vijonary fpeculations 
may eventually ruin thoufands of enterprifing merchants and in- 
duflrious feamen. I am free to fay, that I think every man who 
was concerned in navigation, and whofe vefTel failed on the day in 
which you flopped the Court, is entitled to an aftioa of damage. 



No. LXXII. To TheophUus P ar sons' f Esq, 30 1 

for your waaton, injudicious, and unprecedented proceedings, and 
if I was on the jury, fliould inlift on laying a heavy penalty. 

Further — did you confider how far fuch a proceeding might 
have operated on the public credit of the United States ? The na- 
tions, to whom we are indebted, mi^ht have made immediate de- 
mands on us, when they apprehended a diflblution of our Judi- 
ciary. The public funds muft have fallen in foreign markets, 
and the merchants in general been expofed to all thofe inconve- 
niences arifmg from a decrcafe of confidence in our judiciary tribu- 
nals. In fhort, fir, you are not aware of the milchiefs which 
might have taken place by your indifcretion, not only as it relates 
to individuals, but to the whole nation. 1 am willing to allow 
you every indulgence for your hafty meafure, but while the digni- 
ty and reputation of America are hazarded by your imprudence, 
7 it is incumbent on every citizen to reprobate your folly, 

X w'ould call on you, iir, to produce an authority, on which 
you predicated your plea. I do not pretend to be a drilled latvyet, 
Ihackled with the formalifes of his profeffion, but I challenge you to 
ftate from the books a fimilar plea. I know that a plea of jurifdic- 
tion may be made, as to a particular cafe, but you will be puzzled 
fo {hew any authority analogou;; to your imperious ftride of 
deftroying the exiilenceof a court, in the extenfive degree contem- 
plated by you. As an attorney, I afk you to produce the evidence 
^T'-^you may be filent> but filence is no convidlion of the propriety 
of your behaviour i and when a lawyer holds his tongue, it is a 
ilrong proof th^t he is confounded. If you do not anfwer, I muft 
. conclude that TheophUus Parfons, JE/guirCj h deftitute of reafons to 
vindicate his conduct. 

I would not be too fevsre in rny remarks, or attempt to dralv an 
unfair conclufion from the premifes ; but when we confider the 
reijpluiionary tendency of the meafure ; the confequences which muft 
inevitably have taken place, in cafe the plea had been admitted ^ 
the total derangement of all caufes in which property was depend- 
ing ; the general conyulfion in every department of government^ 
by a war commencing between the legiflature and judiciary ; in 
fhort, the laws fufpended ; life, liberty and property tofTed on th^ 
boiilerous ocean of contending parties ; the fword of juftice arreft- 
ed, and the poignard of an EiTex junto introduced as a fubftitute— - 
amidll this contention, who, fir, could anfwer for the dreadful ftate. 



30* BlUy Bnpper and Charles Shady, No. LXXIII. 

into which fociety would be plunged ? Tou mufl: have been re- 
fponrible iox the event, and "God only knows" the extent of the 
cataftrophe. Viewing things on this broad fcale, no citizen who 
dulyeftimates the harmony of the United States will confider the 
above obfervations as too pungent. I flatter myfelf that your can- 
dour and good fenfe xvill fuppofe them but a moderate difcipline for 
the evil which you threatened. 



No. LXXIIL 



BILLY D.IPPER AND CHARLES STEADY, 



N the progrefs c>i federalifnh every pajjion of the human mind 
has been affailed ; intereft, fear and pride have been the bulwarks 
more immediately expofed to the attack of the enemy. The 
young inert of all ranks in fociety have been arreiled by the federal 
party ; the weight of pecuniary inSuence has threatened them 
with poverty, and in many inftances with the ruin of themfelves 
and families. How often have v/e feen the overbearing fpirit of a 
rich defpotj exercifed on the days of election — and it is known as 
a fa(fl:, that many trade/men were explicitly told, at the time the 
Brltyh treaty was in agitation, if they did not fign in favour of its 
adoption, that every means would be taken to deprive them of 
the employ r^ent. of federal^Jis. Even fmce the hji eIe8lon, certain 
p?tty tyrants have refufed to employ feme independent mechanics y be- 
caufe they exercifed their right of fiiifrage as -confclence dictated, 
when they had ever fulfilled their engagements v/ith undoubted 
honefty and fidelity. 

But the moCt powerful and artful method purfaed was ex- 
' citing a kind oi fcjkionalk currency to the politics of the day, 
Thofe v/ho prefumptuoufly llyled themfelves the " better fort'* 
introduced ?i cant pbrafeology of yiVcrfl/ andjacoMn, Federaltfm 
W^^ as fajdiionable as a fpencer or pantaloons — in all thofe rejined 
ftrcksj federalifm was the card of inYitatioix or introdudlion ; 



No. LXXIII, Billy Dapper and Charles Steady, 303 

"^hich admitted the re{pe<5tlve guefls— " Mr. Suth-z^nt^' a federaU 
Ifli' was the common paiTport which ufhered him into thefe polite 
aiTociation?. Mafters and miiTes were taught to reverence and 
rerpe(fl all thofe who were complimented with this appellation j 
young gentlemen and young ladies were noticed by their refpedlive 
mammas and papas in proportion as they gave evidences of their 
federal inclination. 

Billy Dapper was a federalift, ar^d Charles Steady Oi jacobin ; the 
former was received with every mark of cordiality, while the lat- 
ter was reprobated as the mod abandoned profligate. ^ Billy would 
talk with a peculiar flippancy about politics, and lament the pro- 
,grefs of infidelity ; he would repeat with rapid volubility, d — n the 
jdcohinf, d-^n the dlforganizers, d — n the deijlsy d-—n a fepid^Itcan gov- 
ernmenti and generally concluded his pious rhapfody with d — n 
Tom Paine ! He was a prodigy of perfedion, and every thing 
Billy faid was conlidered monjlrouf.y wife and f-juonderfully profound ; 
he gained fuch an afcendancy that all he propofed was adopted, 
and many deep fpeculations were made in ccnfequence of his fage 
recommendations. His notes were readily endorfed, and Billy 
had only to afk and receive ; he purfued his plans, and increafed 
in reputation to the amount of about 100,000 dollars. At length 
his affairs began to grow a " little fqually ;** his " checks" on the 
bank were all " balanced ;" and finally he had no other refounpe 
than to betake himfelf to the place of refuge iii " ScoUay's build- 
ings,'' and there, likj many of his predeceflbrs, enriched himfelf 
by impoverifhing his creditors ; thereby cancelling all debts, dues 
and demands by a noli profequi of ^^fit tr at fit gloria tnundi." Billy 
Dapper after thus legally and honourably difmcumbering himfelf from 
, the rude affaults of impertinent dunners and more infolent haHiffsf 
ftrutted about with a dignified deportment ; took new apartments, 
decorated them with faftiionable furniture, and commenced gentle" 
man under the " modern philofophy'* of the bankrupt-a(5t. Hg 
now renews his old language ; d — ns the jacohins; d — ns theprefidefit^ 
and is peculiarly energetic in anathematizing Toni* Paine the inpdeL 
He is greatly concerned for the caufe of religion, and laments the 
confequences of demoralizing the rixing generation ; he will often 
exclaim, — what will become of fociety when men are not held to 
do juftice by moral obligation I But Billy is a federalill ; he has 
?ifrumsd his credit, goes on in his bufmcfs, and even now looks 



504 ^il^y Dapper and Charles Sieady, . No,' LXXIII* 

down with ineffable contempt on Charles Steady. — During tte 
reign of terror, Billy and his comrades were outrageous againft 
every man who dared to think different from them ; the card- 
table would fometimes be dillurbed by their vociferations ; even 
the tranquil game of whiil would be thrown into confufion ; all 
the honours would oftentimes be loil, and the tricks would be the 
only part of the game to count upon. 

Thus much for the hiflory of Billy Dapper — but, alas, Charles 
Steady was peculiarly unfortunate under his political denunciation.. 
He had received a collegiate education, and was well ind^rirdcd 
in tlie principles of honeily and economy ; he had not only applied 
himfelf to his profeffion, but had appropriated his leifare hours to 
reading hiftory, and from thence had been able to judge with pro- 
priety of thofe fyflems of government which fecured the rights of 
the people ; he knew the baneful elfed^s' of monarch/, the deftruc- 
tive tendency of ariftocracy, and had from reflection approved a 
republican forni as moft congenial to his country. Knowing that 
economy was the bafis of this government, he always reprobated 
thofe expenditures and eftablifhments under the former adminiflra- 
tion, which led to a fubverfion of the purity of its principles. In 
the reign of terror, therefore, he had the refolutiori not to wear a 
cockade ^ he exploded the idea of a (landing army ; he did not 
approve of excife laws or flanip-adts, and thought it was an impo- 
fition for Mr. Adams to allow eight per cent, for the loan of 
money when all the federalifts had pledged their lives and property 
In fupport of his meafures. Ke would often fay, why did Mr. 
Adams thus fport away the public credit in giving fuch excefTive 
ufury, when he had the flrongefl affurances from the addrelTes of 
the federaliiis, that their property was at his difpofal ? Charles, 
by this kind of converfation, and by adhering to thefe principles;^ 
Was early denounced in all circles of his acquaintance as 2. jacobin / 
the young gentlemen lorfook him, the young ladies eyed him afkant ; 
even w*hen he entered into company, it was quickly whifpered that 
he was ii jacobin ; if any parties were propofed in his prefence, it 
was foon hufned till Charles had retired — No gentleman would be 
feen abroad in his company ; no lady would condefcend to ride ivith 
him, none to walk with him, none to talk with him, none to curtefy 
to him, even if he fubmifTively bowed to them ; — alas, poor 
Charles was forfaken by all his former acquaintance ; and even 



No. LXXIIL Billy i3afper and Charles Steady, 30^ 

the young ladies who always before were pleafed with him, took a 
ftrong averrion, and he was left alone to wander about lik^ 
Rachel mourning for her firft-born. 

However, Charles adhered to his principles, and purfued his 
occupation with induftry. He got forward in oppofition to the 
vile means of his enemies to injure his reputation ; he formed 
a character by his fcientific acquirements ; his credit was eftab- 
lifhed by the rectitude of his conduct j his notes were never hawk- 
ed upon the exchange at a difcount ; he baffled his opponents 
by the uniformity of his principles, And now ftands in that elevated 
lituation, as it relates to property and honour, that his enemies 
envy him. He is not difturbed by the Cries of the injured widow 
and orphans j he walks through the ftreets v^rithout the turfes of 
honed creditors ; ^nd when he pafles, no m.an can fay, there goes 
d viUain ! He does not carry the bankrupt-a<5t as a palTport, or a 
*' Whereas" as a receipt in full for all delinquencies ; his pay- 
ments are twenty ihillings in the pound, and wh^t he eats, drinks 
and wears are not the earnings of other men's induflry. He does 
not make religion a cloak for licentioufnefs, or curfe Tom Paine 
for a mafk- to cheat an indifcreet tradsfman ; he efteems honed 
men, let their religious profeffions be what they may, and never 
embraces a hypocrite to gain an advantage by his fycophancy j 
he fpeaks his mind on all proper occafions with the flnceritj of a 
freeman, and fcorris to Hatter, though he might obtain the appro- 
bation of the powerful ; he remains coiiedled in the various changes 
of parties, and fteady to his purpofe when he rs threatened with 
tlie frowns of the opulent ; an approving confcienee raifes him 
above fear, and all his; anions are th« refult of a deliberation, 
founded on the bafis of inviolable integrity. He never fmiles to 
betray the innocent, or frowns to difmay the timid ; he inculcates 
Chridia'nity to promote charity and philanthropy, but defpifes the 
man who mak-es the beuevoknce of the D^ity a fcourge to infii^fb 
the mifchief rankling withm his own bofom ; his practice and his 
profeffion in every refped correfpond ; he is not a faint in wordsj^ 
and a fiend in deeds. 

Thus ftand in general the chara(5lers of thefe two men, and 
t-hus have they proceeded in their refpe<5l:ive iiitercomfe wid^ fo- 
ciety. To avoid as much as poilible, perfonalides, tliey are not fo 



3q6 . The Widoiu's Mile, No. LXXIV, 

particularly defcrlbed as to defignatc any individual. One, how- 
ever, has been covered with the mantle oi federalifm, which, like 
charity, hides a multitude of fms ; u-liile the other has been 
obliged to exercife all his virtues, to fcreen hinifclf from the ma- 
lignant difpofition of his adverfaries — while one revelled in luxury 
and diffipation, impofed on the credulous and defrauded the un- 
fufpicious, the other was befet witli all the venom of malice, and 
his charadter rendered the fport of every unprincipled man who 
had enrolled his name in the federal catalogue. ** Such things 
have been," but we truft in God that the time is arrived, when- 
characters will be eftimated, not by the phrafcology of party, but 
by the ftandard of honour and honefly ; that imperious lordlings 
who have acquired fortunes by the necromancy of fpeculatloa ; 
defpots who exercife an infolent control over the tradefman and 
labourer ; and fanatics who wifh to ftiackle the reafon of mankind, 
will be brought to that * check and balance' which gives them no 
other pre-eminence than what arifes from their inherent merit. 
When this takts place, the hypocrite will be ftripped of his plu- 
mage, the purfe -proud fpeculator of his trappings, and fpurious 
federalifm appear in that deformity to which its advocates have 
long fmce reduced it. 



No. LXXIV. 



THE widow's mite. 



Text — " And he called unto him his difciplesy and fayeth, 'verify I fay 
un}o you, that this pQor Widow hath cajl more i?i, than all they luhich 
have caji into the Treafury, — Mark xi. 43d, 

X HE fcriptnre is profitable for all things ; it contains dodrines 
which are applicable both to civil and religious inftitutions. Our 
Saviour took cognizance of all tranfactions, and always .made his 
obfervations witla a view to Inculcate fecial and divine precepts. 



No. LXXIV. The Wido-Tv's Mite, 307 

Afler cautioning his hearers againft thofe " who love to go in long 
clotliing, and falutations in the' market-place, the chief feats in 
the fvnagogue, the uppermoft feats at feg.fts ; who devoured wid>- 
ows' houfes, and for a pretence made leng prayers :'* At this mo- 
ment of exhortation, he fat over againft the Treafury, and beheld 
many that " were rich call in much'* ; but amidll; this general exhi- 
bition of public munificence, he defcried a poor woman putting in 
her mite, which fo far arrefled his attention as immediately led him 
to notice the promptitude with which {he paid her exadions. 

This calling into the treafury, it is conjedured, was a tax 
upon the Jews, for the fupport of their ecclefiaftical inftitutions ; 
as we cannot fuppofe that either the rich or the poor were at that 
day difpofnig of their money in a wanton manner, without feme 
call from the governmejit. The rich Scribes and Pharifees, it is 
probable, took occafion in the prefence of our Saviour, to fhew 
their alacrity in paying tythes of all they poffefled, and depofited 
of their abundance, the full amount of their taxes. They thought 
it would confound him, while reprobating thofe who made a boaft 
of their fan<5lity, to fee with what readinefs they placed their aflefT- 
ed quota into the treafury. It is probable, they expeded the 
multitude and his difciples would have rofe in oppofition to his 
denunciation, v/hen the evidence was fo clearly before their eyes, 
of the fmcerity of their profeflions. No doubt fome men in long 
clothing, who had devoured many a widow's houfe, took occa- 
fion to make a great parade around the treafurer's office, in order 
to attradl the attention of the bye-ilanders — they expeded to hear 
the people cry out, thefe are the "men of order" ! thefe are the men 
of " fteady habits" ! thefe are thofe who fupport church and ft ate ! 
thefe are the charitable a<5tioi:is of thofe whom ye have thus calum- 
niated ! Behold their fmcerity ! fee with what cheerfulnefs they 
caft in their riches ! Can any doubt their attachment to the rights, 
liberties and happinefs of the people ? As to this poor widow, fhe 
only cafts in a mite, while they are obliged to enrich the trea- 
fury with the greateft abundance. 

This miode of reafoning w^as very natural for men who confid- 
ered things in this contraded point of view ; but our Saviour re- 
ceded on this event in a different manner. He never made an 
obfervation without an explicit meaning ; he confidered the fub- 
jeft, as it related to the circumftances of fociety, and ihQ' inequality 



5oS The Widow's Mite, No. LXXIV. 

of taxes. He knew that the abundance of the rich was not in pro- 
portion to the widow's mite ; and when he faw that her tax was 
the greateft part of her whole property, he could not but remark 
to his difqiples on the difproportion of the burthen. His whole 
miniilration was folely calculated to relieve the bowed down, and 
when he obferved in this general depofit into the treafary, that 
though the lich feemed to bear a large proportion of the public 
expenfes, yet as i^ related to . the property poiTelled, the poor had 
the heaviefl v/eight iij difcharging the public debt. The treafu- 
rer, it is expe<rted, even fmiled at the poor widow, when fhe threw 
in her mite ; and provided the old lady had made any complaint 
of her tax, ilie would have been confidered as a diforganizer, and 
fent to the houfe of corredlion ; neither is it improbable that our 
Saviour was denounced as a ftirrer up of fedition, for drawing any 
parallel between the widow and the rich men who accompanied 
iaer. At that day they held in fmall repute the taxes of the mid- 
dling clafles of citizens ; they thought their aid in fociety was of 
but little confideration ; without reflecting, that while others gave 
of their abundance, the poor man paid a greater proportion of his 
a<5lual poiTeffions. 

Thefe refledicns naturally lead vis to notice the obfervations 
made by thofe v/ho opfX)fe the repeal of the excife and other in- 
ternal taxes. They fay the rich pay them, and that the poor are 
not injured by their operation. While confidering this queftion, 
we will not confine ourfelves to the poor, in the idea generally af- 
fixed to this appellation ; but we will, in connexion with them, 
bring into view the middling Intereji, confifting of farmers, tiade^'- 
|?i€n and labourers. When we offer thefe claffes as the criterion 
on which to judge, we muft conclude, that they pay mere taxes by 
excife,' than thofe generally denominated the rich ; and though 
the high-toned federaliils pretend to juftify this mode of taxation, 
^s falling exclufiveiy on the wealthy, yet on an accurate examina- 
tion we Ihail find they fall heavily ca the poor and middling in- 
ter eft. 

The excjfe, as it relates to many rich men, is principariv en the 
confumption of fuch articles as they are called on to furniih moie 
generally from inclination or accident, than neceflit)'. For the 
m^k partj, they are men who live on the income of their public 
ftocks and bank 4iYi4ends. The eicife whkb th^;y pay is either to 



No. LXXIV. The mjo-tu's M'lte, 309 

pleafc their own appetites, or to entertain their bacchanalian afibci- 
ates, on fome peculiar feftive occailons. All they pay is a volun- 
tary t^x, and as the revenue is increafed by the fums ralfed on the 
Qommunity at large, they are enabled to receive their quarterly- 
dividends with more pun<5tuality. They are In favour of an ex- 
cife upon a general principle, that if they pay 6f, duty in the 
couria of the year, they are furc of receiving from tlie treafury 
the full intereft on their funds at 20/I 

Bat the cafe ftandsdiiferent with others, who may be denom« 
inated the middhng iiitereft:. The farmer, in confequence of an 
excifc, is brought into an expenfe which is a dived: tax on his pro- 
duce, and which he cannot avoid. It is not merely to pleafe his 
appetite, neither does he receive any immediate advantages refult- 
ing fiom the revenue. The fupplies of fpirituous liquors to the 
workmen and labourers upon his farm, are an extra expeufe which 
he is nectlfttdttd to pay ; every glafs of liquor is burdened with a 
duty, which lefTens the promts pn his produce. In haying-time, he 
is obliged to employ a great number of labourers ; in the feveral 
tufy feafcns, he has a great addition to his family, and their main- 
tenance includes many articles on which an excife Is laid. In mod 
inftances, the farmer, by this mode of taxation, has to pay a larger 
amxount to the government, than many men who have from one 
hundred thoufand to five hundred thoufand dollars in the public 
funds. 

The cafe is fomewhat nmilar with the tradefman, as he is obli- 
ged to employ many journeymen in his occupation, and wages are 
generally giv?n in proportion to the prices on certain particular 
articles ; the number of apprentices ufually taken by this clals of 
citizens, involve in it a heavy tax from this fpecies of revenue. 
Even the merchant is fubjed to a difproportionate weight of gov- 
ernment from this caufe ; as th« employment of his clerks and la- 
bourers is attached with an expenfe arifmg from this fource. The 
old foldier, who difpofed of the evidences of his patriorifm during 
cur confii<5t with Britain, moft afTarcdly mud feel the weight of a 
tax, which falls on the cheering coidial that refrefhes him amidft 
the toils and fatigues of the day ; his mite comes heavily, when 
he reflecls that thefe are the rewards of his fervices. He nom 
drinks his grog with a m.erry heart, and bleffes the adminiftration 
iiifit has removed the bitter ingredient of an excife. 



310 The Wuloiu's Mite. No. LXXIV. 

When, therefore, we hear the federalifts exclaimnig that the 
exclfe was principally paid by the rich, and that it was an impc- 
iition on the poor to repeal it, the fallacy of fuch reafoning is evi- 
dent froip a more acf urate confideration of the fubjeft. For I be- 
lieve we may venture to alfert, that the middling intereft, includ- 
ing the labouring poor, pay four times their juft quota by this 
mode of taxation more than the richeft clafTcs in fociety. Thefe 
fmall duties are a conftant draining from their hard-earned prop^ 
grty, and though the rich apparently caft into the treafury much of 
their abundance, yet, like the poor widow, the farmer, tradefman 
g.nd labourer pay in " more than they all." 

The repeal of the chaife and carriage-tax is alfo fald to be in-f 
jurious to the middling intereft. They tell us, that the rich 
nabobs at the fouthward are the chief fuppcrters cf this tax, and 
that it is only relieving than by the repeal. But this reafoning 
alfo is vanity. The proportion of carriages among the rich men 
of this dcfcription, is fcarcely one to an hundred. In this town, 
we have about fifty fuch carriages, but through the ftate, the num- 
ber of chaifes may be reckoned at five thoufand ; thefc are gen- 
erally kept by farmers and tradefmen, not merely for convenience, 
but their local fitnation requires it ; the diftance from meeting- 
houfes in the country, obliges a man to keep this family-carriage 
to convev his wife and children to divine feivice ; to take a rida 
to the fea-port on bufmefs ; and probably to pay intereft on a note 
in the bank, cr in the hands of one of thefe rich men, who fo 
greatly bemoan the repeal of the tax. A chaife therefore cannot 
be called a luxury, but a neceffary article in moft families in the 
country. To apply thefe remarks to my text, the duty on five 
thoufand carriages is a revenue which arifqs principally from the 
middling clafles ; and if they do not, like the widow, pay into the 
treafury all they have, yet they caft in more in proportion to the 
property they polTefs, than the fifty who appear to depofit fo 
largely from their abundance. Can any perfon think it reafona- 
ble, that a hackman, whofe carriage is his only means of main- 
tenance, fhould pay the fame tax on this article as the man who 
keeps a pleafurable-ciirriage, and has an income of ten thoufand 
dollars to fupport it } 

It is fmgular, that thofe who ftyle themfelves fed eralifts ever 
pretend to be led by gofpel principles, and are fo devout as to ii;i- 



No. LXXIV. The Whiow's Mite, Hi 

eorporate religion with their politics ; they claim an exclufi^e 
charadler for attachment to the Cariilian fyftem ; yet there is no 
book extant, whiich ib completely counterads their political tenets. 
Our Saviour feemed to feek cccafion to reprobate all thofe who 
made a trade of their piety ; his fermon on ,the mount, and every 
remark he made, were peculiarly levelled at thofe bodies who 
exercifed fovereignty over the people from their pre-eminent 
fanclity^ or pretended to render to Cafar more than others^ Is it 
not remarkable, that our Saviour fhould efpy a widow with her 
mite, amidil the crouds who furrounded the treafury ; that he 
ihould call his difciples to him, and fo minutely ftate the quantity 
fhe had given in ; that he (liould over-look with indiiFerence the 
large fums paid by the rich, and feleft a poor v/oman as the 
object of his notice, who was the leaH regarded by the money- 
holders who accompanied her ? He did not rtiaike his obfervations 
Indifcriminately to his audience ; as he knev»r the prejudices of the 
people in favour of thofe who made great profeffions of their 
liberality towards religious and civil rnllitutions ; but he called 
his difciples unto him, and privately gave them a hint, to beware 
of hypocrites, and inftilled into them, as a radical principle, 
that the poor or middling intereft always paid their full proportion 
of the public taxes. This being a day to pay Into the treafuryy 
and having an opportunity to fee the procefs of the bufinefs, he 
took occalion to give this ledture to his difciples ; but if he had 
feen the group who probably the next day went to receive their 
demands, poffibly, he would have been as particular in defignating 
fome individuals for the quantity they received, in proportion to 
the fum they had paid, as he was in defcribing the widow and her 
fmall pittance. 

To conclude, the foregoing remarks are not intended to make 
an invidious diflinftion between tlie rich and the poor. In fociety 
the former are to be refpe6led, and the latter regarded. A levell- 
ing principle Is not the obje<5l contemplated, but that each individ- 
ual fhould feel his juil weight in the community. The obferva- 
tions are made to check the arrogance of a certain " fe6t,'* who 
pretend to claim an exclufive privilege from their property ; who 
endeavour to depreciate thofe who are not polFeffed fo largely of 
this world's goods as themfelves ; who claim all the religion, all 
the knowledge, all the patriotifm of the country, aiid who defpife 



3i2 . Revieiu of OU llraef. No~ LXXV, 

the poor, for their mite towards the fiipport of government, Bufe 
our Saviour has given them a J^ootl kilon, which the prefent ad* 
miniilration is endeavouring to foHow, and which we are perlirdd- 
ed w^ill be approved by heaven. The impoft being adequate y^i 
all the purpofes of governmentj under the econorriical fyUem 
adopted, the merchant, tradefniln, farmer, war-worn foldier, or 
tlie poor widow, are not required netdJefsly to pay even a miixi into 
the treafury. 



No. LXXV. 



REVIEW OF ■'' OLD T^TvIES 



a 



s 



EVENTY-FIVE, In the feventeenth century, is a prcmiRerit 
number in the American calendar ; it Is emphatically defignated 
** the time which tried men's fouls" ; it is the period of the Amer- 
ican revolution, which called forth all the energies of patriotifm, 
valour and decifion. The man who halted between two opinions^ 
at this crlfis, was juilly col-ifidered an enemy to his coimtry. 
America theri alTumed the attitude of an injured and determined 
nation. Britain avowed the principle, and purfued meafures td 
carry into execution the deteftable declaration, to " bind us in all 
cafes whatever.'* This veto was attempted to be enforced by the 
lanus of the bayonet f and the citizens of America had no other alter- 
native than to decide between slavery and freedom. 

In this conteil:, Iiherfy or death was the motto — ** Uniting we 
ft and, dividing we fall," was the creed to which eveiy real friend 
to his country fubfcribed. Tlie tones took one fide of the qUeftion, 
and the lohigs the other ; one party affifted the Britifh, and the 
other oppofed them. The Boilon tov^^n-meetings were an epitome 
of the controverfy between Britain and America. Fellow-citizens, 
ye who remember the conteft, recollect the debates in your folemn 
affemblies ; bring to mind the crouded audiences, who with anx- 
ious concern attended to the deliberations of your Intrepid patriots. 
Can ye forget the machinations of your enemies or the fubtle 



/ 



No. LXXV. Revle'UJ of Old Times. 



3^i 



Sefigns of Hutchinfon and his adherents ? Were not your liber- 
ties fufpended on the intrepidity of your determinations, and were 
not a body of tories affaiiing you in every direction ? If you had 
then been afraid to efpoufe your rights, they would have fallen a 
facrifice to your timidity. Recollect the horn-book fadiony who 
intermixed themfelves among ihsfons of liberty ; the foldlery who 
were fent to intimidate the citizens during their freedom of debate 
and inveftigation. Our fouls were then " invigorated wlth^the 
fpirit of liberty ;" Faneml-Hall bore teilimony that men were 
fuperior to " wolves" ; the decifions of the town of Bofton gave 
ample evidence that the liberty of brutes, and the unalienable 
rights of freemen, were not analogous. No real American at this 
period contemplated the derogatory connexion between the vora- 
cious animals of the defert. and the deliberate fentinients of citi- 
zens. Even at this period, when the revolution of America Avas 
in- fwaddling clothes, when the independence of our country had 
fcarcely formed its features in embryo, no one was hardy enough 
to draw a parallel between our exertions for liberty ^ and the favage 
difpofition of wolves in the foreft ! 

This period reminds us of that fanguinary fcene, when the 
ftreets of Bofton were crimfoned with the blood of its citizens 1 
The horrid maffacre on the night of March the ^th 1770, is a 
lelTon which ought to Imprefs on the minds of Americans the 
hoftile difpofition of Britain. Can any friendlhlp exlil in a nation, 
whofe foldlery fpread indifcriminate llaughter among the inhab- 
itants of tills metropolis ? Can the old tuhi^s forget the diftreffing 
fcene when the corps of five of |:heir fellow-citizens u'cvc followed 
in folemn proceffion through the ftreets of Bofton ? When the 
tories were rejoicing at the fanguinary catallrophe, and only be- 
wailed the misfortune that Samuel Adams and John Hancock 
were not the objefts of general lamentation. The ivhigs well 
remember the town-meeting at the Old-South the fucceedliig day ; 
the aifembly of citizens was auguft and impretiive ; the debates 
were forcible and dccifive ; tlie energies of the inhabitants appear- 
ed in their full raajefty ; one fpirit iilvigorated the whole body, 
and one -tongue expjreffed tlieir ultimate determination. Can we 
forget the venerable Samuel Adams on this folemn occafion ? 
Can we forget the fortitude of his mind, or the miignanimity of 

Q q 



314 RivL"w of Old Tim'-u ' No. LXXV 

hfs conduft ? Do we not even at this d;iy recognize him in thC' 
Cld-Soutlj pulpit, while Itanding as a bulwark to impede the en- 
croachments \-of the enemy ? " How did Our iicarts bum within- 
us," when he recounted the inipofitions we had fufrered ! and how 
did our fouls beat in uYiifon v^ith thx icntin::ents which he inculcated-! 
This was truly the " ilme to try nieti's fouls J^ Venerable patriot \ 
you are now retired from the world to enjoy that compofure 
which yotrr tervices merit ; happy are you in the reflection, that 
you have never deviated from the road which you early Jefcribed 
as the only path of fafety and happin-efs. Iii' your retirement, yoa 
have to lament, that fame who began the journey with you have 
ftrayed into llie broad v^^ay which leads to deftrudion ; but ftill- 
your refled:ions muil give confokition to your declining years 5: 
and though feeble in body, yet your SOUI^muft experience thofe* 
joys which arc ever Grangers to the breafts of apoftates. While 
others have received the fycophantic addrelfes of meuy who in '75* 
would have led them to the gibbet, you have enjoyed domeftic 
tranquillity, a«d have had the latisfaclion to refled:, if you was not 
fiattcred, you vras not d;'fpifcd ; you never became the dupe of a 
party, or th^ fport of thofe who made an indrument of your cre- 
dulity ;-^firm, manly and decihve, you never was obliged to apoW 
ogize for your conduct, by laying the blame on thofe who pre- 
fumed to didate through an " expected or unexpefled quarter.'^ 
No — you was a politician equal to your emergencies, and certain- 
ly you was placed in a refponfible fituation, when the moil critical 
precaution was neceflary for your judgment. When the profcrip' 
tlon of Britain entwined you and Hancock as viftims to fatiate 
their vengeance, even at this momentous erifis, Adams and 
Hancock never ftooped- to become fuppliants for miniiferial or 
tory clemency. Your fcllow^citrzens, venerable patrivty will ever' 
embalm- your memory with their praife, avid your name will never 
be mentioned vv ithout reverting to the magnitude of your virtues, 
and the pre-eminent teftimonies you have given of your unbiafTed 
attachment to their freedom and happinefs. You have done 

YOUR DUTY, AND NO MAN CAN IMPEACH YOUR FIDELITY. 

In this Number, I have chofen to feled among the variety of 
circumdancer. attending the revolution, the Biflon maffacre. This 
was the touchftone of the Enghfh fyftem of taxation. After the 
*r0op<s had arrived in Bofton, every method v^^as taken to bring op„ 



Vo. LXXV. Revkii' of Old Tnncs. ^'1^ 

& rupture ; they found town-meeting altercations were needlefs ■; 
their only refort was, io arms and the JhedJing of Hood ! The toiie£ 
always held up to the miniftry, that we were poltroons, and that 
tlie firft man killed would end-thc .cor-troverly, Hh^ffth of March 
majfacre was planned uj)on this derogatory iiippofition ,; the minift- 
ry expected, after tli^y had displayed their prov.'efs and evinced 
their determination, that the citizens of America would ha,ve been 
intimidated from aiiy further oppofition ; but when they found 
that tlie blood of the Americans operated like oil to the flame, 
they became difmayed. The lirmnefs of the town of Bofton on 
this occafion, was the balls of the reyolution ; this was the trial of 
principle ; this was putting theory into prai^ice. The .conduct of 
Britain v/as bringing our town-meeting reiblves to the teft, and 
this was the period when the republicans gave an unequivocal 
evidence of their patriotifm.. The tradefmen of Boflon were alert 
to the ca.ufe of their country'; they g2,xc fupport to the adive 
citizens who pledged tlieir lives and fortunes in vindication of the 
rlghts of the, people ^ they were an irrehilible body, and when they 
moved within the orbit of freedom and rofe fuperlor to tory in^ 
fluence, all oppofition fell before them. The tradefmen were fully 
informed of the importance of the controverfy, and when they 
fpoke, their voice was audible and decifive. The independent mer- 
chants VJQXQ. not ina-flive, as we were not baffled at this period with 
a body of mercantile mufhrooms, who live on the fmiles of a 
Br'it'ifh mafler, and who dare not a8 contrary to his didates. The 
YEOMANRY alfo came forward to vindicate their rights as free- 
men ; this valuable part of the community never failed when their 
exertions were neceffary ; on this independent body we ever did, 
jind ever muft rely ; they, are the ft^mina of our government, and 
the great palladium of our conftitutional privileges. The counties 
of Middlefex and Norfolk, with others, ftill retain the horrors of a 
Britifh banditti, as they well remember the fanguinary onfet of a 
mercenary foldiery on the commencenient of hoftilities. The 
19TH OF April, 1775, "^^^^ imprefs on their minds the dreadful 
effects of monarchy and toryifm. Lexington was a telegraphy which 
conveyed the intelligence to* the remoteft parts of the continent — • 
like xhefiar in the eafl, mentioned in fcripture, it direded Wafhing- 
ton to the fpot, where the camp of Ametica was formed, to efieft 
the falvateon of freemen. From this moment the Americans wer^ 



^f6 R.cvicn» of Old Times. . No. LXXV, 

alive to tlieir fituation, and nothing fhort of heavell could have 
infpired them with their martial hitrepidity, valour and prowefs ; 
unprepared with every warlike implement, they were obliged to 
feek powder from the very earth under their ancient buildings, 
and, Irke the dud of Egypt by the wand of Aaron, it was convert- 
id to the purpofe of annoying and diftrefling their enemies. 

1 have particularly felected, as is before obfervcd, the fubjedl 
of the Bnjion majfacre. When this took place, the controverfy in 
this country involved in it the right of the Britifh government to 
tax America ; they fenf troops to enforce it. In this ftate of things, 
could any patriot juftify, for a trifling fee, the indifcriminate 
daughter of his fellow-citizens, merely from the unruly conduft of 
a number of boys ? Edward Paine, Efq. a worthy citizen, was 
wounded at his door, and every man, woman and child Vs^ere 
more protefted by Providence, than the lenity of the murderers. 

I would not dwell too long on this circumftance, relating to- 
the advocate for Prefton, as I believe the fuggeftion is fufficient to 
convince him of the impropriety of his conduct. Whether the 
main guard of Britiih troops Ihould difpenfe the laws, in a country 
where their luhole authority n.vas dijputed^ was the queftion on which 
Prefton and his allociates ought to have been tried. ) 

The controverfy had gone beyond the trifling confideration of 
a lawyer's fee ; the important queftion of civil and military boun- 
. dary was to be afcertained, and when a patriot became the advo- 
cate for a prompt decifion of powder and ball (without even the 
formality of a jaftice of the peace) the Britifn naturally concluded 
that a few guineas would filence our clamours, and bring our 
leading chara(5lers to juiHfy their meafures. 

The political ftate of our country requires us to look back, in 
order to take fome hue of departure, by which we may draw our 
decifions. The fifth of March malTacre, in my opinion, is the era 
which decided characlers, within the town of Bofton, in the eftima- 
tion of Britain. They never forgave Samuel' Adams or John 
Hancock for infifting on the removal of the troops ; Engliih pride 
rofe indignant at the a(5tion ; this was the unpardonable fm, which 
led to their profcription— but while tliey thirfted for the blood of 
thefe patriots, gratitude ever induced them to refpeifl thofe who 
l-ountenanced a venal court to releafc the murdereis. At this 



moment, the hand-writing was difcovered *' 3Tene Tekel Upharffiy^ 
which is thus interpreted,-^he who vindicates the murderers of his 
townfmen is found wanting in patriotifm. 



The following pieces ivrre fwrltfen, hi the year ij^ji hy the fame au- 
thor ; — and as they contain principles and documents connsded lulth 
the foregoing Numbers^ they are inferted for the perufal of the citi" 

zens. 

LAND-TAX, &C. 

X HE flatement of the treafury-departmenr, for further fupplies 
of revenue, is a fubjeft which could fcarcely be contemplated a few- 
years back. The IMPOST was, in the firft inftance, confideied 
as adequate to all the exigences of government ; and in fa<5l was 
declared fo vaftly competent to all the purpofes, that a declaration 
was made by fecretary Hamilton that an overplus remained in 
the treafury. Notwith {landing this pleafing reprefentation, we 
were foori called upon for an EXCISE, which was predicated on 
the principle that the war-D£partment required this additional 
duty. Thefe two taxes have been for many years in full opera- 
tion, and though we have been told, of the " flourishing fituation of 
our commerce," (of confequence the revenue arifmg mufl have 
been greatly augmented) yet, even with this brilliant profpedl of 
a decreafe of taxation^ w^e have now prefented to us a gloomy flate- 
ment, tliat the revenue is incompetent to our governmental de- 
mands. A LAND-TAX is now the refort, and is to become the 
medium for further fupplies. The merchant and tradefman have 
hitherto experienced largely the demands of government ; and the 
FARMER is now to be brought forward to affift the revenue* 
Though the yeomaniy have heretofore in an indired: v/ay bore 
their proportion of the weight of impcfl and excife, yet they are' 
now called upon for an immediate taxation on -their lands. 



,318 JLana-Tax, Iffc. 

It is pofTiblc that the neceilitles of our goveinnierjt may require 
an increafe of revenue, but we certainly ought to know by what 
fatahty, we are reduced to this necefflity. We ought to be inform- 
ed of the expenditures, and through what channels the excefs of 
duties have been abforbed. If the departments of government 
Jiave hitherto beeti too lavilh of the public money ; If the vvAp. 
DEPAR.TMENT has fuuk mlllions, by " mif-management and ne- 
g\e.Q. :" If the British treaty brings into view a large debt to 
1)6 difchareed bv the United States : If the buildlns: of frigates, 
will abforb rr«illior^:i co complete tiiem : If we have hitherto been 
lavlfii in confequence of the facility of colleding the revenue : — 
If thefe things are true, it is proper that the people (liould be made 
acquainted with thefe circum.ftances, before they refign the griiat 
ftamina of Taxation, the LANDS of the United States. 

No individual withiL: the United States ever conceived that the 
fubjea of a land-tax would have been before Congrefs at fo early 
a period after the adoption of the federal conftitution. We have 
often heard that we -were lejlfcning our debts ; that the revenue 
^?v'as adequate :: and the " flourifhlng ftate of our commerce," gave 
vigour to thefe happy Ideas. But thefe luminous profpe<5ls have 
become c"'oudc'd, and the citizens, in a time of peace, ar^ reduced in 
their financiering arrangements, to a war eftablifhment. 

Ccngrefs it is expected will confider with attention this new 
re-'cnue proportion ; for if the landed property ij once touched, 
the future fyftem of finance is opened upon an extenfive fcale ; 
when this refource (which was ever confidered the laft) is broke in 
upon, in a time of peace, and (liould the United States be hereafter 
engaged in a war, the extent of its operation, and the yearly in- 
creafe of tax on this fource, will reduce the country to a flate, but 
little {hort of the mod fervlle nation in Europe. 

If, within a few years, we have gone fo greatly beyond our 
refources of impoft and excife ; if v/e have become fo lavilh on 
thefe two objedts, as to expend all the production from them, have 
we not reafon to fuppofe that the call for one million, four 

HUNDRED AND £lGHTY-F0UR THOUSAND DOLLARS On the land 

will be as quickly expended ? When the government can once 
^'p this hobby-horfe, with a weight of one penny on an acre, they will 
"foon mal"=^ **• ^'r-t with a weight c^ tivsnty fi'dlwgi. 



tree Ships, free Goods, 3^9 

ECONOMY in our expenditures is the great obje£l cf atten- 
tion. Commerce is already burthened. Maniifadimes are in gen- 
eral either ruined or embarralTed. The revenue ariling from im- 
poft and excife, (efpecially the laft two years) it is probable would 
have been adequate to our purpofes, if the money had been 
economically appropriated. But -vvhen \ve find, that the expendi- 
tures in thofe tranfadions which immediately come within our 
knowledge, are lavifhed to an unparrelleled excefs, we have reafoii 
to fufpedt that economy has not been the llandard of our conducl. 

The building of our three frigates, it is expected, will coft more 
money than three times the fame number in any part of Europe. 
This, bufmefs may ferve to put fome men in pay, who otherv/ays 
would be out of employ ; it may ferve to give exclufive advan- 
tages to individuals in furnifnmg the manufaduring materials ; it 
may conduce to political purpofes, by employing particular meiv 
in all the lucrative parts of this naval tranfadlion. But if it is' 
ahfolutely necejfary that we fliould haVe a navy, of three frigates, 
the buHnefs fhould befo equally proportioned, that no one individ- 
ual Ihould monopolize in liis manufaclur'ing department^ the ad>'anta- 
ges of it. 

Congrefs, previous to their granting a land-taiK, it is prefumed, 
will call for official documents, to afcertain precifely the expen- 
ditures of the enormous fum raifed by impofi and excife, and will 
not haftily break in upon the dernier refort of TERRA FIRMA* 
tin " The People" are convinced of the propriety, neceiiity and 
economy of the meafure. 



FREE SHIPS, FREE GOODS. 



FeUow-Citiz.£ns,- 






JL HE difpute between France and this country has got'fo fai:* 
involved in perplexity, that the real objccVs of controverfy are al- 
moft thrown out of public view. 

The caufe of complaint is fimply this, the treaty which the 
United Staters have made with France, has fecured to us the im- 



g20 /r^?^ Ships y free Goods. 

poftant privilege of the CARRYING-TRADE, by making free 
Ihips free goods. By this treaty, the commerce of this country, 
as it refpedts that nation, has the mod ample fecurity for a free 
trade, even in time of war. The great diihciilty, then, arifmg be- 
tween France and this country, is, that by the Britilh treaty ive 
have exprefslv fupulated with England that free fhips JJdall not make 
free goods. 

In confequence of this ftipulatlon, the French property on board 
American fhips is fubjedl to capture by the Britilh, while the En- 
gli/h property on board American fhips is to rem.ain free and unmo- 
lefled. France complains of this inequality of privilege, more ef- 
pecially as this is admitted, on our part, by an exprefs agreement 
in the treaty with England. 

Let then the Americans judge Vv^Ith refpe<^ to the propriety 
and juftnefs of this partiality. I am fenfible, that the plea made 
by the advocates for the Britilh treaty is, that England never ac- 
knowledged the principle, and never would accede to the terms of 
admitting free fhips to make free goods. But though this obfer- 
vation may be plead by Britain, yet the queftion naturally arifes, 
whether it was good faith in the government of the United States 
ijoluntarily to make a treaty with England, in diredl oppofition to 
the principle on which their treaties with France and Spain were 
founded ? If Britain would not confent to the freedom of our 
navigation, was it politic or generous in us to grant them by treaty 
the right to capture the property of thofe who had genercufly ac- 
ceded to the principle ? 

Suppofe two men had made an agreement to give free courfe 
to tlie trade of each other, and a third was fo refractory as never 
to confent to it. In this cafe, would it not be the higheft violation 
of the right of one, if the other fhould enter voluntarily into an 
agreement with him who would not recognize the privilege, to check 
and embarrafs the trade of the man with whom he had made his 
ilrft covenant ? 

The controverfy with France and the United States ftands on 
the fame ground of equity. It is true, that nation does not dii- 
pute the right of England, in not agreeing that free fhips fhould 
make free goods ; neither do they difpute our right to make a 
treaty- with them, for this purpofe* But at the fame time, while 



c 



Fm Ships J free Goods, 32 x 



the ngh Is acknowledged on our fide, if we improve it to their 
injury, they alfo have a right to refent our ingratitude and duplicity. 
If we have inconfiderately and wantonly exercifed our right in 
making a treaty with their implacable enemies, and thereby given 
them advantages which deftroy the mutual benefits contemplated in 
our former contract, they have the fame right to refent our con- 
dud as we have to make a treaty with Britain to their injury. 

The people of America have been deceived by the frequent 
attempts to perfuade them, that France wifhes to interfere in our 
right to make treaties. This, however, is falfe. France has never 
denied us this right. But if we are fo imprudent as to make a 
treaty, which fubjedls French property to be taken on board 
American veffels, when at the fame time, they are under engage- 
ments to us, that Englilh property (hall be fecure In fuch bottoms, 
the operation becomes fo exceffively unjuft, that we cannot rea- 
fonably fuppofe any nation would tamely place themfelves in fuch 
a derogatory and unfavourable fituation. 

Nations, like individuals, -w-iU fecure themfelves again ft injuf- 
tice ; and the only queftion is, whcUicr the French are wrong m 
their ref^'itincnti or we in giving them the provocation ? 

I have endeavoured to give a plain fiatement of what appears to 
be one of the effential points of controverfy, between France and 
the United States. The merchants are left to judge of the bene- 
fits of a war with thofe powers, which wifh to fupport the Carry- 
ing Trade of the United States in alliance with one which is anx- 
ious to annihilate It. 

If a war fhould commence between France and Spain, and 
America, what are the profpefts of our merchants ? Are they 
willing to join England in this warfare, v/ho are anxious to deftroy 
our Carrying Trade ? Impoflible that the good {tn^t of the Ame- 
rican merchants fliould lead them to this excefs of Quixotlfm and 
individual ruin. 

A war with France and Spain is no lefs than a war upon our 

own commerce. It is commercial fuicide ; and provided the Ef- 

fex junto are capable of deceiving the merchants int© a compliance 

%vith their projefts, the only fatisfa(5lion they can receive, after the 

R r 



22 



On foreign lujluence. 



expenditures of their property, and the ruin cf their trade, will be 
the ridicule of thofe who are living on the fmiles and favoritifm of 
a Britiili party refiding in this country. 



ON FOREIGN INFLUENCE. 



♦•' Ld us not be EngTiJhmen^ nor Frenchmen^ but Americans^ 

i-N my lad, a few obfervations were made on this con'Denient faying, 
of certain tlme-fer'vlng fycophants. I therein endeavoured to prove 
that we did not adt as Americans on the queflion of the treaty, but 
were wholly under a Bnt'ifjj i?ifluencei in acceding (contrary to our 
previous refolutions) to this baneful and deftrudive inftrument. 

I fhall now confuler tKIs ftibjecl upon more general principles, 
and attempt to Ihew, that Britijh irjlucnce pervades t-hic; mnntry in 
a more extenfive manner than is generally apprehended. 

When we reflect on the number of Britifh factors who refide 
within the United States — the number of individuals who were ene- 
mies to our revolution, and fmce the peace returned among us — 
the number of perfons who refided in America during our contefl 
with Britain, and who were inimical to our independence — the 
particular body of merchants, Vv^ho receive their annual fupplies of 
merchandize from the Englifh merchants and manufadlurers — the 
fhop keepers in the country who are vending thefe fuperfluities in 
the feveral towns throughout the United States — the fafhions and 
manners which we imbibe from our Britifh connexions : I would 
candidly afk, whether all thefe circumftances do not ferve to 
prove that we are under the influence of the BrltiJh nation^ by the 
various operations of thefe refpedive interefts ? 1 dare venture to 
affert that there is not a man who contemplates the fubjed upon 
fair and rational principles, but will readily allow, that the influ- 
ence of the Britifh predominates in this country from thefe refpec- 
tive caufes, and that no oxhzr foreign influence is half fo powerful. 



On foreign Injluence. ' » 323 

I will again inquire with confidence, whether any man can 
fuppofe we are under a French t/i/Iue?ice, ftrong enough to oppofe 
this powerful combination in favour of Britain ? Look through 
our feapcrts and the inland trading towns, and who are the per- 
fons acflive in our political concerns ? Are they French or Brlhjh 
merchants ? "What fpecies of merchandize are in their ftores or 
fhops ? Whofe fafhions do we follow, or whofe manners do we 
adopt ; are they French or Englifi ? Even our theatrical enter- 
tainments aie announced as being a6ted at Covent-Garden or 
Drury-Lane, to give a zeft to the performance, and we are led to 
fupport them in proportion as they have received their plaudit at 
thofe ROYAL places of amufement. Let the revilers againft 
French influence produce the channels through which it operates ; 
let them name the body of French merchants, refiding in the me- 
tropolis or inland towns ; let them announce the immenfe " horde*' 
of French republicans refiding among us. We can then judge 
whether they are in proportion to the numerous clan of Britifh 
ariftocrats, and men who pre npmJy in favour of the monarchy of 
Britain. Let them produce the body of Frenchmen who are ac- 
tive in our elections in any degree equal to thofe of the Britifh : 
In fhort, let them mention any particular as it relates to foreign 
hiflimice, and it can be proved that the Englijh nation poflefs, and 
practice it in a fourfold ratio. 

After fuch demonftrations of the predileflion of certain per- 
fens to Britain ; after being convinced that BritiJJo attachments both 
in trade and in political fentiments fo greatly predominate, can we fe- 
rioufly fay, that French injluence prevails v/ithin the United States I 
On the contrary, is it not evident, that Britifh influence has an un- 
controlable fway ? Scarcely a hat (not a three-cornered one) which 
covers the head of an American, but what announces our connex- 
ion with their merchants ; and the fantaftic gewgaws of many of 
our ladies are the trophies which proclaim our complete refigna- 
tion to their fafhionable influence. The American ladies whofe 
graces and beauty rife fuperior to any ornaments from Europe, 
ought to fpurn at the idea of becoming fubfervient to the paltry 
trumpery of foreign importations. 

The manufactures of America are daily falling a facrifice to 
our paitlality for Britain ; while the Britifh manufacturer is in- 



^24 On foreign Influenct, 

creafmg in wealth by our importations, the American manufadn- 
rer is declining with equal rapidity ; do not our importations op- 
erate as a prohibition on our own manufadlures, and does not the 
refidence of Britifh factors give a fuperiority over our own mer- 
chants ? 

While we are talking of foreign influence, let us refle(5l on our 
connexion with England. Let us contemplate the numerous 
avenues by which this is conveyed. It works in every diredlion, 
and ftrengthens in almoft every connexion. I would again afk, 
wherein have the French an equal weight ? Let thofe who are 
exclaiming againft them, produce the evidences of their influence ; 
or let them fhow any circumftance, which can in any way coun- 
tera<5l the forcible operation of the Britifh, not only in their com- 
mercial intercoiirfe, but in the efficacy of thofe infidious arts practi- 
fed by a phalanx of Britifh fadors, who refide among us under 
a deceptive maflt of naturalization. 

To fum up the whole in a few words, the Briti/l: infiience has 
become a ftrong and powerful higicdlcnt to poifon the republican 
principles of our citizens, and while they arc employing their tools 
to cry down a French injluence, they are ufmg every bafe art to ef- 
fe5: their own. They know their force in feveral parts of the 
United States, and are bufily employed to vilify and abufe every 
charafter who attempts to difclofe their nefarious meafures. Not 
that I am in favour of a French influence, but would control 
it in every inftance ; my real fentiments are, let us be AMERI- 
CANS in DEED and in TB-UTH. 



Concluduio Address* 325 



CONCLUDING ADDRESS. 

\_Never before publijhed.~\ 
Fellow-Citizens, 

x\fTER perufmg the foregoing Numbers, you will be led to 
confider the propriety of the principles, and the juftnefs of the re- 
flexions.— Here then we are at iffue. ARE THE SENTI. 
MENTS RIGHT, OR ARE THEY WRONG ? Speak with 
candour, and decide with that impartiality which characterizes 
patriots and republicans. 

To the YOUNG Americans the foregoing remarks may appear 
erroneous. They have rifen on tV><^ ftage fmce the fi^-tree began 
to bloflbm, and fruit was on the vine ; fmcc the labour of the olive 
has not failed, and the fields have yielded their meat ; when the 
flock was not cut off from the fold, and there was herd in the 
ftall. In thefe halcyon days, they experience the bleflings which 
their fathers obtained by their prowefs and exertions. 

The queftion now is, by what means has this country arrived 
to its prefent eminence ? Was it by the friendfhip of that nation 
which declared they had a " right to tax us in all cafes what- 
ever" ? Did the ravages of their troops give fruitfulnefs to our 
fields, or did the blood they fhed enrich the foil which feeds the 
cattle on our " thoufand hills'* ? 

I will not affront my countrymen by admitting this idea. If 
we had been conquered, the wildernefs that now blofToms like the 
rofe, would have been the gloomy afylum of perfecuted patriots ; 
and thefe venerable fages would have been hunted in their retire- 
ment as partaking of the ferocious liberty of wolves. 

Is it policy then, or rather is it not an affront to heaven, to 
feek an alliance with thofe who have given fuch evidences of their 
enmity ? Muft we commence war with France and Spain, and 
then apply to England for affiftance, as is propofed by Mr. Mor- 
ris ? Gracious God ! " let us paufe ! for heaven's fake paufe !'* 



526 Concluding Address, 

before we precipitate the United States into fb hazardous 
a fituation ! Muft our country again be ftained with blood \ 
Muft the clarion of war be blown through the continent ? 
Muft millions of dollars be appropriated to efFed that, which an 
amicable negociation will probably cancel ? Surely the Prefident 
has adled the part of a Chriftian by attempting a reconciliation : 
for he who wantonly draws the fword, we are told, will perifh by 
the fword. Not that we fhould fuffer any nation to impofe on us ; 
but reafon and humanity didate the path to be taken. 

A war with France and Spain, in alliance with England, is 
tlie ground-work of the politics of the party in oppofition to the 
prefent adminiftration. They have, by their artifice, interwoven 
t!iemfelves for a number of years back into our national councils, 
and the principal part of our troubles have arifen by their agen- 
cy. They wifh to augment the public debt, by eftablllliing fyf- 
tems which lead to extravagant expenditures. They w^ant the 
government to maintain a body of men at the expenfe of the in- 
duftrif^uc rr-.prchant, farmer, a^^^^ t^-^-i^rn^-ian. — .This \s genuine feder- 
filifm with them, and every thing which hab a dJfFerent tendency is 
reprobated as rank jacohimfm. 

Are the young men in fa\'0ur of this policy ? If they are, 
it muft eventually prove their luin. An expenfive government 
creates burdenfome taxes, and the rifmg generation muft feel the 
weight of their prefTure. 

This party attempt fo far to vitiate the youth, as to render 
republicanifm unfaihionable. This is ftriking at the vitals of our 
government ; for the man who is not a republican is a POLITI- 
CAL ATHEIST, and is as much a fubverter of the Conftitution 
as Thomas Paine is an unbeliever in Revelation. All our civil in- 
ftitutions, from the days of our forefathers, are as firmly founded on 
Republicanifm, as the platform of the churches on the Chriftian 
religion. 

The foregoing obfervations are not intended to infiame the paf- 
fions, but to allay them ; though exprefted with warmth, they are 
calculated to bring us to cool refleaion. In the prefent ftate of 
public affairs, it is requiftte to bring into view the many arts and 
ftratagems pradifed by thofe who affume the appellation of Fed- 
eralifts, and to fhew that all their alarms were the effufions of dif- 
affeaion, rather than an attachment to the peace and profperity of 



Concluding Addrai» 327 

the country. While we revert to the periods v;hen plots and con- 
fpiracies were the telegraphs to communicate terror and amaze- 
ment, and when neighbours aiTumed an hoftile attitude tow^ards 
each other, how pleafmg is the refle<5tion that the cool moment of 
deliberation has difpelled tbofe clouds which threatened an annihi- 
lation of every benign attribute which harmonizes fociety ! If we 
find thefe things falfe, (which at the time they were propagated 
gave an impulfe to our political conduft) ought we not to diftiuft 
thofe men who create alarms to deftroy the confidence of the peo- 
ple in the prefent adminiftratioji ? If they have hitherto been falfe 
prophets, what reafon have w^e to believe in their future prog- 
noflications ? 

Fellow-Citizens— In treating on the various fubje<5ls in the 
foregoing Numbers, I have been obliged to vary the mode by ar- 
gument and fatire. Many things have required a ferious confid- 
eration, while others admitted no other plea than ridicule. I have 
wholly confined my obfervations to political confideratlcns, with- 
out wifhing to refle(51: on any individual in his moral or fecial ra- 
pacity. The GENERAL GOOD is my only object, and I wil- 
lingly place myfelf on the candid decifions of my fellow-citizens. 
I court no partial patronage. Having offered my fentiments on the 
fundamental principles of the Conflitution, it will give me fatisfac- 
tion as a citizen if they are fupported ; but if they are not, I feel my- 
felf in a fituation to meet the evils which await my country. Pro- 
vided I receive the approbation of the virtuous and patriotic, I 
Ihall never concern myfelf about perfons of an oppofite chara<5ler ; 

« To virtue only, and its friends, a friend, 
The ivorld bejide may murmur or commend : 
Know all the dijlant din this tvorld can keep. 
Rolls o'er my grotto, and but foothes my JleepJ* 



FINIS. 



