
ELEMENTS 



OF 



AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTBT, 



IN 



A COURSE OF LECTUBE8 



FOR 



THE BOARD OF AGRICULTURE. 



BY SIR HUMPHRY DAVY, LL. D. 
F.B.S.L.kE.M.E.1. 

. Member of the Board of Agrkultore, of the VtxapX Irish Academyi of the 

Acadenies of St. Petertburgh, i^todcholm, Berliiiy ?hiladelphia» tec. 

end Honoraty Frofetsor oi l&amp;hemistry to the Boyel ieetittttion. 



PUBLISHED 
ByEtttbani»£tk&amp;Go.Kew.Yofll; eodWudeiliHyr Boston, 

••••••••••••• 

iSlfiw 



S^^ifi^ 









\"0 



TO THB 

PRESIDENT AND MEBfBEBS 

OF 

THE BOARD OF AGRICULTURE 

FOR THE YEAR 1813. 

THESE LECTURES, 

PUBLISHED AT THEIR REQUEST, 

ARS msCRIBBO^ 
AS A TE3TIM0NT OF THE RESPBCT OF THE AUTHOE^ 

AKD OF 

^19 GRATITUDE JOtL TBS ATTI^RTIOK WITH VBICB 
THET BAVE BEEN RBCBtVED. 



•VN, 



ADVERTISEMENT. 



DURING ten years, since 1802, 1 have had the 
hcmqur, every Session, of delivering Courses of Lec- 
tures before the Board of Agriculture. I have endea- 
voured, at a/I times, to follow in them the progress of 
chemical discovery ; they have therefore varied every 
year : and such is the rapidity with which Chemistry 
is extending, that some alterations and improvements 
were rendered necessary at the time they vf&amp;re prepar* 
ing for the press. 

The Duke of Bedford has enabled me to stamp a 
value upon this work, by permitting me to add to it the 
results of the experiments instituted by His Grace 
iqpon the quantity of produce afforded by the different 
grasses. 

I am indebted for much useful information to 
many members of the Board ; of which acknowledg- 
ments will be found in the body of the work. If there 
are any omisssions on this head, I trust they will be 
attributed to defect of recollection, and not to any 
want of candour or of gratitude. 

Where I have derived any specific statements from 
books^ I have always quoted the authors ; but I have 



VI ADVERTISEMENT. 

not always made rderences to such doctrines as are 
become current, the authors of which are well known ^ 
and^which may be almost considered as the property 
of all enlightened minds. 

Amongst books to which I have not referred for 
any particular facts, but which contain much useful 
general information, I shall mention the Earl of Dun- 
d6nald's Treatise on the connection of Chemistry with 
Agriculture ; Mr. Rennie's Dissertations on Peat j and 
die Geneiral Report of the Agriculture of Scotland. 
This last work did not come into my hands till the 
concluding' sheets of Aese Lectures were printii^* 
Had it been in circulation before, I should ha^e pi?ofitf 
fd by many statements given in it, panai^ilaidy diose 
Df theopiniims of the enlightened Prc^essor of Agri* 
culture in the University of Edinburgh ; a^d I shcmld 
have dw&lt;glt with satis&amp;cdon on the importance given 
to some chemical doctrines by his experience. 



Berkeley Square^ 



CONTENTS. 



tECTORE I. page, 

Introduclion. Oenml Views of the Objcrt* «f the eoufse» 
and of the order id if hit h they d,f&lt;s to be dlacassed 3 

LECTURE II. 
Of the general Powers of Matter which influence Vegeta- 
tion; of Gravitation, of Cohesion, of Chemical Attrac- 
tion, of Heat, of IJght, of Electricity, ponderable Sub* 
stances, Elements of Matter, particularly those found in 
Vegetables, Laws of their Combinations and Arrange- 
ments -- •• •- - • - 23 

LECTUItE lit 
On the OrganizaUon of Plants. Of th^ Roots, t'runk, and 
Branches; of their Structure. Of the Epidermis. Of 
the cortical, and albumous Parts of Leaves, Flowers, and 
Seeds* Of the Chemical Constitution of the Organs of 
Plants, and the Substances found in them. Of mucila- 
l^ous, saccharine, extractive, resinous, and oily Sub- 
stances, and other vegetable Compounds, their Ar- 
rangements m the organs of l^lants, their Composition^ 
Changes, and Uses - SO 

LECTURRIV. 
Ob Soils : their constituent Parts. On the Analysis of 
Soils. Of the Uses of the Soil. Of the Rocks and 
Strata found beneath Soils. Of the Improvement of 
Soils. - • - • 13^ 

LECTURE V. 
On the Nature and Constitution of the Atmosphere, and 
its influence on VegetnUes* Of the Germination of 



VIII CONTENTS. 

Seeds. Of the Functions of Plants in their difiTerent 
Stages of Growth ; with a general view of the progress 
of Vegetation * - - - - - • l^^ 

LECTURE VI. 
Of Manures of vegetable and animal Origin. Of the man* 
nerin which they bepome the Nourishment of the Plant 
Of Fermentation and Putrefaction. Of the different } 
Ape(itea of Manures of vegetable Origin ; of the differ- 
ent Species ol animal Origin. Of mixed manures. 
General Principles ^ith respect to the use and applica- 
tion of such Manures - - - - . . 339 

LECTURE VII. 
On Manures of mineral Origin, or fossile Manures ; their 
Preparation, and the Manner in which they act. Of 
Lime in its different States ; Operation of Lime as a 
]\Ianure and a cement ; different combinations of Lime. 
Of Gypsum ; Ideas respecting its use. Of other Neu- 
tro-saline Compounds, employed as Manures. Of Al- 
kalies and alkaline Salts ; of common Salt • - ^76 

LECTURE VIII. 
On the improvement of Lands by Bumihg ; chemical 
Principles of this Operation. On Irrigation and its ef- 
fects. On Fallowing ; its disadvantages and uses. On 
the convertible Husbandry founded on regular rotations 
of different Crops. On Pasture. On various Agricul- 
tural Objects connected with Chemistry. Conclusion 30f 

APPENDIX. 
An account of the Results of Experiments on the Produce 
and Nutritive Qualities of different Grasses^ and other 
Plants, used as the Food of Animals. 



COUBSB OF LECTURES 



OK 



THE ELEMENTS 



OI 



AQRWVLTVEdL CHEMI8TRT. 



B 



A 

COURSE OF LECTURES, &amp;c. 



LECTU&amp;E I. 

Introduction. General Views of the Objects of the Course ^ 
and of the order in which they are to he discussed. 

It is with greaipleasure that I receive the pTermis- 
^on to address so distinguished and enlightened an 
Audience on the subject of Agricultural Chemistry. 

That any thing which I am able to bring forward, 
should be thought worthy the attention of the Board 
of Agriculture, I consider as an honour; and I shait 
endeavour to prove my gratitude, by employing every 
exertion to illustrate this department of knowledge, 
and to point out its u$e&amp; 

In attempting these objects, the peculiar state of 
die enquiry presents many difficulties to a Lecturer, 
Agricultural Chemistry has not yet received a regular 
and systematic form. It has been pursued by compe- 
tent experimenters for a short time only; the doctrines 
Ijave not as yet been collected into any elementary trea- 
tise; and on an occasion wheii I am obliged ,to trust 
so much to my own arrangements, and to my own 



C 4 3 

limited infonnatioa, I cannot but feel diffident as to 
the interest that may be excited, and doubtful of the 
success of the undertaking, I ' know,^ however, that 
your candour will induce you pot to expect any thing 
like a finished work upon a science as yet in its infancy; 
and I am sure you will receive with indulgence the 
first attempt made to illustrate it^ in a distinct course 
of public lectures. 

Agricultural Chemistry has for its objects all 
those changes in the arrangements of matter connect- 
ed with the growth and nourishment of plants ; . the 
comparative values of their produce as food; the coQ^ 
stitution of soils; the manner in which lands are en- 
riched by manure, or rendered fertile by the different 
processes of cultivation. Enquiries of such a nature 
cam^ot but be interesting and important, both to the 
theoretical a|;riculturist, and to the practical farmer. 
To die first, they are nec^sary in supplying most of 
tjie fundamental principles on which the theory of the 
jflrt depends. To the second, they are useful in afford- 
ing simple and easy experiments for directing his la- 
bours, and for enabling him to pursue a pertain and 
systematic plan of improvement. 

It is scarcely possible to enter upon any investiga- 
tion in agriculture without finding it connected, more 
ox less, with doctrines or elucidations derived froqai 
chemistry. 

If land be unproductive, and a system of ameliorat- 
ing it is to be attempted^ the sure method of obtaining 
the object is by deternijbing the cau^e qf its sterility, 
which qiust necessarily depend upon soi^e defect in 



the coni^tution of the soil, which m^ he easily di^^ 
covered b/ chemical analysis. 

Some laiids of good apparent texture are yet 
sterili^ in a I4gh de^^ ; a^d common observation and 
commoA practice afford.no means of ascermining the 
$att905 &lt;^t of removing the efi^ct. The application of 
chemical te$ite in sty^ch cases is obvious ; for the soil 
tm^ coiitain ^me poxious prinaple which may be 
easily discovered, ami probably easily destroyed. 

Are any of the salts of iron present? ihey may be 
decomposed hj time. Is these an excess of sfliceous 
sand? ithe system of im|)rovemeait must depend cm 
Ae application of clay and calcareous matter. Is 
theft a defect of calcareous matter? the re^tiedy is * 
obvious. Is an ^i^cess of v^etable matter indicated ? 
it may be reifnoved by liming, paring, and burning. 
Is there a deficiency of vegetable matter i it is to be 
supplied by manure. 

A question concerning the different kinds of lime- 
stone to be employed in cqltivation often occurs. To 
determine this fuHy in the common way of experience, 
would demand a ' considmble time, perhaps ^me . 
years, znd, trials which might be injurious to crops } 
but by simple chemical tests the nature of a limestone 
is discovared in a few minutes ; and the fimess of its 
Application, whether as a manure for different smls, or 
as a cement, determined. 

. Peat earth of a certain consistence and composi- 
tion is an excellent manure j but there are some varie- 
ties of peats which contain so large a quantity of fer- 
ruginous matter as to be absolutely poisonous to|)lants. 



[63 

Nothing can be more simple than the chemical opera- 
tion for determining the nature, and the probable uses 
of a substance of this kind* 

There has been no question on which more dif- 
ference of o{»nion has existed, than that of the states 
in which manure ought to be ploughed into the land ; 
whether rec^it, or when it has gone through the pro- 
cess of fermentation ? and this question is still a sub- 
ject of discussion ; but whoever will refer to the Am- 
plest principles of chemistry, cannot entertain a doubt 
on the subject. As soon as dung begins to decom- 
pose, it throws off its volatile parts, which are the 
most valuable aiid most efficient. Dung which has fer- 
mented, so as to become a merie soft cohesive mass, 
has g^ierally lo^ from one third to one half of its 
most useful constituent elements. It evidently should 
be applied as soon as fermentation begins, that it may 
exert its full action upon the plant, and lose none of 
ks nutritive powers. 

It would be easy to adduce a multitude of other 
instances of the same kind ; but sufficient I trust has 
been said to prove, that the connexion of Chemistry 
with Agriculture is not founded on mere vague specu- 
lation, but that it offers principles which ought to be 
understood and followed, and which in their progres- 
sion and ultimate results, can hardly fail to be highly 
beneficial to the community. 

A view of the objects in this Cours?e of Lectures, 
and of the manner in which they are to be treated, 
will not, I hope, be considered as an improper intro- 
duction. It will inform you what you are to expect ; 



it will affor4 a general idea of the annexion of the 
different parts of the subject, and of their relative im- 
portance ; it will enable me to. give some historical 
deta9s of the progress of this branch of knowledget 
aiid to reasoa from what has been ascertaiped^ con- 
cerning what remains to be investigated and disco- 
vered. 

The phenomena of vegetation must be consider- 
ed as an important branch of the science of organized 
nature; but though exalted above morganic matter, 
^ v^etables are yet in a great measure dq)ende&amp;t for 
their esdstence upon its laws. They receive their nour* 
ishment irom the exterpal elements ; they assimilate 
It by means qS peculiar organs ; and it is by examin** 
ing their physical and chemical constitution, and the 
substances and powers which act upon them, and the 
modifications which they undergo, that the sdentific 
principles of Agricultural Chemistry are obtained. 

According to these ideas^ it is evident ^at the 
study pught to be ccHnmence4 by some general en- 
quiries into the a&gt;mp9^^^ and nature of material 
bodies, and the laws of their changes. The surface 
of the earth, the atmosphere, and the water deposited 
from it, must either together or separately afibrd all the 
principles concemeid in vegetation ; and it is ooXy by 
examining the chemical nature of these principles^ 
that we are capable of discovering what is the food of 
plants, and the maimer in which this food is suj^Ued 
and prepared for their nourishment. The principle 
of the constitutipn of bodies, consequently, will form 
the first subject for our consideration. 



I 10 ] 

m^re than seven or eight belong to than, and thf ee con^ 
sritute the greatest part of their organized matter ; and 
Sccarding to the manner in which these elements are 
disposed, arise the diffa^ent properties of the products 
of vegetation, whether employed as food, or for other 
purposes and wants of life. 

The value arid uses of every species of agricut 
tural produce, are most correctly estimated and applied 
when practical knowledge is assisted by principles de- 
rived from chemistry. The compounds in vegetables 
really nutritive as the food of animals, are very few ; 
farina or the pure matter of starch, gluten, vegetable 
jelly, and extract. Of these the most nutritive is 
gluten, which approaches nearest in its nature to ani- 
mal matter, and which is the substance that gives to 
wheat its superiority over other grain. The next in 
oMer as to nourishing power, is sugar, then farina } 
and last of all gelatinous and extractive matters. Sim- 
ple tests &lt;rf the relative nourishing powei?s of the differ- 
ent species of food, are the relative qusoitities of these 
'^idNstances that they a^iford by analysis ; and tjiough 
iaste and appearadce must influence the consumption 
rfall articles in years of plenty, yet ihey are less at- 
tended to in tidies of scarcity, and on such occa^ons 
thib kind of knowlaige may be of the greatest impor- 
ismce. ' $ugar and &amp;rina or starch, are vexy similar 
in composition^ and are capable of being converted 
info eath other by ilimple chemical processes. In the 
discus^n of their relations, I shall detail to you the 
results of some ree^^t expmments which will be 
found possessed of afrplications both tq theoeoniociy 



of vegetatioii, and to some important processes of; 
manuiacture. 

All the varieties of substances found in plants,, 
are produced from the sap, and the sap of plants is 
derived from water, or from the fluids in the soil, and 
it is altered by, or combined with principles derived 
from the atmosphere. The influence of the soil, of 
water, and of air, will therejFore be'the next subject of 
consideration. Soils in all cases consist of a mixture 
of different finely divided earthy matters $ with ani- 
mal or v^etable substances in a state of decomposi* 
ticm, and certain saline ingredients. The earthy mat* 
ters are the true basis of the soil ; the other parts, 
whether natural, or artificially introduced, operate in 
the same manner as manures. Four earths generally 
abound in soils, the aluminous, the siliceous, the cal- 
careous, and the magnesian. These earths, as I have 
discovered, consist of highly inflammable metals 
united to pure air or oxygene ; and they are not, as 
far as we know, decomposed or altered in vegetation. 
The great use of the soil is to afford support to the 
plant, to enable it to fix its roots, and to derive nour- 
ishment by its tubes slowly and gradually, from the so- 
luble and dissolved substances mixed with the earths. 

That a particular mixture pf the earths is con- 
nected with fertility, cannot be doubted : and almost 
all sterile soils are capable of being improved, by a 
modification of their earthy constituent parts, I shall 
describe the simplest method as yet discovered of 
analysing soils, and of a^fsrtaining the constitution ^ 
and chewcal ingredients wkich appear to be^ connect- 



C 12 3 

ed with fertility and on this subject many of the for- 
mer difficulties of investigation will be found to be re- 
moved by recent enquiries* 

The necessity of water to vegetation, apd the lux- 
uriancy of the growth of plants connected with the pre- 
sence of moisture in the southern countries of the old 
continent, led to the opinion so prevalent in the early 
schools of philosophy, that water was the great pro- 
ductive element, the substance from which all things 
were capable of being composed, and into which 
they were finally resolved. The ** •»e'«^ &gt;*~ ^V of 
the poet, •* water is the noblest," seems to have 
been an expression of this opinion, adopted by the 
Greeks from the Egyptians, taught by Thales, and 
revived by the alchemists in late times. Van Hel- 
mont in 1610, conceived that he had proved by a de- 
cisive experiment, that all the products of vegetables 
were capable of being generated from water. His 
results were shewn to be fallacious by Woodward in 
1691; but the true use of water in vegetation was 
unknown till 1785; when Mr. Cavendish made the 
grand discovery, that it was composed of two elastic 
duids or gases, inflammable gas or hydrogene, and 
vital gas or oxygene. 

Air^ like water, was regarded as a pure element 
by most of the ancient philosophers : a few of the 
jchemical enqy^rers in the sixteenth and seventeeth 
centuries, formed some happy conjectures respecting 
its real nature. Sir Kenelm Digby in 1660, supposed 
that it contained some ^line matter, which was an 
is^ential food of plants, Boyle, Hooke^ and Mayow;^ 



C 13 3 

between 1665 and 1680, stated that a small part of it 
only was consumed in the respiration of animals, and&gt; 
in the combustion of inflammable bodies ; but the^ 
true statical analy^ of the atmosphere is comparative- 
ly a recent labour, achieved towards the end of the 
last century by Scheele, Pi-iestley, ^nd Lavoisier, 
These celebrated men shewed that its principal 
elements are two gases, oxygene and azote, of which 
the first is ess^itial to flame, and to the life ofanimals,. 
and that it likewise contains small quantities of 
aqueous vapour, and of carbonic acid gas ; and La- 
voisier proved that this last body is itself a compound 
elastic fluid, consisting of charcoal dissolved in oxy- 
gene, 

Jethro Tull, in his treatise on Horse-hoeing, pub*, 
lished in 1 733, advanced the opinion that minute 
earthy particles supplied the whole nourishment of the 
vegetable world ; that air and water were chiefly useful 
in producing these particles from the land ; and that 
manures acted in no other way than in ameliorating the 
texture of the soil, in short, that their agency was 
mechanical This ingenious author of the new system 
of agriculture having observed the excellent effects 
produced in farming by a minute division of the soil^ 
and the pulverisation of it by exposure to dew and dir^ 
was misled by carrying his principles too far. Duh- 
amel, in a work printed in 1754, adopted the opinion 
of TuU, and stated that by finely dividing the soil^ any 
number of crops imght be raised in successbn from 
the same land. He attempted also to prove, by di- 
rect expariments, that vegetables of every kind were 



C 14 1 

otpable of being raised without manure. This cele- 
bratfid horticulturist lived, howcjver, sufficiently long 
to alter his opinion. The results of his later and 
most refined observations led him to the conclusion, 
that no ^ngle material afforded the food of plants*. 
The general experience of farmers had long before 
convinced the unprejudiced of the truth of the same 
opinion, and that manures were absolutely consumed 
in^ the process of vegetation. The exhaustion of soils 
by carrying off com cropis from them, and the effetta 
of feeding cattle on lands, and of preserving their 
manure, offer familiar illustrations of the principle y 
and several philosophical enquirers, particularly Has- 
senfratz and Saussure, have shewn by satisfactory ex- 
periments, that animal and vegetable matters deposit- 
ed in soils are absorbed by plants, and become a part 
of their organized matter. But though neither water, 
i)Lor air, nor earth, supplies the whole of the food of 
plants, yet they all operate in the pxwess of vegeta- 
tion. The soil is the laboratory in which the food is 
prepared. No manure can be taken up by the roots 
of plants unless water is present; and water or its 
elements exist in all the products of vegetation. The 
germination of seeds does not take place without the 
j»*esence of air or oxygene gas ; and in the sunshine 
vegetables decompose the carbonic acid gas of the at'* 
mosphere, the carbon of which is absorbed^ and be- 
comes a part of thefar organized matter, and the oxy-^ 
gene gas, the other constituent, is giv^ of*; and in 
consequence of a variety of agaicie$» the &lt;3p&lt;:qnomy of 
veg^ationis made subservient to t^e general order of 
the system of nature. 



1 15 3 

h is shewn by various researches, that the constitu- 
tion of the atmosphere! has been always the same since 
the time that it was first accurately analysed j and 
this must in a great measure depend upon the powers 
of plants to absorb or decompose the putrifying or de- 
caying remains of animals and vegetables, an'd the 
gaseous effluvia which they are constantly emitting* 
Carbonic acid gas is formed in a variety of processes 
of fermentation and combustion, and in the respiration 
of animals, and as yet no other process is known in 
nature by which it can be cotisumed, except vegeta^ 
tion. Animals produce a substance which appears to 
be a necessary food of vegetables ; vegetobles evolve 
a principle necessary to the existence of animals ; and 
these different classes of beings seem to be thus con^ 
nected together in the exercise ^of their living functions 
alGKl to a certain extent made to defend upon each 
^her for their existence. Water is raised from the 
ocean, diffused through the air, and poured dowQ 
upon the $oil, so as to be applied to the purposes 
of life* The different parts of the atmosphere are 
naingled together by winds or changes of tempera*- 
ture, and successively brought in contact with the 
surface of thfe earth, so as to exert their fertilizing in* 
fluence. The modifications of the soil, and the ap- 
pUcation of manures are placed within the power of 
man, asif for the purpose of awakening his industry 
and of caHing forth his powers. 

The theory of the general operation of the more 
compound manures may be rendered very' obvious by 
simple cheiSiical principles; but there is still much 



t 16 3 ' 

to be discovered with regard to the best methods 
of rendering animal and vegetable substances soluble ; 
with respect to the processes of decomposition, how 
they may be accelerated or retarded, and the means 
of producing the greatest effects from ihe materials 
employed : these subjects will be attended to in the 
Lecture on Manures. 

Plants are found by analysis to consist princi- 
pally of charcoal and aeriform matter. They, give 
out by distillation volatile compounds, the elements 
of which ^re pure air, inflammable air, cbally matter, 
and azote, or (hat elastic substance which forms a 
gi*eat part of the atmosphere, and which is incapable 
of supporting combustion. These elements they gain 
either by their leaves from the air, or by their roots 
from the soil. All manures from organized substan- 
iCes contain the principles of vegetable matter, which 
during putrefaction are rendered either soluble in 
water or aeriform— and in these states they are capsi* 
ble of being assimilated to the vegetable organs. No 
one principle affords the pskbulum of vegetable h'fe; 
it is neither charcoal nor hydrogene, nor azote nor 
oxygene alone ; but all of them together in various 
states and various combinations. Organic substances 
as soon as they are deprived of vitality, begin to pass 
through a series of changes which end in their com- 
plete destruction, in the emire separation and dissipa- 
tion of the parts. Animal matters are the soonest des- 
troyed by the operation of air, heat, and light. Vege- 
ble substances yield more slowly, but 'finally obey the 
same laws. The periods of the application of manures 



C 17 3 

from decomposing animal and vegetable substances 
depend upon the knowledge of these principles, and' 
I shall be able to produce some new and important 
facts founded upon them, which I trust will remove 
all doubt from this part of agricultural theory. 

The chemistry of the more simple manures ; the 
manures which act in very small quantities, such as 
gypsum, alkalies, and various! saline substances, has 
hitherto been exceedingly obscure. It has been gen- 
erally supposed that these materials act in the vegetable 
ceconomy in the same manner as condiments or stimu- 
lants in the animal ceconomy, and that they render the 
common food more nutritive.- -It seems, however, a 
much more probable idea, ithat they are actually a 
part of the true food of plants, and that they supply 
that kind of matter to the vegetable fibre, Which is 
analogous to the bony matter in animal structures. 

The operation of gypsum, it is well known, h 
extremely capricious in this country, and no certain' 
data have hitherto been offered for its application. 

There is, however, good ground for supposing 
that the subject will be fully elucidated by chemical 
enquiry. Those plants which seem most benefited by 
lis application,' are plants which always afford it on 
analysis. Clover, and most of the artificial grasses, con- 
t^ it, but it exists in very minute quantity only in 
barley, wheat and turnips. Many peat ashes which 
are sold at a considerable price, consist in great part 
of gypsum, with a little iron, and the first seems to 
be their most active ingredient. I have examined 
several of the soils to which these ashes are success- 



C If 1 

fully applied) alid I h^ve found in them no sensible 
quantity of gypsum. ][n general, cultivated soils contain 
sufficient pf this substance for the use of the grasses ; 
in such cases, its a^lication cannot be advants^eous. 
For plants require only a cextam quantity of ln^^re ^ 
an excess may be detrimentsd, and cannot be us^ul. 

The thepry of the operation of stlljpaline sub^ianr 
ces, is one of the parts of the chemistry of agiicaiitures 
Hipst simple audi distinct, '^ley are found in all [^a^ 
and therefore may be regarded as amongst their e^ 
sential ingredients. From their powers of comlwa- 
tion likewise, they may be useful in introducing vari- 
ous principles into the sap of vegetables, whkh may 
be subservient to their nourishment. 

The fixed alkalies which were formerly regarded 
as elementary bodies*, it lias been my good fortune to 
decompose. They consist of pure air, united to high- 
ly inflammable nietallic substances ; but t^ere is no 
reason to suppose that they are reduced into, their 
elements in any of the processes of vegetation. 

In this part of the course I shall; d\)ireU at Qonsi- 
derable length on the important su)bject of I^imi^, ao4 
I shall be able to offer some nov^l views. 

Slacked lime wa^ used by the Romahs for man^ 
mring the soil in which fruit trees grew; Thisi We ^^ 
ii^nned by Pliny, Mark had. be$n enipl0yed by. the 
Britons and the Gwls from tb^^ earliest um^^ as. a 
top' dressing, for land* But th^ preciae. peijod^ in 
which buriit lime firstcame into general we in die (mo- 
tivation of Iwd, ia, I believe, tinknowTi. The origia 
of the sipplication from tl^ ea^Iy/i^ti^cticesis.si^ckait^ 



C 18 3 

ly obvious ; a Substance ivhich had been used widi 
success m gardening, must havie been sbpn tiled in 
in farming ; and in countries wHere marie was not to 
lie found, calcined limestone would be naturally em- 
ployed as a substitute. 

The elder writers dn agriculture had no correct 
nptions of the nature of Hme, limestone and marie, or 
of their effects ; and this was the necessary cons^ 
quence qf the imperfection of the chemistry of the 
age« Calcareous matter was jconskiered by the alche- 
mi^s as a peculiar earth, which in the fire became 
combined with inflammable acid; and Evelyn and 
HartBb, and sdll later, lisle, in their works on hus* 
bandry, have characterized it merely as a hot manure 
of use in cold lands. It is to Dn Black of Edinburgh 
that our first distinct rudiments of knowledge on the 
subject are owing. About the year 1755, this cele- 
brated professor proved, by the most decisive experi- 
ments, that limestone and all its modifications, mar- 
bles, chalks, and maries, consist principally of a pecu^ 
liar eaath imited to an aerial acid : that the acid is 
given out in burning, occasioning a loss of mote than 
40 per cent., and that the Hme in consequence becomes 
caustic. 

These important facts imfmediately applied with 
equal certainty to the explanation of the uses of lime, 
both as a cement and as a manure. As a cement, 
lime appBed in ks caustic state acquires its hardness 
and durability i, by absorbing the aerial (of as it has 
been since called carbonic) acid, which always exists 
in small quantities in the atmosphere, it becomes as 
it were again limestone. 



their teifture, and cau^s thein to be less permeable 
to water. 

The histances in which it must be obvio^usly pre-^ 
judicial, are thode of sandy dry siliceous soils, contain-* 
ing little adimal or vegetable matter, fiere it can 
only be destructive^ for it decomposes that on which 
the soil depends for its productiveness. 

The advantages of irrigation, though so lately a 
subject of much attention. Were well known to the I 
ancients ; and more than two centuries ago the prac* \ 
lice was recommended to the fartners of our country ; 
by Lord Bacon ; ** meadow-watering/' according to ! 
the statements of this illustrious personage, (given in I 
his Natural History, in the article Vegetation,) actS \ 
not only by supplying useful moisture to the grass ; i 
but likewise the water carries nourishment dissolved 1 
in it, and defends the roots from the effects of cold« ' 

No general principles can be laid down respecting 
the comparative merit of thedi^teiit systems of culti- ; 
vation, and the different systems of crops adopted iu 
different districts, imless the chemical nature of the 
soil, and the physical circumstances to which it is e±* 
posed are fblly knowti. Stiff coherent soils are tb&amp;se 
most benefited by minute division and aei^tion, and iti 
ihi drill system of husbandry, these effects are pro- 
duced to the greatest extent ; but still the labour ai^d 
expense connected with its application in certain dis* 
tricts, may not be compensated for by the advantages 
produced. Moist cKmates are best fitted for raising 
the artificial grasses, oats, and btoad leaved crops ; 
stiff aluminous soih, in general, are most adapted for 



C «9 1 

irbeat crap$, said cgkurapa^ 9^ produ^ m^ikat 
sam-|binand c}over« 

Nothing is^ pipre wanting in agticvlture, thtn ex* 
p^meuts in V9)mh all the circumstaoces are minutely 
s^d %i^nti6cally detailed* Thia art will advance with 
i^pidity in proportion as it becomes exact in it» 
methods* A^ ii^ pkyi^cal researches all the cauam 
should be considered i a di&amp;rence in the results may 
be piroduced&gt; even by t^e &amp;U of a half an inch of rain 
inore or less in the course of a season^ or a &amp;w de» 
grees of ^^peratv^rey or even by a slight difference in 
the su^-Skott^ or i^ the inclination of the laod* 

Infi^iliadiiQil colle^t^ after views of distinct eo^ 
imiry, would necessarily be mc^re acoirate» and more 
capable oC bfsing connected w^, ti^e get^ral pnndplea 
of science ; ^nd 9 |sw histories of the results of truly 
philosophical eicj^rifnents ia agricultural chemistry^ 
would be of more value ifk enlight^^g and baiefitting 
die %nier, tha^ the g^ eatesi possiUe accumulatbn of 
imperfect ti^akb conducted merdy in the empirical 
q&gt;irit. It; ia no unusual occurence for pa*s&lt;^ who 
s^gue in fe^Qur of practice and exp^^ce, to con* 
deiw genei^lly all dtfempts^ to improve agriculture by 
philosophical enquiries and themical mediods. That 
much vague speculation may be found in the w&lt;»rks of 
those who have l^tly taken up s^cultural chemis- 
try, k k ]mpo8sS)le to desiy. It is not unconunon to 
fmdz nufisba: of chaises rung upon a string of tecb- 
fuci^l terms, such as oxygene, hydrogene, carbon^ and 
asote, as if ^e science depended upon words, rather 
than upon thi^s. But tlus is in igict an argument for 



C 24 3 

the necessity of the establishment ofjuft priiiciples of 
chemisstry on the subject. Whoever reasons upon 
agriculture^ is obliged to recur to this science. He 
feels that it is scarcely posdble to advance a step with- 
out it ; and if he is satisfied with insufficient views, it 
is not because he prefers them to accurate knowledge, 
but generally because they are more current If a 
person journeying in the night wishes to avoid beihg 
led astray by the ignis fatuus, the most secure method 
is to carry a lamp in his own hand. 

It has been said, and undoubtedly with great 
truth, that a philosophical chemist would i^ost proba- 
bly make a very unprofitable business of farming ; and 
this certainly would be the case, if he were a mere 
philosophical chemist ; and unless he had served his 
apprenticeship to the practice of the art, as well as to 
the theory. But there is reason to believe, that he 
would be a more successful agriculturist than a per- 
son equally uninitiated in farmmg, but ignorant of 
chemistry altogether ; his science, as for as it Went, 
would be usjeftil to him. But chemistry is not the 
only kind of knowledge required, it fofms a small part 
of the philosophical basis of agriculture ; but it is an ' 
important part, and whenever applied in a, proper 
manner must produce advantages. 

In proportion as science advances all the princi- 
ples become less complicated, and consequently more 
useful. And it is then that their application is most 
advantageously made to the arts. The common la* 
bourer can never be enlightened by the general doc- 
trines of philosophy, but he will not refuse to adopt 



C 25 3 

any practice, of the utility of which he is fully con- 
vinced, because it has b^en founded upon these prin- 
ciples. The mariner can trust to the compass, 
though he may be wholly unacquainted with the dis- 
coveries of Gilbert on magnetism, or the refined prin- 
ciples of that science developed by the genius of 
jEpinus. The dyer will use his bleaching liquor, 
even though he is perhaps ignorant not only of the 
constitution, but even of the name of the substance 
on which its powers depend. The great purpose of 
chemical investigation in Agriculture, ought undoubt-' 
edly to be the discovery of improved methods of cul- 
tivation. But to this end, general scientific principles 
aftd practical knowledge, are alike necessary. The 
germs of discovery are often found in rational specu- 
lations ; and industry is never so efficacious as when 
assisted by science. 

• It is from the higher classes of the community, 
from the, proprietors of land ; those who are fitted by 
their education to form enlightened plans, ^d by their 
fortunes to carry such plans into execution ; it is from 
these that the principles of improvem^at must flow to 
the labouring classics of the community ; and in all 
cases the benefit is mutual; for the interest of the 
tenantry must be always likewise the interest of the 
proprietors of the soil. The attention of the labourer 
will be more minute, and he will exert himself more 
for improvement when he is certain he cannot deceive 
his employer, and has a conviction of the extent of 
his knowledge* Ignorance in the poss^sor of an 
esm^ of the manner in which it ought to be treated^ 



C 26 } 

often leads either to inattention pjr injudicious prac« 
tices in the tenant or the bailifF. ** Agrum p€$^ 
simum mulctari cujus Dominus non d$cet ted audit viU 

licum*^ 

There is no idea more unfounded than that a 
great devotion of time, and minute knowledge of gen« 
eral chemistry is necessary for pursuing exi)eriments 
on the nature of soils or the properties of manures. 
Nothing can be more easy than to discover whether a 
soil effervesces, or changes colour by the action of an 
acid, or whether it bums when heated ; or what 
weight it loses by heat : and yet these simple indic;^ 
tions may be of great importance in a system of cultK- 
ration. The expence connected with chemical enqui- 
ries is extremely trifling ; a small closet is sufficient 
for containing all the materials required, l^he most 
important experiments may be made by means of a 
small portable apparatus ; a few phials, a few acids^ a 
lamp and a crucible ar&amp; all that are necessary, as I shall 
endeavour to prove to you, in the coarse of these 
lectures. 

It undod[)tedly happens in agricultural chemical 
experiments conducted after the most refined theo- 
rectical views, that there are many instances of failure, 
for one of success ; and this is. inevitable from the 
capricious and uncertain nature of the causes that 
operate, and from the impossibility of calculating on 
all the circumstances that may interfere ; but this is 
far from proving the inutility of such^ trials \ one hap- 
py result which can generally improve the methods 
of cultivation is worth the lsd)our of a whale life ; and 



C 27 3 

an unsuccessful ^xpeiiment well observed, must esta- 
blish some truth, or tend to remove some prejudice. 
Even con^dered merely as a philosophical 
science, this department of knowledge is highly worthy 
• of cultivation* For what can be more delightful than 
'^'^ to trace the forms of living beings and their adapta* 
tions and peculiar purposes ^ to examine the progress 
of inorganic matter in its different processes of 
change, tiH it attain its ultimate and hi^est destina* 
lion ; its $ubserviency to the purposes of man. 

Many of the sciences are ard^tly pursued, and 
%onddered as proper objects of study fqr all refined 
ininds, merely on account of the intellectual pleasure 
they afford ; merely because they enlarge our views 
of nature, and enable us to think more correctly with 
resp^^ to the b^gs and objects surrounding us. How 
much more then is this department of enquiry worthy 
of attention, in which the pleasure resulting from the 
love of truth and of knowledge is as great as in any 
other branch of philosophy, and in which it is likewise 
connected with much greater practical benefits and 
advantages. " Nihil est melius^ nihil uberius^ nihil ho^ 
mine lihero d^iusJ* 

D^coveries made in die cultivation of the earth, 
are not merely for the titne and country in which they 
are developed; but they may be considered as extend-* 
mgtofuturi^ %^» ^d as ultimately tending to bene- 
fit the whole human race ; as affording subsistence 
for generations yet to come; as multiplying life, and 
not only nmltiplying life, but likewise providing for 
its eigoyment. 



28 



LECTURE IL 

Of the general Powers of Matter which influence Vegeta- 
tion^ Of Gravitation, of Cohesion, of chemical Attract 
tion, of Heat, of Light, of Electricity, ponderable 
Substances, Elements of Matter, particularly those 
found in Vegetables, Laws of their Combinations and 

Arrangements. 

« 

THE great operations of the farmer are directed 
towards the production or improvement of certain, 
classes of vegetables j they are either mechanical or 
chemical, and are, consequently, dependant upon the 
laws which govern common matter. Plants themselves 
are, to a certain extent, submitted to these laws ; and 
it is necessary to study their effects both in consider- 
ing the phaenomena of vegetation, and the cultivation 
of the vegetable kingdom. 

One of the most important properties belonging 
to matter is gravitation, or the power by which mas- 
ses of matter are attracted towards each other. It is 
in consequence of gravitation that bodies thrown into 
the atmosphere fall to the surface of the earth, and that 
the different parts of the globe are preserved in their 
proper positions. Gravity is exertefd in proportion to 
the quantity of matter. Hence all bodies placed above 
the surface of the earth fall to it m right lines, which 
if produced would pass through its centre ; and -a 



body falling near a high mountain, is a little bent 
out of the perpendicular direction by the attraction 
of the mountain, as has been shewn by t||e experi«i 
ments of Dr. Maskelyne on Schehallien. ^ 

Gravitation has a very important influence on 
the growth of plants ; and it is rendered probable, by 
the ejqjeriments of Mr. Knight, that they owe the pe- 
culiar directicm of their roots and branches almost en- 
tirely to this force. 

That gentleman fixed some seeds of the garden 
bean on the circumference of a wheel, which in one 
instance was placed vertically, and in the other hori- 
zontially, and made to revolve, by means of anodier 
wheel worked^ by water, in such a manner, that the 
number of the revolutions could be regulated; the 
beans were supplied with moisture, and were placed 
under circumstances favourable to germination. The 
greatest velocity of motion given to the wheel was 
such, that it performed ^50 revolutions in a minute. 
It was found that in all cases the beans grew, and that 
the direction of the roots and stems was influenced by 
the motion of the wheel. When the centrifugal force 
was made superior to the force of gravitation, which 
was supposed to be done when the vertical wheel per- 
formed 150 revolutions in a minute, all the radicles, 
in whatever way they were protruded from the po- 
ation of the seeds, turned their points outwards from 
the circumference of the wheel, and in their subse- 
quent growth receded nearly at right angles from its 
axis ; the germens, on the contrary, took the opposite 
direction, and in a few days their points all met in 
the centre of the wheel. 



C 50 3 

When the centrifugal foitewas made merely to 
modify the force of gravitation in the horizontal wheel 
when th^igreatest volocity of revolution was given^ 
^the radicles pointed downwards about ten degrees be- 
low^ and the germens as many degrees above the 
horizontal line of the wheel's motion ; and the devia- 
tion from the perpendicular was less in proportion^ 
as the motion was less rapid.* 

These facts afford a rational solution of this cu- 
rious problem, respecting which different philosophers 
have given such different opinions ; some referring it 
to the nature of the sap, as De la Hire, others, as 
Darwin, to the living powers of the plant, and the 
stimulus of air upon the leaves, and of moisture upon 
the roots. The effect is now shewn to be connected 
with mechanical causes ; and there seems no other 
power in nature to which it can with propriety be 
referred but gravity, which acts universally, and 
which must tend to dispose the parts to take a uni- 
form direction. 

If plants in general owe their perpendicular di- 
rection to gravity, it is evident that the number of 
plants upon a given part of the earth's circumference^ 
cannot be increased by making the surface irregular, 
as some persons have supposed. Nor can more stalks 
rise on a hill than on a spot equal to its base ; for the 
slight effect of the attraction of the hill, would be only 



* Fig. 1 represents the f«rin of the experiment when the vertical wheel was 
made to perform if o revolutions in a minnte. 

Fig. 3 repi-esenti the case in which the horizental wheel perforned SSO revo- 
iMions. 



p. 50 





[31 3 

to make the plats deviate a very Iktle from the per- 
pendicular. Where horizontal layers are poshed 
forth, as in certain grasses, particularly such as the 
fiorin, lately brought into nodce by Dr. Richardson, 
more food may, however, be produced upon an irre« 
gular surface ; but the principle seems to apply strict- 
ly to corn crops. « 

The direction of the radicles and germens is such 
that both are supplied with food, and acted upon by 
those external agents which are necessary fo^ their 
developement and growth. The roots come in con« 
tact with the fluids in the ground ; the leaves are ex« 
posed to light and air ; and the same grand law which 
preserves the planets in their orbits, is thus essential 
to the functions of vegetable life. 

\^en two pieces of polished glass are pressed 
together they, adhere to each other, and it requires 
some force to separate them. This is said to depend 
upon the attraction of cohesion. The same attraction 
gives the globular form to drops of water, and enables 
fluids to rise in capillary tubes ; and hence it is some- 
times called capillary attraction. This attraction, like 
gravitadon, seems common to all matter, and may be 
a modification of the same general force ; like gravi- 
tation, it is of great importance in vegetation. It pre- 
serves the forms of aggregation of the parts of plants, 
and it seems to be a principal cause of the absorption 
of fluids by their roots. 

If some pure magnesia, the calcined magnesia of 
druggists^ be thrown into distilled vinegar, it gradu- 
ally disolves. This is said to be owing to cbemiccU 



C 32 3 

atiraetion^ the power by which different species of 
matter tend to unite into one compound. Various 
kinds. of matter unite with different degrees of force : 
thus sulphuric acid and magnesia unite wkh more 
readiness tha^ distilled vinegar and magnesia ; and if 
sulphuric acid be poured into a mis:ture of vinegar 
and magnesia, in which the acid properties of the 
vinegar have been destroyed by the magnesia, the vine- 
gar will be set free, and the sulphuric acid will take 
its pl^ce« This chemical attraction is likewise called 
chemical affinity. It is active in most of the phaeno- 
mena of vegetation. The sap consists of a number of 
ingredients, dissolved in water by chemical attraction ; 
and it appears to be in consequence of the operation 
of this power, that certain principles derived from the 
sap are united to the y^etable organs. By fhe laws 
of chemical attraction, different products of vegetation 
are changed, and assume new forms: the food of 
plants i^ prepared in the soil ; vegetable and animal 
remains are changed by the action of air and water, 
and made fluid or aeriform ; rocks are broken down 
and converted into soils; and soils are mo» finely 
divided and fitted as receptacles for the roots of 
plants. 

The different powers of attraction tend to pre* 
serve the arrangements of matter, or to unite them m 
new forms. If there were no opposing powers, there 
would soon be a state of perfect quiescence in nature, 
a kind of eternal sleep in the physical world. Gravi- 
tation is continually counteracted by mechanical 
agencies, by projectile motion, or the centrifugal 



C 33 3 

bfce ; and their joint agencies occa^on the motion of 
the heavenly bodies, CobesHon and chemical attrac* 
6on are opposed by the repulsive energy of beat, and 
the harmonious cycle of terrestrial changes is pro« 
duced by cfaeirrmufuai opij^tions. 

Heat is c^^ble of being communicated from one 
bgdy Co jotiier bodies; and its common effect is lo 
expand ihem, to ailarge them in all their dimensions. 
This is easily exemplified. A solid cylinder of metal 
after being heated will not pass thrau|^ a ring barely 
sufficient to receive it when cold. When water is 
heated in a globe of glass having a long slender neck, 
it rises in the neck ; and if heat be applied to air con- 
fined in such a vessel inverted above water, it makes 
its escape from the vessel and passes- thiough the wa- 
ter. Thermometers are instrument^ ibr measuring 
degrees of heat by the expansion of fluids in narrow- 
tubes. Mercury is generally used, of which 100,000 
parts ^t the freezing point of water become 101 ,835 
parts at the boiling ])oint, jand on Fahrenheit's scale 
these parts are divided into 180 degrees. Solids, by 
a certain increase of heat, become fluids, and fluids 
gasses, or elastic fluids. Thus ice is converted by heat 
into water, and by stiH more heat it becomes steam : 
and heat disappears, or, as it is called, is rendered^ 
Jatent during die conversion of solids imo fluids, or 
fluids ifl^o gassesy and reappears or becomes sensible^ 
when gasses, become Juids, or fluids scrlids : hence 
cold is produced during evaporatbn^ and heat during 
the condensation of steam. 

■■ p . ■ 



C 8* 3 

There are a few eitcepdons to the law ofeycptasion 
of bocBes by heat, which seem to depend either upon 
. some change in their chemical constitution, or on th^ 
becoming crystallized. Clay contracts by heat, . 
which seems to be oiling to its giving off water. Cast 
iron and andmqny, when melted, crystallize in cool- 
ing and expand. Ice is much lighter than water. 
Watier expands a little even before it freezes, and it is 
of the greatest density at about 41° or 42**, the freez«^ 
ing point being 32"* ; and this circumstance is of con* 
siderable importance m the general oecoaomy of na* 
ture. The influence of the changes of seasons and , 
of the position of the sun on the phenomena ef v^^ 
tation, demonstrates the effects of heat on the func- 
tions of plants. The matter absorbed from th^ soil 
must be in a Btdd state to pass into their roots, and 
when the surface is feozen they can dierive no nour- 
ishment from it. The activity of chenucal changes 
likewise is increased by a certain increase of tempera- 
ture, and even the rapkiity &lt;tf the ascent ef fluids by 
capillary attracdon. 

This last fact is easily sheiwn by placing in each 
of two wine glasses a similar hollow stalk of grass, so 
bent as to discharge any fluid in the glasses slowly by 
cafnllary attracdon ; if hot water be in one ^ass^ anil 
cold water in the other, the hot water will be dia^ 
(barged much more rajudly than the cold water. The 
fermentation and decomposition of animal and vegeta* 
ble substances require a certsun degree of heat, which 
is consequently necessary for die preparation of the 
food of plants ; and as evaporation is more rapid in 



C 8s 3 

proportion its the tempemture is higher, the superflu- 
ous parts of the sap are most readily carried, off at the 
time its ascent is quickest. -^ 

Two oi^nions are current rei^)ectix9g the nature 
(^heat. By some philosophers it is x:onceived to be 
a peculiair subtile fluid, of which the particles repel 
each other, but have a strong attraction for the. part^ 
eles of other matter. By others it is considered as 
a miotion or vib)*ation of the particles of. matter, 
which is supposed to differ iq velocity in different 
cases, and thus to produce the different degrees of 
temperature. Whatever dedsion be uhitnately madf 
respectmg these opinions, it is certain that there is 
matter monng in the space betwe^i us and the hea^ 
venly bodies capable of communicating heat ; the mo^ 
(ions of which are rectilineal : thus the solar rays 
produce heat in acting on the sur£ice of the earth. 
The beautiful experiments of Dr. Herschel have 
sihewn that there are rays transmitted from the sua 
inrbtch do not illuminate } and which yet produce 
fnore heat than the visible rays ; and Mr. Ritter and 
Dr. W ollaston have shewn that .there are other inviss* 
He rays distinguished by their chemical efiects* 

The different influence of the different solar ray9 
0n vegetadon have not yet been studied ; but it is cer« 
tain that the rays exercise an influence independent of 
the heat they produce. Thus plants kept in the dark 
in a hot-house grow luxuriantly, but they never gain 
theif natural colours ; their leaves are white or pale, 
and thdr juices watery and peculiarly saccharine. 



C S6 3 

When a piece of sealing-wax is rubbed by * 
tvoallen cloA, k gail^s the power of attractbg light 
bodies, such as feathers or ashes. In this state it is 
said to be electrical j; ^d if a metallic cylinder, placed 
iipbn a tod of glass, is brought in contact with the 
baling- wax, it likewise gains the momentary power of 
attracting light bodies, so that electricity like heat is 
communicable. When two light bodies receive the 
same electrical iiafluence, or are electrified by the 
same body, they repel each other. When one of them 
is acted on by sealing-wax, and the other by glass that 
has been rubbed by woollen, they attract each other ; ' 
hence it is said, that bodies similarly electrified repel 
each other^ and bodies dissimilarly electrified attract 
each other: and the electricity of glass is called 
vitreous or positive electricity, and that of sealing*wax 
resinous or negative electricity. 

When of two bodies made to rub each other one 
is found positively electrified, the other is always 
found negatively electrified, and, as in the common 
electrical macljiney these states are capable of bidng 
communicated to metak placed upon rods or pillars of 
glass* Electricity is produced likewise by the contact 
of bodies ; thus a piece of zinc and of silver give a 
sHght electrical shock when they are made to touch 
each other, and to touch the tongue : and when a 
number of .plates of copper and zinc, 100 for instance^ 
are arranged iu a pile with cloths moistened in sab and 
water, in the order of zinc, copper^ moistened clothe 
zinc, copper, moistened cloth, and so oil, they form 
an electrical battety which will give strong shocks 



E «7 1 

and Iparks, and winch is possesed of remarkabte 
chemical powers* The luminous pbas&amp;omena pro- 
duced b^r common electricity are well known. It 
would be improper to dweU ' upon them in ibis 
place. They are the most impressive effects occa* 
sioned by this agent ; and they pffer illustrations 
^ of lightning and thunder. 

Electiical changes are constantly takij^g place in 
nature,, oii the surface of the earth and in the atmos^ 
phere; but as yet the efiects of tlus power in vegem^ 
tion have^ not been tennectly esdmated. It has been 
shewn by experiments made by means of the Voltaic 
battery (thfe instrument composed of zinc, copper, and 
water), that con^und bodies in general are capaUe 
of b^ig^ decomposed by electrical powers, and it is 
probsA)le, that the various dectrical pfaaenomena oc- 
curring in our system, must influence both the ger- 
mination of seeds and die 'growth of plants. I found 
that com sprouted much more rapidly in water posi- 
tively electrized by the Voltaic instrument than in 
water negatively electrified; and experiments made 
upon the atmosphere shew ibst clouds are usually ne- 
gative y ^and as when a cloud is in one state of elec- 
tricity the surface of the earth beneath is brought into 
the opposite state, it is probable that in common cases 
the surface of the earth is positive. 

Different opinions are entertained amongst sden&lt;^ 
tific men respecting the nature of electricity ; by some, 
the phsenomena are conceived to depend upon a single 
subtile fluid in excess in the bodies said to be posi- 
tively electrified, in deficiency in die bodies said to be 



negatively eiectrified* A second' c^ss suppose th^ 
effects to be produced by two different ffuMs^ called 
by them the viqreous fluid and the resiapus fluid } wd 
others regard them ^s affections or motions pf mattw^ 
or an exhibition of attractive powers, simibr to .dips^ 
which produce chemical combination and decoaippsir 
tion ; but usually exerting their action on masses. 

The different powers that have been thus genera- 
ally described, continually aqt upon (roi^mon milter 
$o as to cl^ange its form and produce arrapgements 
fitted for the purposes of life* Bodies are either sim^ 
pie or compound. A body is said to be simple, wbeq 
it is incapable of being resolved into any other fi)rm§ 
of matter. Thus gold, or silver, though they may 
be melted by heat or dissolved in corrosive menstrua, 
yet are recovered unchang^ in their properties, and 
they are said to be simple bodies. A body is consi* 
dered as compound, when two or more distinct sub^ 
stances are capcjible of being produced from it } thus 
marble is a compound body, for by a strong heat, it i^ 
converted into lime, and an elastic fluid i$ disengaged 
in the process : and the proof of our knowledge of 
the true composition of a body is^ that it is capable of 
being reproduced by the .same substances as those into 
which it had been decomposed j thus by exposing 
lime for a long while to the elastic fluid, disengaged 
during its calcination, it becomes converted into a sub- 
stance similar to powdered marble. The term element 
has the same meaning as simple or undecompounded 
body ; but it is applied merely with reference to the 
present state of chemical knowledge. It is probable. 



that asyM we are nol aoqtiamted wkh any of the ttvte 
elements of tnattei: ; many substances^ formerly sujk 
posed to be simple, have been lately decompounded, 
3nd the chenucal arrangement of bodies must be coii» 
^ered as a mere expression of lacts, the results of 
accurate statical experinients* 

Veg^able substances in general' are of a very 
compound nature, and consist of a great number of 
elements^ most of which belong l&amp;ewise to the other: 
kingdoms of nanire, ' and are fdund in various forms. 
Thdr more cdmplicated arrangements are best under* 
^ood after their simpler forms of combination have 
been examined. 

The number of bodies which I shall consider as 
at present undecomposed, are, as was stated in the 
mtroductory lecture, two gasses that support combust 
bu^oh, sevax inflammable bodies, and thirty-dghc 
metab. 

In most of the inorganic compounds, the nature 
of which is weil known, into which these elements 
enter, they are cbmbined in definite proportions ; so 
that if the elements be representied by numbers, the 
proportions in which they combine are expressed 
either by those numbers, or by some simple multiples 
of them. 

I shall mention, in few wordd, the characteristic 
properties of the most important simple, substances, 
and the numbers representing the proportions in 
which they combine in those cases, wher^they haive 
been accurately ascertained. 



1^2 

1. Oxygene forms about one*fiith of the air of ou^ 
atmosphere. It is an elastic fluid, at ail known^ tem- 
peratures. Its specific gravity is to that of air as 10967 
to 1&lt;XXX). It suf^rts combustion with much mere 
rividhess than common air^, so that if a small steel 
^re, or a watch spring, having a bit of inflamed wood 
attached to it, be introduced info a bottle filled with 
the gas, it bums with great splendour. It is respirable. 
It is very slightly soluble in water. ^The numbei^ re- 
presaiting the proportion in which it combiues is 15. 
It may be made by heating a mixture of the mineral 
called manganese, and sulphuric acid together, in a 
proper vesseli or by heating strongly red lead, qt red 
precipitate of mercury. 

2. Chlorine^ or oxymuriatic gas, is like oxygeiie, a 
'permanent elastic fluid. Its colour is yellowish green, 

its smell is very disagreeable ; it is not respirable ; it 
supports the combustion of all the common inflam* 
mable bodies except charcoal ; its specific gravity 
is to that of air as 24677 to 10000; it is soluble 
in about half its volume of water, aOid its solution in 
water destroys vegetable colours. Many of the 
metals (such as arsenic or copper) take fire spon- 
taneously when introduced into a jar or bottle filled 
with the gas. Chlorine may be procured by heating 
togethe^^a mixture of spirits of salt or muriatic acid, 
and manganese. .Th^ number representing the pro- 
portion in which this gas enters into combination 
is 67. 

S. Hydrogene^ or m&amp;zmmMe WTy is the lightest 
known substance ; its specific gravity is to that of air 



as 792 to 10000* It bums by the action of an in- 
flamed taper, "when in contact with the atmosphere. 
The proportion in which it combines is rq&gt;reaented by 
unity, or i* It is procured by the ac|i&lt;»i of diluted chI 
of vitriol, or hydro sulphuric add on filings of zinc or 
iron* It is the substance employed for filling air bal- 
loons. 

4. jizote is a gaseous substance not capable of 
being /condensed by any known degree of cold : its 
specific gravity is to that of common air as 9516 to 
10000. It does not enter into combustion under 
common circumstances, but may be made to unite 
with pxygene by the agency of electrical fire. It forms 
nearly four fifths of thp air of the atmosphere ; and 
may be procured by burning phosphorus in a confin- 
ed portion of air^ The number representing Uie pro- 
portion in which it combing is 26. 

5. Carbon is considered as the pure matter of 
charcoal, and it mtay be produced by passing spirits of 
wine through a tube heated red. It has not yet been 
fused ; but rises in vapour at an intense heat. Its 
specific gravity cannot be easily ascertained ; but that 
of the diamond, which cannot chemically be distin- 
guished from pure carbon, is to that of water as 3500 
to^ 1000. Charcoal has the remarkable property of 
absorbing several limes its volume of different elastic 
fluids^ which are capable of being es^pelled from it by 
heat. The number representing it is 1 1 .4. 

6. Sulphur is the pure substance so well known 
by that name : its specific gravity is to that of water 
as 1990 to 1000. It fuses at about 220° Fahrenheit j 

G 



I 42 3 

ai^ at betweai ^OO'' and GOO" takes iire» if in contact 
with the air, and burns with a pale blue flame. In this 
process it dissolves in the oxygene of the air, and proi* 
duces a peculiar acid elastic fluid. The numbelr re* 
presenting it is 30. 

?. Pht^horm is a solid of a pale red colour, of 
specific gravity 1770. It fuses at 90*, smd boils at 
^50^. It is luminous in the air at common tempera- 
tures^ and burns i^th great violence at 150^, so that 
it must be handled with great caution. The number 
representing it is 20. It is procured by digesting 
together bone ashes aiid' oil of vitriol, and strongly 
heating the fluid substance so produced with powdered 
charcoal. 

8. Borm is a solid of a dark olii^ colour, infu- 
sible at any known temperature. It is a substance 
very lately discovered, and procured from bomcic 
acid. It burns with brilliant sparks, when heated in 
oxygene, but not in chlorine. . Its specific gravity, 
and the number representing it, are not yet accurate! jr 
known, 

9. Piatinum is one of the noble metals, of rather 
a duller white than silver, and the hea^est body in 
nature; its specific gravity being 21500. It is not 
acted upon by any acid m^istrua except such as con« 
tain chlorine ; It requires an intense de^gr^ pf heat 
for its fusion. 

10. The properties of gold are well known. Its 
specific gravity is 19277. It bears the same relation 
to acid menstrua as platinum : it is one of the char* 
acteristics of both tbeste bodies, that they are very dif- 
cultly acted upon by suli^un 



C ^3 „3 . 

11. Silver is of specific gravity 1 MOO, it burns 
more readily than ptantimim or gold, m^hicfa require 
the intense heat of electricity. It readily unites to 
sulphur*. The number representing it is 205. 

12. Mercury is the only known metal fluid 2tf 
the common temperature of the atmosphere ; it boils 
at €60**, and freezes at S9« below 0. Its specific gra- 
vity is 135601 The number representing it is S80. 

13. Capper is of specific gravity 8890. It burns 
when strongly heated with red flame tinged with 
green. The number representing it is 120. 

14. Cohalt is of specific gravity 7700. Its point 
of fusaon is very high, nearly equsil to that of %on. 
In its calcined or oxidated state, it is employed for 
giving a blue colour to glass. 

15. Nicielisofo, white colour : its specific gra- 
vity is 8820. This m^tal and cobalt agree with iron, in 
hdng attractil^ by the magnet* The numb^ repre- 
senting nickel is 1 1 1. 

16. Iron h of specific grav&amp;y 7790* Its other 
properties are well known. The number represent- 
ing it is 103. 

17. Tin is of ^specific gravity 72911 ; it is a very 
fusible metal, and bums when ignited in the air : the 
numbar representing the prq)ortion in which it com^ 
bines is 110. 

18« Zinc\&amp; one of the most combustO)le of the 
common metals. Its specific gravity is about 7210. 
It is brittle metal under common circumstances ; bid: 
when heated-may be hammered or rolled into thtii 
leaves, and after this operation is malleable* The num^- 
ber representing it is 66. 



C 4* 3 

19, Lend is of ^ecific gravity 11352 ; it fuses 
at a temperature rather bigho: than tin. The num- 
ber representing it is 39^. 

'20. Bismuth is a brittle metal of specific gravity* 
9822i It is nearly as fusible as tin; when cooled 
slowly it crystallizes in cubes. The nfUmber repre-* 
seating it is 1 35. 

21. Antimony is a metal capable of being volat- 
ilized by a strong red heat. Its specific gravity is 

6800. It bums when igiiited with a feint white light. 
The number representing it is 1 70. 

22. Arsenic is of a blueish white colour, of 
specific gravity 83 10. It may be procured by heating 
the powder of common white arsenic of the shops 
strongly in a Florence flask with oil. The metal rises 
in vapour, and condenses in the neck of the fiaisk. 
The number representing it is 90. 

23. Mqnganesum may be procured from the 
mineral called manganese, by intensely igniting it in 
a forge mixed with charcoal powder. It is a metal 
very difficult of fusicm, and very combustible; its 
specific gravity is 6850. The number representing it 
is 177. 

24. Potassium is the lightest known metal/betng 
only of specific gravity 850. It fuses at about 150% 
and rises in vapour at a heat a little below redness, 
It is a highly combustible substance, takes fire when 
thrown upon water, burns with great brilHancy, and 
the product of its combustion dissolves in the water. 
The number representing it is 75. It may be made 
by passing fused caustic vegetable alkali, (the pure kali 



C 45 3 

qf druggists) through iron tmrnings strongly ignited 
in a gun barrel, or by the electrization of potash by a 
string Voltaic battery. 

25. Sodium may be made in a similar manner to 
potassium. Soda or the mineral alkali being substituted 
for the vegetable alkali. It is of specific gravity 940. 
It is very combustible. When thrown upon water, 
it swims on its surface, hisses violently, and dissolves, 
but does UQt inflame. The number representing it 
is 88. 

26. Barium has as yet been procured only by 
electrical powers and in very minute quantities, so that 
its properties have not been accurately examined. 
The number representing it appears to be ISO. 

Strontium the 27th, Calcium the 28th, Magnesium 
the 29th, Silicum the SOth, Aluminum the Slst^ Zir- 
conum the S2d, Glucinum the.SSd, and Ittrium the 
34th of the undecompounded bodies,^ like barium,, 
have either not been procured absolutely pure, or 
only in such minute quantities that their properties 
are little known ; they are formed either by electrical 
powers, or by the agency of potassium, from the dif- 
ferent earths whose names they bear, with the change 
of the tef mination in um ; and the numbers repre- 
senting them are believed to be 90 strontium^ 40 cal- 
cium, 38 magnesium, 31 silicum, S3 aluminum, 70 
zirconum, 39 glucinum, 11 1 ittrium. 

"^ Of the remaining thirteen simple bodies, twelve 

are metals, most of which, like those just mentioned, 

can only be procured with very great difficulty ; and 

^ the substances in general from which they are procxij- 



C 46 3 

ed are very rare in nature. They are Palladium^ 
Rhodium^ Osmium^ Iridium^ Colubiumj Chromium^ Mo* 
lybdenurrij Cerium^ Tellurium^ Tungstenumj Titanium^ 
Uranium. The forty^sfeventh body has not as yet 
been produced in a state sufficiently pure to admit 
of a minute examination. It is the principle which 
gives character to the acid called fluoric acid, and 
may be named Fluon^ and is probably analogous to 
phosphorus or sulphur. The numbers representing 
these last thirteen bodies have not yet been determin- 
ed with sufficient accuracy to render a reference to 
them of any utility. 

The undecompounded substances unite witR feach 
other, and the most remarkable compounds are form- 
ed by the combinations of oxygene and chlorine with 
inflammable bodies and metals } and these combina- 
tions usually take place with much energy, and are 
associated with fire.. 

Combustion in fact, in common cases, is the 
process of the solution of a body in oxygene, as hap- 
pens when sulphur or charcoal is burnt; or the fixa- 
tion of oxygene by the combustible body in a solid 
form, which takes place when most metals are burnt, 
or when phosphorus inflames ; or the production of 
a fluid from both bodies, as when hydrogene and oxy* 
gene unite to form water. 

When considerable quantities of oxygene or of 
chlorine unite to metals or inflammable bodies, they 
often produce acids : thus sulphureous, phosphoric, 
and boracic acids are formed by a union of considera- 
ble quantities of oxygene with sulphur, phosphorus, 



[47 J 

and boron : and muriatic acid gas is formed by the 
union of chlorine and hydrogene* 

When smaller quantities of oxygene or chlorine 
unite with inflammable bodies or metals^ they form 
substances not acid, and more or less soluble in wa- 
ter; and the metallic oxides, the fixed alkalies, and 
the earths, all bodies connected by analogies ; are pro- 
duced by the union of metals with oxygene. 

The composition of any compounds^ the nature 
of which is i?srell known, may^be easily learnt from the 
numbers representing their elements ; all that is ne- 
cessary, is to know how many proportions enteir into 
union.^ Thus potassa^ or the pure caustrc vegetable 
alkali, consists of one proportion of potassium and one 
of oxygene, and its constitution is consequ^itly 75 
potassium, 15 o:$ygene. 

Carbonic acid is composed of two proportions of 
oxygene 30, and one of carbon 11.4. 

Agsun, lime consists of one proportion of Calcium 
and one of oxygene, and it is composed of 40 of cal- 
cium and 15 of oxygene. And carbonate of lime j or 
pure chalk, consists of one proportion of carbonic 
add 41.4, and one of lime 55. 

Water cdn^ts of two proportions of hydrogene 
2, and one dP oxygene 15 ; and when water unites to 
other bo^es in definite proportions, the quantity is 17, 
or spme multiple of 17, i. e. 34 or 51, or 68, &amp;c. 

5od^, or the mineral alkali, contains two propor- 
tions of oxygene to one of sodium.r 

Ammonia^ or the volatile alkali is composed of six 
proportions of hydrogene and one of azote^ 



[ 48 ] 

Amongst the earths. Silica or the earth of flints, 
probably consists of two proportions x&gt;f oxygene to 
one of 'silicum j and Magnesia^ Strontia, Baryta oir 
Barytei^ Alumina^ Zircona, Qlusijiaj and Ittria of one ^ 
proportion of metal and one of oxygene. 

The metallic omdes in general consist of the metals 
united to from one to four proportions of oxygene ; 
and there are, in some cases, many different oxides of 
the same metal j thus there are three oxides of lead ; 
the yellow oxide, or massicot, contains two proportions 
of oxygene; the red oxide^ or minium^ three; and the 
puse coloured oxide four proportions. Again there are 
Iwo oxides of copper^ the black and the orange.; the 
black contains two proportions of oxygene, the 
oraiige one. 

For pursuing such experiments on the composir 
lion of bodies as are connected with/agricultuhil che- 
mistry, a few only* of the imdecompounded substan- 
ces ^e necessary ; and amongst the compounded 
bodies, the common acids, the alkalies, and the earths, 
are the most essential substances. The elements 
found in vegetableis, as has been stated in the intro- 
ductory lecture, are very few. Oxygene, hydrogene, 
and carbon constitute the greatest part of their organ- 
ized matter. Azote, phosphorus, sulphur, mangane- 
sum, iron, silicum, calcium, aluminum, and magne- 
sium likewise, in different arrangements, enter into 
their composition^ or are found in the agents to which 
they are exposed ; and these twelve undecbmpound- 
ed substances are the elements, the study of which 
is of the most importance to the agricultural chemist. 



C « 2 

The doctrine of definiie combinations^ as ^1 be 
^hewn in the fpllowing lectures, vnll assist us in gahi» 
ing just views respecting the composition of plants, 
and the economy of the v^etable kingdom ; but the 
same accuracy of wdght and measure, the same statical 
results which depend upon the uniformity of the laws 
that govern dead matter, cannot be expected in opera- 
tions where the powers of life are concerned, and 
where a diversity of organs and of iunctions exists* 
The classes of definite inorganic bodies, even if we 
include all the crystalline arrangements of the mineral 
kingdom, are few, compared with the forms and sub* 
stances belonging to animated nature* Life gives a 
peculiar character to all its productions ; the power of 
attractioJQ and repulsion, combination and decomposi- 
timi, are sidxervient to it ; a few elements, by die 
diversity of their mangement, are made to form the 
most Cerent substances ; and similar substances are 
produced from compounds which, when si^erfidallf 
eamined, ^pear dttkely different. 



50 



. ^ LECTURE III. 

f 

On the Organization of Plants. Of the Roots ^ Trunks 
and Branches. Of their Structure. Of the Epider- 
mis. Of the cortical and alburmus Parts of Leaves^ 
Flowers J and Seeds. Of the chemical Constitution of 
the Organs of Plants y, and the Substances found in 
them. Of mucilaginous J saccharine^ extr active j resin* 
ous, and oily. Substances^ and other vegetable Com* 
pounds^ their Arrangements in the Organs of Plants^ 
their Composition^ Changes^ and Uses. 

VARIETY characterises the vegetable kingdom, 
yet thfere is an analogy between the fonns and the 
functions of all the different classes of plants, and on 
this analogy the scientific principles relating to their 
organization depend. 

Vegetables are living structures distiBguished 
from animals by exhibiting no signs of perception, 
or of voluntary motion j and their organs are either 
organs of nourishment or of reproduction; organs 
for the preservation and increase of the individual, or 
for the multiplication of the species. 

In the living vegetable system thefe are to be 
considered, the exterior form, and the interior constir 
tution# 

Every plant examined as to external stwcture, 
displays at least four systems of organs— or some 
amilogous parts. First, the Root. Secondly^ the 



t 51 3 

Trunk and Srapches^ or Stem. Thirdly, the Leaves ; 
and, fourthly, the Flowers or Seeds, 

The root is that part of the vegetable which least 
impresses the eye ; but it is absolutely necessary. It 
attaches the plant to the surface, is its organ of nour- 
ishment, and the apparatus by which it imbibes food 
from die ^oil. — ^The roots of plants, in their anatomic 
&lt;:al division, are very similar to the trunk and 
branches. The root may indeed be said to be a con- 
tinuation of the trunk terminating in minute ramifica- 
tions and filaments, and not in leaves 3 and by bury- 
ing the branches of certain trees in the soil, anddeva* 
ting the roots in the atmospheae, there is, as it were, 
an inversion of the functions, the roots produce buds 
and leaves, and the branches shoot oi^t into radical 
fibres and tubes. This experiment was made by 
Woodward on the willow, and has been repeated by 
a number of physiologists. 

When the branch or the root of a tree is cut 
transversely, it usually exhibits three bodies : the bark, 
the wood, and the pith ; and these again are iadividu*- 
ally susceptible of a new divi^on. 

The bark, when perfectly formed^ is covered by 
a thin cuticle or epidermis ^ which may be ea^ly separ- 
ated; It is generally composed of a number of laminae 
or scales, which in old trees are usually in a loose and 
decaying state* The epidermis is not vascular, and it 
merely defends the interior parts from injury. In 
forest trees, aod in the larger shrubs, the bodies of 
which are firm, and of strong texture, it is a part of 
little importan(%; but in the re^s, the grasses, canes. 



C 52 3 

and the plants having hoilew stalks, it is of great use, 
and is exceedingly strong, and in the microscope seems 
composed of a kind of glassy net-work, which is prin^ 
dpaily sificeous earth* 

This is the case in wheat, in the oat, in different 
species of eqaisetum, and, above all, in the rattan, the 
epidermis of which contains a sufficient^ quantity of 
flint to give light when struck by steel ) or two pieces 
rubbed together produce sparks. This fact first oc- 
curred to me in 1798, and it led to experiments, by 
which I ascertsoned that siliceous earth existed genet'* 
ally In the epidermis of the hoUow plants. 

The siticeous efHdermis serves as a support, pro* 
tects the bark from the action of insects, and seems 
to perfomii a part in the economy of these fedble ve* 
getable tribes^ similar to that performed in the animal 
kingdom by the didl of the crustaceous insects. 

Immediately beneath the epidermis is the faren^ 
chyma* It is a soft substance consisting of cells filled 
with fluids having almost always a greenish tint. The 
cells in die parenchymatous part, when examined by 
the microscope, appear hexagonal. This form, ia* 
deed, is that usually Reeled by the celluhr mem- 
branes in vegetables, and it seems to be the resuk of 
the general re-action of the s^d parts, similar to that 
wluch takes place in the honey-comb. This arrange- 
ment, which has usually been ascribed to the skill and 
artifice of the bee, seems, as Dr. Wollaston has ob- 
served, to be merely the result of the mechanical laws 
which influence the pre$sure of cylindas composed of 
soft materials, the nests of solitary bees being um- 
formly circular. 



C 53 3 

V 

The innarmost part of the bark is coasdtuted by 
the cmrtical layers^ and their numbers vary with the age 
of the tree. On cuttmg the bark of a tree of aeventl 
years standing, the projuctions of different periods 
may be distinctly seen, though the hyer of every 
particular year can seldom be accurately defined. 
' The cortical layers are composed of fibrous parts 
which appear interwoven, and which are transverse 
and l&lt;HigitudinaI. The transverse are membranous 
and porous, and the longitudinal are generally com* 
posed of tubes. 

The Actions of the parenchymatous and cc^rticat 
parts of die bark are of great importance. The tubes 
of the fibrous parts appear to be the organs that rt* 
cdve the sap ; the cells seem destined for the elabora- 
tion of its partSy and for the exposure of t^em to the 
actioa of the attnosphei^, and the new matter is annu- 
ally produced in die spring, immediately on the inner 
sur&amp;ce of the cordqd layer of the last year. 

It has been shewn by the experiments of Mr. 
Knight, and those made by other physiologists, that 
the sap descending through the bark a^er being 
mo(fified in the leaves, is the principal cause of the 
growth of the tree ; thus, if the bark is wounded, the 
principal formation of new barkis on the uj^ier edge 
of the wound} and when the wood has been removed, 
the formation of new wood takes place immediately 
beneath the bark : yet it would appear from the late 
observations of M. Palisot de Beauvois, that the sap 
may be transferred to the bark, so as to exert its nutri- 
tive functions, independent of any general system of 



C 54 ] 

circulation. That gentleman separated different por- 
tions of bark from the rest of the bark in several trees, 
and found that in most instances the separated baric 
grew in the same manner as the bark in its natural 
state. The experiment was tried with most success 
on the lime- tree, the maple and the lilac ; the layers of 
bark were removed in August 1810, and in the spring 
of the next year, in the case of the maple and the lilac, 
small annual shoots where produced in the parts 
where the bark was insulated.* 

The wood of trees is composed of an external or 
living part, called alburnum or sap-woodj znd- of v^ in- 
ternal and dead part, the beart-wood. The alburnum 
is white, and full of moisture, and in young trees and 
annual shoots it reaches ^ven to the pith; The albur- 
num is the great vascular system of the vegetable 
through which the sap rises, and the vessels in it ex- 
tend from the leaves to the minutest filamaits in the 
roots. 

There is in the alburnum a membranous sub- 
stance composed of cells^ which are constantly filled 
with the sap of the plant, and there are in the vascu- 
lar system several dii^erent kinds of tubes ; Mirbel has 
distinguished four species, the simfle tubes ^ the forcus 
tubes^ the trachea^ and the false trachea*^; 

The tubes, which he has called simple tubes, 
seem to contain the resinous or oily fluids peculiar to 
different plants. 



• Fig. 3 represents the result of the experiment on the maple. Journal de 
Pliyyique, Septenber 1811&gt; page 810. 

t Fig. A, 5, 6, and 1, represent Mirbel's idea of the simple Cube«» the porons 
t&amp;bes, the tracheae, and the false tracheae. ^ 



T- 34 




1^4- 



Fig: 8. 




F-S*- 



ris.9 




/ 



^ 



Fi g: lo. 




i: 55 3 

The porous tubes likewise contain these fluids ; 
and their use is probably that of conveying them into 
the sap for the production of new arrangements. 

The tracheae contain fluid matter, which is at 
ways thin, wktery, and /pellucid, and these organs, 
as well as the false tracheae, probably carry off water 
from the denser juices, which are thus enabled to con* 
$plidate for the production of new wood. 

In the arrangement of' the fibres of the wood, 
there atre two distinct appearances. There are series 
of white and shining laminse which shoot from the 
centre towards the circumference, and these constitute 
what is called the siher grain of the wood. 

There are likewise numerous series of concentric 
layers which are usually called the spurious grain^ and 
their number denotes the age of the tree.* 

The silver grain is elastic and contractile, and it 
has been supposed by Mr. Knight, that the change of 
volume produced in it by change of temperature is 
one of the principal causes of the ascent of the sap* 
The fibres of it seem always to expand in the morning 
and contract at night ; and the ascent of the juices, as 
was stated in the last Lecture, depends principally on 
the agency of heat. 

The silver grain is most distinct in forest trees ; 
but even annual shrubs have a system of fibres simi- 
lar to it. The analogy of nature is constant and uni« 



* Fig. ^.rei^resentfl tke section of aft' elm branch, ivhich oxhibitt the tobalac 
stroctnre and the silver and spurious grain. Fig. 9 represents the section of part 
of the branch of an oak. Fig, XQ, tl^ of the branch of sui ash. 



C 56 3, 

hrm^ and sioiihr eflFects are usually produced fay simi- 
kur organs. 

The pith occupies die centre of the wood ; its 
texture is membranous ; it is composed of cells, which 
are circular towards the extremity, and hexagonal iQ 
tlie centre of the substance. In the first in&amp;ncy of 
the vegetable, the pith occupies but a small space. It 
gradually dilates, and in annual shoots and young 
trees offers a considerable diameter. In the more 
advanced age of thetree/acted on by the heart-wood, 
pressed by the new layers of the albmnum, it begins 
to diminish, and in very old forest trees disappears 
sjtogether. 

Many different opinions I^ve prevailed with re- 
gard to the use of the pith. Dr. Hales supposed, that 
it was the great caiise of the expansion and develope- 
ment of the other parts of the plant ; that being the 
most interior, it was likewise the most acted u|)on of 
-all the organs, and that from its reaction the pheno- 
mena of their developement and growth resulted. 

Lmnseus, whose lively imagination was continu- 
ally employed in endeavours to discover analogies be- 
tween the animal and vegetable systems, conceived 
*^ that the pith performed for the plant the same func- 
tions as the brain and nerves in animated beings/' He 
considered it as the organ of irritability, and the seat 
ofKfe- 

The latest discoveries have proved, that these two 
opinions are equally erroneous. Mr. Knight has re« 
moved the pith in several young trees, and diey con« 
tinned to live and to increase. 



FJ7 



FigJl. 




C T^LoSotit Sc. 



It is evidently then only an organ of secondary 
importance. In early shoots, in vigorous growth, it is 
filled With moisture, arid it is a reservoir, perhaps, of 
fluid nourishment at the time it is most wanted. As 
the heart-pwood forms, it is more and more separated 
from the living part, the alburnum ; its functions be- 
come extinct, it diminishes, dies, ztid last disappeai^s. 

The tendrih^ the spines^ and other similar parts 
of plants are analogous in their organization to the 
branches, and offer a similar cordcal * tod alburnous 
organization. It has been shown, by the late obser- 
vations of Mr. Knight, that the directions of tendrils, 
and the spiral form they assume, depend upon the 
unequal action of light upon them, and a similar 
reason has been assigned by M. Decandolle to account 
for the turning of the parts of plants towards the sun ; 
that ingenious physiologist supposes that the fibres 
are shortenekl by the chemical agency of the solar 
rays upon them, and that, consequently, the parts 
will move towards the light. 

The leaves^ the -great sources of the permanent 
beauty of vegetation, though infinitely diverdfied in 
their forms, are in all cases similar in interior organic 
^zation, and perform t&amp;e same functionis. 

The alburnum ^reads itself from the foot-stalks 
into the vary e3ctremity of the leaf j it retains its vas- 
cular system and its living powers ; and its peculiar 
tubes, particularly the tracheae, may be distinctly seen 
in the leaf.* 

i 

' ' ' .. - ' - ■ - ' - — - ' 

..^ * Fag 11. repretcntf part of a leaf of a vine magnified and cat, so as tb exhU 
bit the trachex ; it is copied, as are also the preceding figures, from GreW's An*- 
jLomy of Plants. 



f 

The green mem|;&gt;ranpu^ substance i^ay b^^fond- 
4ered as an extension of tl^e parenchyma, aB4 ^ 
fine and thin cpyering ^s tl^e epidermis^ T^us t^f^ 
organi^tion of the roots and branches may be tr^^^fd 
into the leaves, which present, ^Qwever, ^, v^ve per- 
fect, refined, zn^ minute stnic^urer 

One great use of th^ le^ve§ ^^ fo^ die ^posfi^ 
of the ^p to the ii^urajGe of the ftjr, he^t^ aq^. l^ght. 
Thei^ surface is extensive, the tubes 9n4 cell^ 
yetj delicate, ^nd their t»ture porous and t^rans* 
parent. 

In tb^ leaves much of the vater of the sap is 
evaporated ; it is combined with new princi|&gt;le8, and 
fitted for itp organizing functions, and probably pasn 
ses, in its prepared state, from the extreme tubes of 
the 2|lburnuiq injto the ramifications of the cortical 
tubes and then descends ihrougli the bark. 

On the uppqr sur£u:e of leaves, which is expos- 
ed to the sun, the epidermis is thick but transparent, 
and is composed of matter possessed of little organi- 
i^ation, which is either principally earthy, or consists 
of some homogeneous chemical substance, b the 
gprass^ it |s partly siliceous, in the laur^ resinous, 
and in the maple and thorn, it is principally constitute 
ed by a substance analogous to wax. 

By thes^ arrangements any evaporatba, except 
&amp;om the apprpprisited tubes, is prevented. 

On the lower surface the epidermb is a thin 
transparent membrane full of cavities, and it is proba- 
bly altogether by this surface that moisture and the 
principles of the atmosphere necessary to vegetation 
are absorbed. 



If la letf be turned^ so a&amp; t6 )^e^eAl its lower sur- 
face to the sun, its filH'es will twist soi&amp;td britig it as 
tnuch as possible into its drig^nal po^ti^ ; and all 
leavfes elevate themselves on the foot-stalk during their 
^xpb^re to the solar lights and as it Were tnoved to* 
wards the sum 

This efiect seeins in a ^reat measure dependent 
upon the mechanical and chemical agaicy of light and 
heat. Bonnet made artificial leaves^ Which, when a 
iboist sponge was held under the lower sur&amp;ce, and 
a heated iron above th^ upper surface, turned exactly 
In the saitie tftaimer as the natural leaves. This how- 
ever can be considered only as a ver^ rude imitation 
Df the natural process. 

What Linnaeus has called the sleep of the leaves, 
appears to depend wholly upon the defect of die ac- 
tion t)f light and heat, and the excess of the operaticm 
of moisture. 

This singular but constant phenomenon had 
never befen scientifically observed, till the attention of 
the botanist of Upsal was fortunately directed to it. 
He was examining particularly a species of lotus, in 
which four flowers had appeared during the day, and 
he missed two in the evening ; by accurate inspection, 
he soon discovered that these two were hidden by the 
leaves which had cloised rbutid them. Such a circum- 
stance cbiild not be lost upon so acute an observer* 
tie immediately took a lantern, went into his garden, 
and witnessed a series of curious facts before un- 
known. All the simple leaves of the plants he exam- 
ined, had an arrangement totally ditferexlit from their 



C 63 3 

it incloses and defends the essential |wts in the inte«- 
tior, and supplies the juices of the sap to than. These 
p2rts iirej Sd/the stamem and the pisiits. 

Tlie essential part of the stametis ate the sum« 
mits or anthers^ which are usually circular fiind of a 
highly TluseUllr t^ifctiire^ and covered with a fine dust 
):all€^d the pblti^^ 

The pistil is cytihdrical, and surmounted by the 
itfyk / and top of which is generally round afid pro- 
taberaht.* 

In the pistil, wheii it Is examined by the micro* 
scope, congeries of spherical forms may usually bft 
|)erceifed, whi&lt;:h seem to be the bases of the future 
seeds. 

Tt is upbh th^^arrangeiiilent of the stamens and 
the pistils, that the Linnean classification is founded. 
The nan(ibei'^ bf the stamens and pistils in the sam^ 
flbwer, theif iii*angernettts, or their division in differ- 
tot flowersj are th&amp; drcUtnstances which guided th^ 
Swedish philbsbphef , aild enabled him to fbrm a sys^ 
tem adinifably adapted tb ^st the mei^ory, and rem 
del* botany of e^y acqutsitidn ; and which, though it 
does hot always associate together th^ plinth most 
irtalogous to each tttfier In then* jgenei'al characters, is 
yet ^ ihgenioti^y cdhtrived ^ tb d^ftbte kll the analo- 
gies of their mbst tesentid pkn^ . 

The pistil is th(^ btpA Whieh eontaihis die rudi^ 
ihents of the se^d ; but the seed is iiever fortned 2is ^ 

• F%. 1% represents tbe common Hlly, a-, the con&gt;Ua« bVkbht the anthers/ 
^&gt; t)ie ptstii. 



E «8 3 

or fliui^ OB tha ajitb^rsu 

This my^ter^ua if||pressiQi|i is nec^^ ary to the 
Qoxitii^qefi succjesisi9ii of the different vegetable tribes. 
I; ^ a feature yf\dch fxt^^ds t^ r^ seqi|))^(:^ of the 
4i#er^nt orders of t&gt;^g8^ ^d ^tsi^l|st|es, qn a fff§9.% 
^(9ks Ibe beauttfiil anatogy o(f naturey 

The ancients had observed, ths^t 4iffi^r^At 4M0 
tx^^ bpre 4iSereQt fiQwcrs, and that those trees pro- 
ducing flowers which cofitai^^ed pistils boise ho ftuit^ 
iinless in the immediate vidaity of such trees as {«ro# 
d^ced flowers contaijoing stameps. This. Icmg esta* 
bli^ed faiet strongly impressed the mind of Malpighi^ 
who ascertained several analogous &amp;cts with regard ta 
other vegetables. Grew, however, was the first p6^« 
son who attempted to generalize upon them, and 
much just reasoning on the subject n^iy he found in 
his works, Lias^us gave a scieiHifiiC and dsadact 
form to that which Grew bad only generally observe 
ed, and has the glory oi establishing wha^ has be^ 
called the sesual system, upon the basis, of minute cb^ 
servations and accurate ezperime^ts• 

The sf&amp;iit ^e l9St production of vigorous vegeta^ 
tion, is wonderfully diversified in fomu Being cif the 
bighest importance to the i^esources of nature, it ia 
defended above all other parts of the plant j by soft 
pulpy substances, as in the esculiait &amp;uits, by (hick 
membranes, as in thp leguminous vegetables, and b]| 
hard shells, or a thick epidermis, as in the palms and 



C 64 3 

In every seed there is to be distinguished, 1, the 
organ of nourishment ; 2, the nascent plant, or the 
flume ; 3, the nascent root, or the radicle. 

In tlie common garden bean, the organ of nour- 
ishment is divided into two lobes called cotyledons ; the 
plume is the small white point between the upper 
part of the lobes ; and the radicle is the small curved 
cone lat their base,* 

In wheat, and in many of the grasses, the organ 
of nourishment is a smgle part^ and these plants are 
called monocotfkdonous* In other cases it consists of 
more than two parts, when the plants are called foly^ 
cotyledonous. In the greater number of instances, it 
is, however, simply divided into two, and is dicotyle^ 
'donousM 

The matter of the seed, when examined in its 
common state, appears dead and inert; it eshibits 
aeither the"^ forms nor the functions of life. But let 
it be actqd upon by moisture, heat, and air, and its 
organized powers are soon distinctly developed. The 
cotyledons expand, the membranes burst, the radicle 
acquires new matter^ descends into the soil, arid the 
plume ris^ towards the free air. By degrees, the 
organs of nourishment of dicotyledonous plants be- 
come vascular, and are- converted into seed leaves, 
and the perfect plant appears above the soil. Nature 
has provided the elements of germination on every 
part of the surface ; water and pure air and heat are 



radicle 



* Fig. 13, represents the garden hean, aa, the coeyledont&gt; h, «he plame, b, tbe 



p. 64 




C 65 3 

universally active, and the means for the preserva- 
tion and multiplication of life, are at once simple and 
grand. 

To enter into more minute details on the vegetable 
physfology would be incompatible \vith the objects of 
these Lectures. . I have attempted only to give such 
general ideas on the subject, as may enable the philo- 
sophical agriculturist to understand the functions of 
plants ; those who wish to study the anatomy of ve- 
getables, as a distinct science, will find abundant ma- 
terials in the works of the authors I have quoted, 
page 9, and likewise in the writings of Linnaeus, Des- 
fontaines, DecandoUe, de Saussure, Bonnet, and^ 
Smith. 

The history of the p ^culiarities of structure in the 
different vegetable classes, rather belongs to botanical 
than agricultural knowledge. As I mendoned in the 
commencement of this Lecture, their -organs are pos- 
sessed of the most distinct analogies, and are govern- 
ed by the same laws. In the grasses and palms, the 
cordcal layers are larger in proportion than the other 
parts ; bat their uses seem to be the same as in forest 
trees. 

In bulbous roots, the alburhous stibstance forms 
the largest part of the vegetable ; but in all cases it 
seems to contain the sap, or solid materials deposited 
from the sap* 

The slender and comparatively dry leaves of the 
pine and the cedar perform tl^e sanie functions as the 
large and juicy leaves of the fig tree, or the walnut. 



[ 66 ] 

Even in the cryptogamia, where no flowers are 
distinct, still there is every reason' to believe that the 
production of the seed is effected in the same way as 
in the more perfect plants. The mosses and lichens, 
which belong to this family, have no distinct leaves, 
or roots, but they are furnished with filaments which 
perform the same functions ; dnd even in the fungus 
and the mushroom there is a system for the absorp- 
tion and aeration of the sap. 

It was stated in the last lecture, that all the differ- 
ent parts of plants are capable of being decomposed 
into a few elements. Their uses as food, or for the 
purposes of the arts, depend upon compound arrange- 
ments of those elements which are capable of being 
produced either from their organized parts, or from 
the yaices they contain ; and the examination of the 
nature of these substances, is an essential part of Agri- 
, cultural Chemistry. 

Oils are expressed from the fruits of many 
plants i resinous fluids exude from the wood ; sac- 
charine matters are afforded by the sap ; and dyeing 
materials are furnished by leaves, or the petals of 
flowers : but particular processes are necessary to se- 
parate the different cpmpoimd vegetable substances 
from each other ^ such as maceration, infusion or diges- 
tion in water, or in spirits of wine : but the application 
and the nature of these processes will be better under- 
stood when the chemical nature of the substances is 
known ; the consideration of them will therefore be 
reserved for another place in this Lecture. 



, C 67 } 

The compound 'substances found in vegetables 
are, 1 gum, or mucilage, and it^ different modifica- 
tions J 2, starch j 3, sugar ; 4, albumen ; 5, gluten ;^ 
6, gum elastic ; 7, extract ; 8, tannin ; 9, indigo ; 
10, narcotic principle ; 1 1, bitter principle j 12, wax ; 
13, resins ; 14, camphor ; 15^ fixed oils ; 16, vola- 
tile oils J 17&gt; woody fibre ; 18, acids ; 19, alkalies j 
earths, metallic oxides, and saline compounds. 

I shall describe generally the properties and 
composition of these bodies, and the manner in which , 
they are procured* 

1. Gum is a substance which exudes from certain 
trees ; it appears in the form of a thick fluid, but soon 
hardens in the air, and become^ solid : when it is 
white, or yellowish white, more or less transparent, 
and somewhat brittle j its specific gravity varies from 
1300toJ490, 

There is a great variety of gums, but the best 
know are gum arabic, glim Senegal, gum tragacanth, 
and the gum of the plum or cherry tree. Gum is 
soluble in water, but not soluble in spirits of vine. If 
a solution of gum be made in water, and spirits of 
wine or alcohol be added to it, the guni separates in 
the form of white flakes. Gum can be made to in- 
flame only with difficulty j much moisture is given off" 
in the process, which takes place with a dark smoke 
and feeble blue flame, and a coal remains. 

The characteristic properties of gum are its easy 
solubility in water, and its insolubility in alcohol. Dif- 
ferent chemical substances have been proposed for 
ascertaining the presence of gum, but there is reason 



C 70 3 

According to Mr. Gay Lussac and Th^ard, 100 
parts of starch are composed of 

Carbon, with a small quantity of 1 

saline and earthy matter - J ^^»^^ 

^ Oxygene • - . - . 49,68 

Hydrogene - - - - 6,77 
or. 

Carbon - . * - 43,55 

Oxygene and hydrogene in thel 
proportions necessary to form r*- 56,45 
water ^ ■ - - - J 

Supjposing this estimation correct, starch maybe 
conceived to be constituted by 15 proportions of car- 
bon, 13 of oxygene, and 26 of hydrogene. 

Starch forms a principal part of a numb^ of es- 
culent vegetable substances. So\«rans, cassava, salop, 
sago, all of them owe their nutritive powers principal- 
ly to the starch they contain. . 

Starch has been found in tfc following plants : 

Burdock (Arctium Lappa^} \ Deadly Nightshade 
(Atropa Belladonna^) Kstort (Polygonum Bistofia^J 
White Bryony C Bryonia alba^) Meadow Saffron (Col- 
chicum autumnale, J Dropwort (Spiraa Filipisndula^) 
Buttercup (Ranunculus bulbosus^j Figwort (Scropbu- 
laria nodosa^) Dwzrf Elder (SamhucusEbulus, J Com- 
mon Elder (Sambucus nigra^J Foolstones (^Orchis 'Mo* 
rio^J Alexanders (Imperdioria Ostrutbium^J Henbane. 
(Hyoscyamus niger^J BrozdAeByed Dock ( Rumex obtu^ 
sifoliusyj Sharp Pointed Dock (Rumex acutus^ Water 
Dock {Rumex acquaticusy) Wake Robin (Arum macU' 



laiumy) Salep (Orchir mascula^) Flower de luce, or 
Water Flag (Iris Pseudacorus^) Stinking Gl^dwyn (Iris 
fostidissimaj') Earthaut (Bunium Bulbopastanum.) 

3. Sugar in its purest state is prepared from the 
expressed juice of the Saccharum Officinarum^ or sugar 
canp ; the acid in this juice is neutralized by lime, 
and the sugar is crystallized by the evaporation of the 
aqueous parts of the juice, and slow-cooling : it is 
rendered white by the gradual filtration of water 
through it. In the con^mon process of manufacture, 
the whitening or refining of sugar is only affected in a 
' great length of time ; the water being gradually suf- 
fered to percolate through a stratum of clay above the 
sugar. As the colouring matter of sugar is soluble 
in a saturated solution of sugar, or syrup, it appears 
that refining may be much more rapidly and oecono- 
mically performed by the action of syrup on coloured 
sugai*.* The sensible properties of sugar are wdl 
known. Its specific gravity according to Fahrenheit 
is about 1.6. It is soluble in its own weight of water 
at 5(y ; it is likewise soluble in alcohol, but in smal- 
ler proportions. 



• A French gentleman laUly in this co«ntry (England), stated to the West 
India planters, that he was in possession of a very expeditious and economical 
method of porifying and reiSning sugar, which he was willing to communicate to 
them for a very ^at pecuniary compensation. His terms were too high to be 
acceded to. Conversing on the subject .with Sir Joseph Banks, I mentioned to 
him, that I thought it probable that raw sugar might be easily purified by passing 
syrup through it, which would dissolve the colouring matter. The same idea 
seems to have occurred about the same time, or before, to Edward Howard, Esq, 
who has since proved its efficacy experimentally, and has published an account of 
his process. 



^€y 



C w ] 



Lavoisier concluded from his experiments, that 
sugar consists in 100 parts of ** 

28 carbon, 

8 hydrogene, 
64 OX) gene. 
Dr. Thomson considers 100 parts of sugar as 
composed of ^ 27,5 carbon, 

7,8 hydrogene, 
64,7 oxygene. 
According to the recent experiments of Gay 
Lussac and Thenard, sugar consists of 

42,47 of carbon, and ^ 

57,53 of water, or its elements. 
Lavoisier's and Dr. Thomson's analyses agree 
very nearly with the proportions of ** 

3 of carbon, 

4 of oxygene, and 
8 of hydrogene* 

Gay Lussac's and Thenard's estimation gives the 
same elements as in gum ; 1 1 of carbon, 10 of oxy- 
gene, 20 of hydrogene. 

It appears from the experiments of Proust, Ach- 
ard, Goettling and Parmentier, that there are many 
difierent species of sugar ready formed in the vegeta- 
ble kingdom. The sugar which most nearly resem- 
bles that of the cane is extracted from the sap of the 
American maple, Acer saccharinum. This sugar is used 
by the North American farmers, who procure it by a 
kind of domestic manufacture. T^ie trunk of the tree 
^ is bored early in spring, to the depth of about two in- 
ches ; a wooden spout is introduced into the hole } the 



C 73 2 

juice flows for about five ,or six weeks. A common 
sized tree, that is, a tree from two to three feet in 
diameter, will yield about 200 pints of sap, and every 
40 pints of sap afford about a pound of sugar. The 
sap is neutralized by lime, and deposits crystals of 
sugar by evaporation. 

TIi^ sugar of grapes has been lately employed iii 
France as a substitute for colonial sugar. It is pro- 
cured from the juice of ripe grapes by evaporation, and 
the action of pot-ashes ; it is less sweet than common 
sugar, and its taste is peculiar : it produces a sensa^ 
tion of cold while dissolving in the mouth ; and it is 
probable contains a larger proportion pf water or its 
elements. 

. The roots of the beet (Beta vulgaris and cicla^ 
afford a peculiar sugar, by boiUng, and the evapora- 
tion of the extract : it agrees in its general properties 
with the sugar of grapes, but has a slightly bitter 
taste. 

Manna^ a substance which exudes from various 
trees, particularly from the Fraxintis Omus^ a species 
of aish, which grows abundantly in Sicily and Calabria, 
may be regarded as a variety of sugar, very analo- 
gous to the sugar of grapes. A substance analogous 
to manna has been extracted by Fourcroy and Vau« 
quelin, froih the juice of the common onion (Allium 
Cepa.) 

Besides the crystallized and solid sugars, there 
appears to be a sugar which cannot be separated from 
watar, and which exists only in a fluid form ; it con- 
stitutes a principal part of melasses or treacle ^ and it 



C H 3 

is found in a variety of fruits : it is more soluble in 
alcohol than solid sugar. ' ' 

The simplest mode of detecting sugar is that re- 
commended by Margiiaaf. The vegetable is to be 
boiled in a small quantity of alcohol ; solid sugar, if 
any exist, will separate during the cooling of the solu- 
tion. 

Sugar has been extracted from the following ve- 
getable substances. 

The sap of the Birch (Betula albai) of the Sy- 
camore {Jeer Pseudoplatanusyj of the Bamboo {Arun^ 
do Bambos^) of the Maize (Zea mays,) of the Cow 
Parsnip (Heracleum Sphondyliuntj) of the Cocoa-nut 
tree (Cocos nucifera^ of the Walnut tree (Juglans 
^Ibai) of t^ie American Aloe {Agave merkana^ 6i the 
Dulse {fuctis Pahtaius^ of the Common Parsnip 
(Pasiinica sativay) of St. John's bread (Ceratonia Silh 
quai) the fruit of the common Arbutus (Arbutus 
Unedoj) and other sweet-tasted fruits ; the roots of 
the turnip {Brassica Rapa^ of the carrot (Daucus Car^ 
ofa,) of Parsley {Apium Petroselinunij) the flower of 
the Euxine Rhododendron (Rhododendron ponticum,) 
and from the nectarium of most other flowers. 

The nutritive properties of sugar are well known. 
Since the British market has been over-stocked with 
this article from the West India, islands, proposak 
have been made for applying it as the food of cattle j 
experiments have been made which proved that they 
may be fattened by it ; but difliculties connected with 
the duties laid on sugar, have hitherto prevented the 
plan from being tried to any extent. 



. i: 75 3 

4. Albumen is a substance which has only lately 
been discovered in the vegetable kingdom. It abounds 
in the juice of the papaw-tree (Carica papaya) : when 
this juice is boiled the albumen falls down in a coagu- 
lated state* It is likewise found in mushrooms, and 
ixx different species of funguses. 

Albumen in it^ pure ^Drm, is a thick, glairy, taste- 
less fluid ; precisely the same as the white of the egg ; it 
is solublef^in cold water ; its solution, when not too di- 
luted, is coagulated by boiling, and the albumen separ- 
ates in the form of thin flakes. Albumen is likewise 
coagulated by acids and by alcohol : a solution of al- 
bumen gives a precipitate when mixed with a cold 
solution of nut-galls. Albumai when burnt produces 
a smell of volatile alkali, and afibrds carbonic acid and 
water; it is therefore evidently principally competed 
of carbon, hydrogene, oxygene, and azote. 

According to the experiments of Gay Lussac and 
Thenard, 100 parts of albumen from the white of the 
egg are composed of 

Carbon • * 52,S83 

Oxygene - . 23,872 

Hydrogene - •■ 7,540 

Azote - - - 15,705 

This estimation would authorise the supposition, 
that albumen is composed of 2 proportions of azote, 
5 oxygene, 9 carbon^ 22 hydrogene* 

The principal part of the almond, and of the 
kernels of many other nuts, appears from the experi- 
ment^ of Proust, to be a substance analogous to co 
agulated albumen. 



W C 76 3 

Tlie jmce of the fruit of the Ochra (Hibiscus 
eseulentus)j according to Dr, Clarke, contains a liquid 
albumen in such quantities, &amp;at it is employed in 
Dominica as a substitute £oy the white of e^ in clari* 
fying the juice of the sugar cane. 

Albumen may be distinguished from other sub- 
stances by its property of coagulating by the action of 
heat or acids, when dissolved in water. According 
to Dr« Bostock&gt; when the solution contains only one 
grain of albumen to 1000 grains of water, it becomes 
cloudy by bmg heated. 

Albumen is a substance common to the animal 
as well as to the vegetable kingdom, and much more 
abundant in the former. 

5. G/2£f^)i may be obtained from wheaten flour by 
the following process : the flour is to be made into a 
paste, which is to be cautiously washed, by kneading 
it under a small stream of water, till the water has 
carried off" from it all the starch ; what remains is 
gluten. It is a tenacious, ductile, elastic substance. 
It has no taste. By exposure to air it becomes of 
a brown colour. It is very slightly soluble in cold 
water but not soluble in alcohol. When a solution 
of it in water is heated, the gluten separates in the 
form of yellow flakes ; in this respect it agrees with 
albumen, but differs from it in being infinitely Jess 
soluble in water. The solution of albumen does not 
coagulate when it contains much less than 1000 parts 
of albufnen i but it appears that gluten requires more 
than 1000 puts of cold water for its solution* 



Gluten when burnt affords similar products to 
albumen, and probably ctiffers very little from it in 
composition. Gluten is found in a great number of 
plants ; Proust discovered it in acorns, chesnuts, 
horse chesnuts, apples, and quince^ ; barley, rye, peas 
and beans ; likewise in the leaves of rue, cabbage, 
creisses, hemlock, borage, saffron, in the berries of 
the elder, and in the grape. Gluten appears to be 
one of the most nutritive of the vegetable substances ; 
and wh&amp;t seems to owe its superiority to other grain, 
from the circumstance of its containing it in larger 
qus^tities. 

6. Cum elastic^ or Caoutchouc^ is procured from 
the juice of a tree which grows in the Brazils, called 
Hasvea. When the .tree is punctured, a milky juice 
exudes from it, which gradually deposits a solid sub* 
stance, and this is gum elastic. 

&lt; Gum elastic is pliable and soft like leather, and be- 
* comes softer when heated* In its pure state it is white ; 
its specific gravity is 93S5. It is combustible, and 
bums with a white flame, throwing off* a dense smoke, 
with a very vdisagreeable smell. It is insoluble in wa« 
ter, and in alcohol ; it is soluble in ether, volatile oils, 
and in petroleum^ and may be procured from ether in 
an unaltered state, by evaporating its solution in that 
liquid. Gum elastic seeihs to exist in a great variety 
of plants : amongst them are, Jatropha elastica^ Ficus 
indica^ Artocarpus inUgrifolia^ and Urce$ta elastica. 

Bird*lime, a substance which may be procured 
frcmt the holly, is very analogous to gum elastic in its 
properties. Species of gum elastic may be obtained 



C V8 ] 

from the misletoe, from gummastic, opiumi and from 
the berries of the Smilax caduca, in which last plant it 
has been lately discovered by Dr. Barton. 

Gum elastic, when distilled, affords yolatile al- 
kali, water hydrogene, and carbon in different com* 
binations. It therefore consists principally of azot^ 
hydrogene, oxygene, and carbon ; but the proportions 
in which they are combined have not yet been ascer- 
tained. Gum elastic is an indigestible substance, not 
fitted for the food of animals ; its uses in the arts are 
well known. 

7. Extract^ or the extractive principle^ exists in 
almost all plants. It may be procured in a state of 
tolerable purity from saffron, by merely infusing it in 
water, and evaporating the solution. It may likewise be 
obtained from catechu, or Terra japonica^ a substance 
brought from India. This substance consists princi* 
pally of astringent matter, and extract ; by the action 
of water upon it, the astringent matter is first dissol- 
vedg and may be separated from the extract. Extract 
is always more or less coloured ; it is soluble in alcohol 
and water, but not soluble in ether. It unites with alu* 
mina when that earth is boiled in a solution of ex* 
tract , and it is precipitated by the salts of alumina, 
and by many metallic solutions, particularly the solu- 
tion of muriate of tin. 

From the products of its distillation, it seems to 
be composed principally of hydrogene, oxygene, car- 
bon, and a little azote. 

There appears to be almost as many varieties of 
extract as there are species of plants* The difference 



C 79 3 

of their properties probably in many cases depends 
upon their being combined with small quantities of 
other vegetable principles, or t6 their containing differ- 
ent saline, alkaline, acid, or earthy ingredients. Maiiy 
dyeing substances seem to be of the nature of extrac- 
tive principle, such as the red colouring matter of 
madder, and the yellow dye, procured from weld. 

Extract has a strong attraction for the fibres of 
cotton or linen, and combines with these substances 
when they are boiled in a solution of it. The com- 
bination is made stronger by the intervention of mor- 
dants, which are earthy or metallic combinations that 
unite to the cloth, and enable the colouring matter to 
adhere more strongly to its fibres. 

Extract, in its pure form, cannot be used as an 
article of food, but it is probably nutritive when united 
to starch, mucilage, or sugar, 

8. Tannin^ or the tanning principle, may be pro- 
cured by the action of a small quantity of cold water 
on bruised grape-seeds, or poanded gall-nut j and by 
the evaporation of the solution to dryness. It appears 
as a yellow substance, possessed of a highly astrin- 
gent taste. It is difficult of combustion. It is very 
soluble both in water and alcohol, but insoluble in 
efher. When a solution of glue, or isinglass (geJatme) 
is mixed with an aqueous solution of tannin, the two 
substances, i. e. the animal and vegetable matters fall 
down in combination, and form an insoluble precipi-* 
tate. 

When tannin is distilled in close vessels, the prijx- 
ctjpal products are charcoal^ carbonic acid, and inflam- 



C 80 3 

mable gasses, with a minute quantity of v^^latile alkaH. 
Hence its elements seem the same as those of extract, 
but probably in different proportions. The charac- 
teristic property of tannin is its action upon solutions '* 
of isinglass or jelly ; this particularly distinguishes it 
fr6m extract, with which it agrees in most other che- 
mical qualities. 

There are many varieties of tannin, which pro- 
bably owe the difference of their properties to com- 
binations with other principles, especially extract, 
from which it is not easy to free tannin. The purest 
species of tannin is that obtained from the seeds of the 
grape ; this forms a white precipitate, with solution 
of isinglass. The tannin from gall-nuts resembles it 
in its properties. That from sumach affords a yellow 
precipitate; that from kino a rose coloured; that 
from catechu a fawn coloured one. The colouring 
matter of Brazil wood, which M. Chevreul considers 
as a peculiar principle, and which he has called Hema- 
tiney differs from other species of tannin, in affording 
a precipitate with gelatine, which is soluble in abun- 
dance of hot water. Its taste is much sweeter than 
that of the other varieties of taimin, and it may per- 
haps be regarded as a substance intermediate between 
tannin and extract* 

Tannin is not a nutritive substance, but is of 
great importance in its application to the art of tanning. 
Skin consists almost entirely of jelly or gelatine^ iii an 
organized state, and is soluble by the long continued 
action of boiling water When skin is exposed to so- 
lutions containing tannin, it slowly combines with 



c 



81 



that principle ; iw fibrous texture and coherence are 
preserved ; it is rendered perfectly insoluble in water, 
and is no longer liable to putrefaction : in short, it 
becomes a substance in chemical composition pre- 
cisely analogous to that furnished by the solution of 
jelly and the solution of tannin. 

In general, in this country, the bark of the oak 
is used for affording tannin in the manufacture of 
leather ; but the barks of some other trees, particu- 
larly the Spanish chesnut, have lately come into use. 
The following table will give a general idea of the re- 
lative value of different species of barks. It is founded 
on the result of experiments made by mystflf. 

Table of Numbers exhibiting the quantity of Tannin af 
forded by 480lbj. of dijffirent Barks j which express 
nearly their relative values. 



Artrft^e of onttre bark of middle sited Oak, cot in spring* 
— of Spanish Chesnat, 

-^ — — — ^-. of Z«ei€e8ter Willow, large 

- M I * t&gt; of I Jaa, 

■ i ■ . — — of Common Willow, large, 

n i . - - .1 .■I — .1.11. of Ash, - - - 

— I ' ■ of Beech, 

—--.*-—— of Horse Ches»at, • 
I. I of Sycamore, 

. .■ of Lombaidy Poplar, 

- ■* - ■ of Birch, 

M " ~... I . of H^zel, 

., I , &gt;•■ of Black Thorn 

' ' — of Coppice 6ak# 
, Ml " — ■ of Oak cttt in autmmi, 
I of Larch, cat in aotumn, 



White Interior cortical layers of Oak Bark, 



lb. 
29 
SI 
33 
13 
11 
16 
10 

9 
11 
15 

8 
14 
15 
3S 
31 

8 
72 



The quantity of the tanning principle in barks 
SSkt% iu (Afferent seasons ; when the spring has been 



. C 82 3 

cold the quantity is smallest. On an average, 4 or 
5lbs. of good oak bark are required to form lib. of 
kather. The inner cortical layers in all barks con- 
tain the largest quantity of tannin. Barks contain the 
greatest proportion of tannin at the time the buds be- 
gin to open— the smallest quantity in winter. 

The extractive or colouring matters found in 
barks, or in substances used in tanning, influence the 
quality of leather. Thus skin tanned with gall-nuts 
is much paler than skin tanned with oak bark, which 
contains a brown extractive matter. Leather made 
from catechu is of a reddish tint. It is probable that 
in the process of tanning, the matter of skin, and the 
tanning principle first enter into union, and that leather 
at the moment of its formation unites to the extractive 
matter. 

In general, skins in being converted into leather 
increase in weight about one third j* and the opera- 
tion is most perfect when they are tanned slowly. 
When skins are introduced into very strong infusions 
of tannin, the exterior parts immediately combine with 
that principle, and defend the interior parts from the 
action of the solution : such leather is liable to crack 
and to decay by the action of water.^ 

The precipitates obtained from infusions contain- 
ing tannin by isinglass, when dried, contain at a medi- 
um rate about 40 per cent, of vegetable matter. It 
is easy to obtain the comparative value of different 
substances for the use of the tanner^ by comparing 

• This estimation ma»t be considertd as applying to dry skin and 4ry leather' 



C 83 3 

quantities of precipitate afforded by infusions of given 
weights mixed with solutions 6f glue or isinglass. 

To m,ake experiments of this kind, an ounce or 
480 grains of the vegetable substance in coarse pow- 
der, should be acted upon by half a pint of boiling 
water. The mixture should be frequently stirred, and 
suffered to stand 24 hours ; the fluid should then be 
passed through a fine linen cloth and mixed with an 
equal quantity of solution of gelatine, made by dissolv- 
ing glue^ j^lty^ o^ isinglass in hot water, in the pro* 
portion of a drachm of glue or isinglass, or six table 
spoonfuls of jelly, to a pint of water. The precipitate 
should be collected by passing the mixture of the solu* 
-don and infusion through folds of blotting paper ; and 
the paper exposed to the air till its contents are quite 
dry. If pieces of paper of equal weights are used, in 
cases in which different vegetable substances are em- 
ployed, the difference of the weights of the papers 
when dried, tdU indicate vath tolerable accuracy, the 
quantities of tannin contsuned by the substances, and 
their relative value, for the purposes of manufacture. 
Four tenths of the increase of weight, in grains, must 
be taken, which will be in relation to the weights in 
the table. 

Besides the barks already mentioned, there are a 
number of others which contain the tanning prindple. 
Few barks indeed are entire free from it. It is like- 
wise found in the wood and leaves of a number of 
trees and shrubs, and is one of die most generallydif'^ 
fused of the vegetable principles. 

A substance very similar to tannin has been 



formed by Mr« Hatcbett, by the action of heated diiu* 
ted nitric acid on charcoal^ and evaporation of the 
HHxtuFe to drynei&amp;$. From 100 grains of charcoal 
Mr. Hatchett obtained 120 grams of artificisd tannin, 
which, like neural tamib, posseted the property of 
Slendering skin insoluble inifmtdt*^ 

Both natural and ardfidal tatmin foi^ com« 
pounds with the alkalies uid tb^ alkaline earths ^ and 
these compounds are not decomposable by ^kin. The 
attempts tbat have been made to lender oak hark 
xxiore efficient as a tanning material by infusion in lime 
water, dre consequently founded on erroneons prindn- 
pies. lime forms with tannm, a compound Bot so^ 
luble in water. 

The acids unitt to tannin^ and produce com* 
pounds that are more or less soluble in water* It is 
probable that in some vegetable substances taxmin 
exists, combined witb alkaline or earthy matter; and 
such substances will be rendered more efficacious for 
the use of the tanner, by the action of diluted acids. 

9. hdigo may be procured from woad (^hatis tinc^ 
ioria^ by digesting alcohol on it, and evaporating the 
solution. White crystalline grains are obtsemed, 
which gradually become blue by the action of Ac at- 
mosphere : these grains are the substance in question. 

The indigo of commerce is principally brought 
from America. It is procured from the Indi^rfera 
^rgenUa^ or wild indigo, the Im^(ffsra disperrmt or 
Gautimala Indigo, and the Indigtfera tinctoria^ or 
French indigo. It is prepared by fermmting the 
leaves of those trees in water* XndigQ in its common 



I5rm appears as a fine, ^^ Hut pdvdtr* It is in- 
soluble in water, and but slightly splabla in alcobol ; 
its true solvent is sulphuric add : 8 parts of sulphu- 
ric add dissolve I part of indigo 4 and the solution 
diluted with water forms a veiy fine blue dye. 

Im]i%o, by its di^illatian, affords carbonic acid 
gas^ water, t:harcoal, ammonia, and some oily and 
wd maitter : the chairoal is in very large proportion* 
Pure indigo 'therefore most probably consists of car- 
bim, hydrogene^ exygene, and azote. 

Indigo owes its bhie colour to combinadon with 
oxygene. For the uses of the dyers it is partly de- 
prived of oxygene, by digesting it with orpiment and 
lime water, when it becomes soluble in the lime water, 
and of a greenish colour. Cloths steeped in this so- 
lution combine with the indigo ; they are green when 
taken out of the liquor, but become blue by absorb- 
%ig oxgene when ex^sed to air. 

indigo is one ci the most valuable and most ex- 
tensively used of the dyeing materials. 

10. The narcotic principie is found abundandy in 
opium^ which is obtained from the juice of the white 
poppy, (^Papav^r alkum)^ To procure the narcodc 
principle, water is digested upon opium : the solution 
dbtson^d is evaporated till it becomes of the consistence 
of a syrup. By the addition r of cpld water to this 
syn^ a precipitate is obtained. Alchohol is boiled on 
this precipitate; during ^the cooling of the alcohol 
crystals Ml down« These crystals are to be again 
dissolved in alcohol, and again predpitated by cool- 
ii^ : and the process is to be repeated till their colour 
is white j they are crystals of narcotic principle. 



13* Reiin is very common in the vegetable king- 
dom. One of the most usual species is that afforded 
by the different kinds of fir. When a portion of the' 
bark is removed from a fir tree in spring, a matter 
exudes^ which is called turpentine ; by heating this 
turpentine gently, a volatile oil rises from it, and a 
more fixed substance remains; this substance is 
resin. 

The resin of the fir is the substance commonly 
known by the name of rosin ; its properties are well 
known. Its specific gravity is 1072. It melts readily, 
bums with a yellow light, throwing oflF much smoke. 
Resin is insoluble in water either hot or cold ; but 
very soluble in alcohoL When a solution of resin in 
alcohol is mixed with water, the solution becomes 
milky; the resin is depositfed by the stranger attrac- 
tion of the water for the alcohoL 

Resins are obtained from many other species of 
trees. Mastich^ from the Pistacia lentiscusy Elemi 
from the Amyris demifera^ Copal from the Rhus copaU 
linum^ Sandarach from the common jumper. Of these 
resins copal is the most peculiar. It is the most diffi- 
cultly dissolved hi alcohol;^ and'^for this purpose 
must be exposed to that substance in vapour , or the 
alcohol employed must hold camphor in solution. Ac« 
cordmg to Gay Lussac and Thenard, 
loo parts of common resin contain 

Carbon - . &gt; . - 75,944 
Oxygene . - . . 13,337 
Hydrogene - - - * 10,719 



C 89' 3 

or of 

Carbon • . - . . 75,944 
Oxygene and hydrogene in the pro-1 
portions necessary to form water J ' 
Hydrogene in excess * - 8,900 

According to the same chemists, 100 parts of co- 
pal consist of 

Carbon - - - - 76,811 
Oxygene - % - - 10,606 
Hydrogene - - - - 12,583 
or^ 

Carbon - - - - 76,811 
Water or its elements - - 12,052 
Hyrogene - - •- - 11,137 
From these results, if resin be a definite com* 
pomid, it may be supposed to consist of 8 proportions 
of carbon, 12 of hydrogene, and 1 of oxygene. 

Resins are used for a variety of purposes. Tar 
and pitch principally consist of resin, in apaxtially de- 
composed state. Tar is made by die slow combustion 
of the fir ; and pitch by the evaporation of the more 
volatile parts of tar. Resins are employed as var- 
nishes, and for these purposes are dissolved inako- 
hol or oils. Copal forms one of the finest. It may 
be made by boiling it in powder with oil of rosemary, « 
and then adding alcohol to the solution. 

14. Camphor is procured by distilling the wood 
of the camphor tree (Laurus Camphora^ which grows 
in Japan. It is a very volatile body, and may be pu- 
lified by distillation. Camphor is a white, brittle, 
;5emitranspareat substance^ having a peculiar odour, 

N 



[90 3 

and ^ strong acrid taste. It is very slightly soluble 
in water ; more than 100,000 parts of water are re- 
quired to dissolve 1 part of camphor. It is very solu- 
ble in alcohol ; and by adding water in small quantities 
at a time to the solution of camphor in alcohol^ the 
camphor separates in a crystallised form. It is solu- 
ble in nitric acid, and is separated from it by water. 

Camphor is very inflammable ; it bums with a 
bright flatae, and throws off a great quantity of car- 
bonaceous matter. It forms in combustion water, 
carbonic acid, and a peculiar acid called camphoric^ 
acid. No accurate analysis has been made of camphor, 
bu( it seems to approach to the resins in its composi- 
tion ; and consists of carbon, hydrogene, and oxy- 
gene. 

Camj^or exists in other plants besides the Lau* 
rus camphora. It is procured from species of the lau- 
rus growing in Sumatra, Borneo, and other of the 
East Indian isles. It has been obtained from thyme 
(Thymus serpillum^) marjorum (Origanum majorana^ 
Ginger tree (Amomum Zingiber^) Sage (Salvia qffidn^ 
alts.) Many volatile oils yield caqiphor by bang 
merely exposed to the air. 

An artificial substance very similar to camphor 
i has been formed by M. Kind, by saturating oil of tur- 
pentine with muriatic acid gas (the gaseous substance 
procured from common salt by the action of sulphuric 
add). The camphor procured in well conducted ex- 
periments amounts to half of the oil of turpentme 
used. It agrees with common camphor in most of its 
sensible properties; but differs materially in its che- 



C • 91 3 

mical qualities and composition. It is i^ot soluble 

without decomposition in nitric acid. From the ex* 

perimerits of Gehlen, it appears to consist of the ele- 

mmts of oil of turpentine, carbon, hydrogene an4 

oxygene, united to the elements of muriatic gas^ 

chlorine and hydrogene. 

From the analogy of artificial to natural camphor^ 

it does not appear improbable, that natural camphor 
may be a secondary vegetable compound, consisting 
of cainphoric acid and volatile oil. Ciamphor is used 
medicinally, but it has no other application. 

15. FtxedoH is obtained by expression from seeds 
and fruits ; the oUve, the almond, linseed and rape- 
s' afford the most common vegetable fixed oils. 
The properties of fitted oils are well known. Their 
specific gravity is less than that of water ; that of olive 
and of rape-seed oil is pl3 ; that of linseed and al- 
mond oil 952 ; that of palm oil 968 ; that of walnut 
and beech mast oil 923. Many of th^ fixed oils con- 
geal at a lower temperature than that at which water 
freezes* They sdl require for their evaporation a 
higher temperature than that at which water boils. 
The products, of the combustion of oil are water, and 
carbonic acid gas. 

From the experiments of Gay Lussac and Then- 
ard, it appears that olive ^1 contains, in 100 parts. 
Carbon - - - # - 77,218 
Oxygene - - - - 9,427 

Hydrogene - - - - 13,360 
This estimation is a near approximation to 1 1 pro* 
portions of carbon, 20 hydrogene, and 1 oxygene. 



C 92 3 

The following is a list of fixed oils, and of the 
trees that afford them. 

Olive oil, from the Olive tree (Olea Europed)^ 
Linseed oil, from the copimon and perennial Fhts 
{Linum usitatissimum et perenne^) Nut oil, from the 
Hazel nut {Coryllus avelland)^ Vf?]xiMt (Juglans regia\ 
Hemp oil, from the Hemp (Cannabis safiva\ Almond 
oil, from the sweet Almond (jlmygdalus communis)^ 
Beech* oil, from the common Beech (Fagta sjlvatka)^ 
Rape-seed oil, from the Rapes (Brassica napus et cam- 
pestris)y Poppy oil, *from the Poppy (Papaver somn^e- 
rum\ oilof Sesamum, from the Sesamum (Sw^;w«m 
orientale)y Cucumber oil, from the Gomds (Ciscurbita 
pepo et malapepo)^ oil of Mustard, (Sinaph nigra et or- 
vensis\ oil of Sunflower, from the annual and peren-^ 
nial Sunflower, (tielianthus annum et perennis)^ Castor 
oil, from the Palma Christi (Ricinus communis)^ To- 
bacco (Nicotiana tabacum et rustica). Plum keimel bil, 
from the Plum tree (Prunus domestical Grape-seed 
oil, from the Vine (Vitis vinifera^ Butter of cacoa&gt; 
from the Cacoa tK^ (Theobroma cacoa^ Laurel oil, 
from^ the sweet Bay tree (Laurus nobilis\ 

The fixed oils are very nutritive substances j they 
are of great importance in their applications to the 
purposes of life. Fixed oil, in combination with soda, 
forms the finest kind of hard soap. The fixed oils 
are used extensively in the mechanical arts, and for 
the preparation of pigments and varnishes* 

16. Vjolatile oil^ likewise called essential mly dificrs 
from fixed dl, in being capable of evajx^eadon by a 
much lower degree of heat } in being soluble in aico- ' 



t'-'JI;*..^'-. W 



C 93 ] 

hol, and in possessirg a very slight degree of solubili'* 
ty in water. 

There is a great number of volatile oils, distin- 
guished by their smell, their taste, their specific gra- 
vity, and other sensible qualities. A strong and pecu- 
liar odour may however be considered a^s the gre^ 
characteristic of each species ; the volatile oils inflame 
.vith more iacility than the filed oils, and afford by 
their combustion different proportions of the same 
substances, water, carbonic acid, and carbon. f 

The foUowiqg specific gravities of different volai 
die oils were ascertained by Dr, Lewis. 

Oil of Sassafras 1094 Oil of Tansy 946 

Cinnamon 1Q85 -.4— Caraway 940 

— — Cloves 1034 — Origanum 940 

Fennel 9a7 — — Spike 936 

Dill 994 -Rosemary 934 

Penny Royal 978 ^ — Juniper 911 

-— ^ Cums^ 97s -^T'— Oranges 888 

Mint .975 — ^Turpentine 792 

~— -Nutmegs 948. 
The peculiar odours of pls^nts seem, in almost 
all cases, to depend upon the peculiar volatile oils they 
contain. All the perfumed distilled waters owe their 
peculiar propoties to the volatile oils they hold in so- 
lution. By collecting the aromatic oils, the fragrance 
of flowers, so fugitive in the common coui«e of na- 
ture, is as it ware embodied and li^e permanent. 

It cannot be doubted that the volatile oils con- 
sist of carbon, hydrogene, and oxygene \ but no ac- 
curate experimaits have as yet been made on the 
proportions in which these elements are combined. 



C 9* ] 

The volatile oils have never been used as articles 
of food J many of them are employed in the arts, in 
the manufacture of pigments and varnish ; but their 
most extensive application is as perfumes. 

17 Woody fibre is procured from the wood, bark, 
leaves, or flowers of trees, by exposing them to the 
repeated action of boiling water and boiling alcdhoL 
It is the insoluble matter that remains, and is the basts 
of the solid organised parts of plants. There are as 
many varieties of woody fibre as there are plants and 
organs of plants ; but they are all distinguished by 
their fibrous texture, and their insolubility. 

Woody fibre bums with a yellow flame, and pro- 
duces water and carbonic acid in burning. When it 
is distilled in close vessels, it yields a considerable 
residuum of charcoal. It is from woody fibre, indeed, 
that charcoal is procured for the purposes of life. 

The following table contains Ae results of expe« 
riments made by Mr* Mushet, on the quantity of char- 
coal afforded by different wood. 
100 parts of Lignum Vita&amp; - 26,8 of charcoal 



-—Mahogany - 25,4 

— Laburnum - 24,5 

— Chesnut - - 23,2 
--Oak . - 22,6 

— American black Beech 2 1 ,4 

— Walnut - - 20,6 

— Holly . . 19,9 
-Beech ^ - 19,9 

— American Maple 1 9,9 

— Elm . . 19,5 



C 95 2 

lOOpartsof Norway Pine - " 19,2 of charcoal 

Sallow . 1 18,4 

. Ash - - 17,9 

. Birth - . 17,4 

' Scottish Fir - 1 6,4 

M. Gay Lussac and Thenard have concluded 

from their experiments on the wood of the oak and 

the beech, that 100 parts of the first contain : 
of Carbon - - . - 52,53 

— Oxygene - - - 41,78 

— Hydrogene - - . 5^69 
and 100 parts of the second : 

of Carbon - - - - 51,45 

---Oxygene * . . 42,73 

— Hydrogene - - - 5,82 
Supposing woody fibre to be a definite compound, 

these estimations lead to the conclusion, that it con- 
sists of 5 proportions of carbon, 3 of oxygene, and 
6 of hydrogene j or 57 carbon, 45 oxygene, and 6 
hydrogene. 

It will be unnecessary to speak of the applications 
of woody fibre. The diiSerent uses of the woods, 
cotton, linen, the barks of trees, are sufficiently 
knovm. Woody fibre appears to be an indigestible 
substance. 

18. The acids found in the vegetable kingdoni 
are numerous ; the true vegetable acids which exist 
ready formed in the juices or organs of plants, are 
the oxalic^ citric j tartaric^ benzoic^ aceticytmlic^ gallic^ 
and prussic add- 



t ^ 3 

All these acids, except the acetic, malic, and 
prussic acids, are ivhite crystallized bodies. The 
acetic, malic, and prussic acids have been obtained in 
the onty fluid state ; they are all more or less solu- 
ble in water ; all have a sour taste except the gallic 
and prussic acids ; of which the first has an astringent 
taste, and the latter a taste like that of bitter almonds. 

The oxalic acid exists, uncombined, in the liquor 
which exudes from the Chich pea (Cieer arietinum)y 
, and may be procured from wood sorrel (Oxalis acetth 
. 5eUa\ common sorrel, and other species of Rumex^ 
and from the Geranium acidum. Oxalic acid is easily 
discoved and distinguished from other acids by its 
property of decomposing all calcareous salts, and 
forming with lime a sah insoluble in water ; and by 
its crystallizing in four-sided prisms. 

The citric acid is the^pe'cuhar add easting in the 
juice of lemons and oranges. It may likewise be ob- 
tained from the cranberry, whortleberry, and hip. 

Citric acid is distinguished by its forming, a salt 
insolub^ in water with lime ; but deconq)OsaJ)le by 
the mineral acids. 

The tartaric acid may be obtained from the juice 
of mulberries and grapes ; and likewise from the pulp 
of the tamarind. It is characterized by its property 
of forming a difficultly soluble salt with potassa, and 
an insoluble ^It decomposable by the mineral adds 
with lime. 

Benzoic acid may be procured from several re- 
smous substances by distillation ; from benzoin, 
storax, and balsam of Tolu. It is distinguished from 



C 97 3 

the other adds by its aromatic odour, and by its ex' 
treme vofeitility. 

Malic acid may be obtained from the juice of 
apples, barberries, plums, elderberries, currants, 
stawberries, and raspberri^. It forms a soluble salt 
with lime; and is easily distinguished by this test 
from the acids already named. 

Acetic acid, or vinegar, may be obtained from 

the sap of different trees. It is distinguished from 

^ malic add by its peculiar odour ; and from the other 

vegetable acids by forming soluble salts with the alka« 

lies and earths. 

Gallic acid may be obtained by gently and gradu^ 
ally heating powdered gall nuts, and receiving the vo- 
latile matter in a cool vessel. A number of white 
crystals will appear, which are distinguished by thdr 
property of rendering solutions of iron, deep purple. 

The .vegetable prussic acid is procured by distil- 
ling laurel leaves, or the kemela of the peach, and 
cherry, or bitter alrtionds. It is characterized by its 
property of foritiing a bludsh green jMrecipitate, when 
a little alkali is added to it, and it is poured into solu- 
tions containing iron. It is very analogous in its pro* 
perties to the prussic acid obtained from animal sub* 
stances ; or by passing ammonia over heated charcoal ; 
but thi^ last body forms, with the red oxide of iron, 
the deep bright blue substance, called Prussian blue* 

Two other vegetable acids have beep found in 
the products of plants $ the morolyxic acid in a saline 
exudation from the' white mulberry tree, and the kinic^ 
add in a salt afforded by Peruvian bark ; but these 



C 98 ] 

two bodies have as yet been discovered in no other 
cases. The phosphoric acid is found free in the 
onion ; and the ' phosphoric, sulphuric, muriatic, and 
nitric acids, exist in many saline compounds in the 
vegetable kingdom ; but they cannot with propriety 
be considered as vegetable products. Other acids 
are produced during the combusticm of vegetable 
compounds, or by the action of nitric acid upon 
them ; they are the camphoric acid, the mUcous or 
saclactic acid, and the suberic. acid ; the first of which 
is procured from camphor ; the second from gum or 
mucilage ; and the third from cork, by the action of 
nitric acid. 

From the experiments that have been made upon 
the vegetable acids, it appears that aH of them, except 
the prussic acid, are constituted by different propor- 
tions of carbon, hydrogene, and oxygene; the prus- 
sic acid consists of carbon, azote and hydrogene, with 
a little oxygene. The gallic acid contains more car- 
bon than any of the other vegetable acids. 

The following estimates of the composition of 
some of the vegetable acids have been made by, Gay 
Lussac and Thenard. 
100 parts of oxalic acid contain : 

Carbon - . - - ^ 26,56&amp; 

Hydrogene ... - 2,745 

Oxygene - - . - 70,689 
Ditto of tartaric acid : 

Carbon - - - - 24,050 

Hydrogene - . . - 6,629 

Oxygene . - . * 69,321 



100 parts of citric acid : 

Carbon - . . - 83,811 
Hydrogene - . - - - 6,330 

Oxygene - - • - 59,859 
Ditto acetic acid : 

Carbon - - - . 50,224 
Hydrogene - - . 5,620 

Oxygene - - - , - 44,147 
Ditto mucous or saclactic acid ; 

CaAon - - - - 33,69 

Hydrogene - - - 3,62 

Oxygene - - - . 62,69 

These estimations agree nearly with the follow- 
ing definite proportions. In oxalic acid 7 proportions 
of carbon, 8 of hydrogene, and 15 oxygene;* in tar- 
taric acid, 8 carbon, 28 hydrogene, 18 oxygene; in 
citric acid, S carbon, 6 hydrpgene, 4 oxygene ; in 
acetic acid, 18 carbon, 22 hydrogene, 12 oxygene; 
in mucous acid, 6 carbon, 7 hyldrogene, 8 oygene. 

The applications of the vegetable acids are well 
known. The acetic and citric^ acids are extensively 
used. The agreeable taste and wholesomeness of 
various vegetable substances used as food, materially 
depend upon the vegetable acid they contain. 

19. Fixed Alkali may be obtained in aqueous so- 
lution from most plants by burning them, and treat- 
ing the ashes with quick lime and water. The vege- 

* According to Dr. Thompson's experiments, oxalic acid consists of 3 pro- 
portions of carbon, 4 of oxygene. and 4 of hydrogene, a result very diiTerent indeed 
frooi that of the French chemists. 



C 100 3 

table alkali, or potassa, is the common alkati, or pot&lt;- 
assa, is the common 'alkali in the vegetable kingdom. 
This substance in its pure, state is \(rhite, and semi- 
transparent, requiring a strong heat for its fusion, and 
possessed of a highly caustic taste. In the matter 
usually called pure potassa by chemists, it ejdsts com- 
bined with water ; and in that commonly called pearl 
ashes, or pot-ashes in commerce, it is cpmbined with 
a small quantity of carbonic acid. Potassa in its com* 
bined state, as has been mentioned, page 47, consists 
of the highly inflammable metal potassium, and oxj' 
gene, one proportion of each. 

Soda, or the mineral alkali, is found in some 
plants that grow near the sea ; and is obtained com- 
bined with water, or carbonic acid, in the same man- 
ner as potassa ; and consists, as has been stated, 
page 47, of one proportion of sodium, and two pro- 
portions of oxygene. In its properties it is very simi- 
lar to potassa ; but may be easily distinguished from it 
by this character: it fDrms a hard soap with oil; 
potassa forms a soft soap. 

Pearl ashes, and barilla and kelp, or the impure 
soda obtained from the ashes of marine plants, are 
very valuable in commerce, principally on account of 
their uses in the manufacture of glass and soap. Glass 
is made from fixed alkali, flint, and certain metallic 
substances. 

To know whether a vegetalile yields alkali, it 
should be burnt, and the ashes washed with a small 
quantity of water. If the water, after being for some 
time exposed to the air, reddens paper tinged with 



C 101 3 

turmeric ; or renders vegetable blues, gi'^en, it con- 
tains alkali. 

To ascertain the relative quantities of pot-ashes 
afforded by different plants, equal weights of them 
should be burnt: the ashes washed in twice their 
volume of water; the washings should be passed 
through blotting paper, and evaporated to dryness ; 
the relative weights of the salt obtained, will indicate 
very nearly the relative quantities of alkali they con- 
tain. 

The value of marine plants in prpducing soda, 
may be estimated in the same manner, with sufficient 
correctness for all commercial purposes. 

Herbs, in general, furnish four or five times, and 
shrubs' two or three times as much pot-ashes as trees. 
The leaves produce more than the branches, and the 
branches more than the trunk. Vegetables burnt in 
a green state produce more ashes than in a dry state. 

The following table* contains a statement of the 
quantity of pot-ashes afforded by some common trees 
and plants. 

10,000 parts of Oak - - 15 

— -^ ofiElm . . S9 

■ of Beech • - 12 

■ of Vine - - 55 

of Poplar - - 7 

— of Thistle - 53 

of Fern - - 62 
of Cow Thistle - 1 96 

*UU linniM opo» t&amp;e experiments of Kirwan, Vanqaelin and Pertait. 



C 102 3 

lOjOCX) parts of Wormwood - Y30 

--_— of Vetches - 275 

of Beans - - 200 , 

^-— of Fumitory - 790 

The earths found in plants are fopr: silica or 
the earth of flints, alumina or pure clay, lime and 
magnesia. They are procured by incineration. The 
lime is u&amp;ually combined with carbonic acid. This 
substance and silica are much more common in the 
vegetable kingdom than magnesia, and magnesia more 
common than alumina. The earths form a prmcipal 
part of the matter insoluble in water, afforded by the 
ashes of plants. The silica is known by not being 
dissolved by acids ; the calcareous earth, unless the 
ashes have been very intensely ignited, dissolves with 
effervescence in muriatic acid. Magnesia forms a solu- - 
ble and crystallizable salt, and lime, a diflicultly solu- 
ble one with sulphuric acid. Alumina is distinguished 
from the other earths, by being acted upon very slowly 
by acids ; and in forming salts very soluble in water,; 
and difficult of crystallization with them. 

The earths appear to be-compounds of the pecu- 
liar metals mentioned page 48 and. oxygene, one pro- 
portion of ^ach. 

The earths afforded by plants are appb'ed to no 
uses of common life; and there are few cases in 
which the knowledge of their nature can be of impor- 
tance, or afford interest to the farmer. 

The only metallic oxides found in plants, are those 
of iron and manganesum : they are detected in the 



[ 103 3 

ashes of plants ; but in very minute quantities only* 
When the ashes of plants are reddish brown, they 
abound in oxides of iron. When black or purple, in 
oxide of manganesum ; when these colours are mixed 
they contain both substances. 

The saline compounds contained in plants, or 
afforded by their incineration, are very various. The 
sulphuric acid combined with potassa, or sulphate of 
potassa, is one of the most usual. Common salt is 
likewise very often found in the ashes of plants j like- 
wise phosphate of lime, which is insoluble in water, 
but soluble in muriatic acid. Compounds of the nitric, 
muriatic, sulphuric, and phosphoric acids, with alkalies 
and earths, exist in the sap of many plants, or are af- 
forded by their evaporation and incineration. The 
salts of potassa are distinguished from those of soda, 
by their producing a precipitate in solutions of pla- 
tina : those of lime are characterized by the cloudiness 
they occasion in solutions containing oxalic acid; 
those of magnesia, by being rendered cloudy by solu- 
tions of ammonia. I^ulphuric acid is detected in salts 
by the dense white precipitate it forms in solutions of 
baryta. Muriatic acid by the cloudiness it communi- 
cates to solution of nitrat of silver ; and when salts 
contain nitric acid, they produce scintillations by being 
thrown upon burning coals. 

As no applications have been made of any of the 
neutral salts, or analogousCompounds found in plants, 
in a separate state, it will be useless to describe them 
individually. The follpwing tables are g^ven from 



c 



104 



M. Th. de Saussure's Researches on Vegetation, and 
contain results obtained by that philosopher. They 
exhibit the quantities of soluble salts, metallic oxides, 
and earths afforded by the ashes of different plants* 



•* 




Constitnenta of 100 parts 






of the Ashes. 


5S of Plants. 




i 




1 


►» 


i 

IS 


i 

.•3 


S 


1 




■ 1 


&lt; 


fi 


I 






^ 




^ 




1 


Leaves of oak (qturciu rttur) May 10 


13 


53 


74ff 


4T 


84 


0,13 


8 


0,64W3« 


t 


Ditto, Sept. 27 - • . 


34 


5S 


549 


17 


1835 


33 


14,5 


1,75 85,5 


9 


Wood of a yoong oak» May lO 


— 


4 


.... 


26 


28,5 


13,35 


0,13 


1 ;83,58 


4 


Bark of ditto 


— 


60 




7 


4,5 


63,35 


0,35 


li75 83,75 


5 


Entire wood of oak 


— 


8 


— . 


^8,6 


4,5 


33 


3 


3,35 30,65 


6 


Albarnnm of ditto - 


— 


— 


..— . 


33 


34 


11 


7,5 


3 i8S,5 


T 


Bark of ditto - . - - 


— ■ 


60 




7 


3 


66 


1*5 


8 31,5 


8 


Cortical layers of ditto - 


— 


73 


^^^ 


7 


3,75 


65 


0,5 


1 


83,7^ 


g 


Extract of wood of ditto - 


— 


61 


^^ 


51 












10 


Soil from wood of ditto - 


— 


41 


— — 


34 


10,5. 


10 


33 


14 


t,5 


11 


Extract from ditto ... 


— 


111 


«... 


66 












u 


Leares of the poplar (populus nigra) 


— 




















May 16 .... 


S3 


66 


653 


36 


13 


39 


5 


l,3t 15,75 


13 


Ditto Sept. IS ... 


41 


93 


565 


28 


7 


S« 


11,5 


M^is 


14 


Wood of ditto, Sept. is 


- 8 


86 


^ 


16,75 


37 


3,3 


1,5 ,34,5 


U 


Bark of ditto .... 




7S 


— 


6 


5,3 


60 


4 


1,5 


33,3 


10 














^ 




/ 






Mity 1 .... 


— 


61 




36 


33,3 


33 


3,5 


1,5 


34,7 


»7 


Ditto, washed in cold water . 


— 


57 




8;b 


19,5 


44.1 


4 


8 


38^ 


is 


Leares of ditto Jane SS • 


38 


62 


655 


33,7 


14 


39 


nfi 


M 


8W5 


10 


Ditto Sept. SO r - - - 


31 


70 


557 


11 


13 


36 


83 


8 


17 


80 


Wood of ditto. May 1 . 


— 


5 




34,5 


35 


8 


0,35 


0,13 


38,3 


SI 


Bark of ditto .... 


— 


68 


.-.- 


13,5 


S^ 


5*. 


0,35 


1,75 


36 


n 


Entire wood of roiili&gt;erry (morus ni- 






















gra)t November ... 


— 


7 


-»-. 


31 


3,35 


56 


0,13 


0,35 


80,38 


S3 


Aibumam of ditto - 


— 


la 


..^ 


86 


37,35 


34 


1 


0,35 


31&gt;5 


S4 


BarkofiMtto 


— 


89 


-.~ 


7 


8,5 


45 


1545 


1,18 83,13| 


S5 


Cortical layers of ditto - 


— ' 


88 




10 


16,5 


48 


D,13 


1 


34,38 


20 


Entire wood of hornbeam (carpinui 






















b«tuitis\ Sov. 


4 


6 


348 


33 


33 


96 


•43 


8i85 


86,63 


SrAlbnrnam of ditto . - - 1 


4 


7 


390 


18 


36 


15 


1 


1 


89 


M]Bark of ditto . - - | 


88 


iS4 


346 


4,5^ 


4^ 


59 


M 


0^830,381 


29 


Wood of horse chesnut (£scu!us hyp- 
pocastanum) May lo • 


. _ 


35 


' ^ 


.9,5 












SO 


Leaves of ditto. May 10 - 


16 


72 


782 


50 












31 


Leaves of ditto, July 23 . - 


20 


84 


65S: 


84 












3S 


Ditto, Sept. 27 - . 


81 


86 


630 


13,5 












33 Flowers of ditto. May 10 . 1 9 j 


71 


873 1 


50 






' J 



c 



105 



•" 




II Conscitaents of loo partt 






of the Ashes. 


i 

■ "o 

OS 
O 

1 


S ^ 
l| 

« e 

is 

&lt; 


3 


W 

II 


1 

1 

CO 


(0 

i 


^ 
^ 


i 

03 


i 

.a ^ 
1- 

i ! 

1 


34 


Fruit of horse chesnut iascuiut hyp- 




















pocastanum) Oct. 5 - - 


12 


34 


647 


82 


12 




0,5 


0,25 5,25 


35 


Plants of peas (pi sum sativum) in flo'r 


— 


95 


— ■: 


49,86 


17,25 


6 


lA 


1 124,65 


36 


Ditto&gt;ripe . - - - 


-• 


81 


"■■^l 


34&gt;25 


22 


14 


11 


2,5 17,25 


37 


Plants of vetches (vicia faha)^ be- 


















fore flowering. May 23 


16- 


150 


895 


55^ 


144 


3,5 


1,5 


0,5^ 


24,50 


38 


Ditto in flower, Jane 23 - 


20 


122 


876 1 


S5,5 


13,5 


4,12 


1,5 


0,5 


24,38 


39 


Ditto ripe, Jane 23 - 


— 


66 


— ' 


50 


17,75 


4 


1,75 


0,5 


26 


40 


Ditto, seeds separated 

SecOs of ditto - - - 


— 


115 




42 


5,75 


36 


1,75 


1 


12,9 


41 


— 


33 


— 


69,28 


27,92 


_. 


— 


0,5 


2.3 


4S 


Do. in flower, rais'd in distilled water 


— 


39 




60,1 


30 


— ., 


..^ 


0,5 


9,4 


43 


Solydago vuJiarh, before flowering, 






















May 1 - - . * - 


— 


92 


-&gt;.- 


67,5 


l0,75 


1,5 


1,5 


0,75 


18,31 


44 


Ditto, JBst in Bovver, July 15 - 


— 


57 


— 


59 


59 


1,5 


1,5 


0,75 


21 


45 


Ditto, seeds ripe, Sep. 20 


— 1 


50 


_. 


48 


11 


17,25 


3,5 


1|5 


18,75 


4d 


Plants of tnmsol (helianthw aunuus^. 






















a month before flowering, Jane 33 


— 


147 


_ 


63 


67 


11,56 


1,5 


0,12 


16,6/ 


47 


Ditto in flower, July 23 - 


13 


137 


877 


61 


6 


12,5 


1,5 


0,12 


18,78 


4d 


Ditto, bearing ripe seeds, Sept. 20 


23 


93 


753 


5,15 


22,5 


4 


3,75 


0,5 


17,75 


49 


Wheat {triticum sativum), in flower 


— 


. 




43,35 


12,75 


0,25 


32 


0,5 


12)25 


50 




— 


— 




11 


15 


0,25 


54 


I 


18,75 


51 


Ditto, a month before flowering 


•^ 


79 




60 


11,5 


0,25 


12,5 


0,25 


15,5 


5% 


Ditto, in flower, June 14 - 


16 


54 


699 


41 


10.75 


0,85 


26 


0,5 


21,5 


53 


Ditto, seeds ripe - 


^ 


33 




10 


ii,r5 


0,25 


51 


0,57 


23 


54 


Straw of wheat 


— 


43 




22,5 


6,2 


1 


6l&gt;5 


1 


78 


55 


Seeds of ditto 


-^ 


13 


..b.. 


47,16 


44,5 




0,5 


0,25 


7,6 


56 


Bran ..... 


— 


52 




4,16 


46,5, 


— .— 


0&gt; 


0,25 


8,6 


57 


Plants of maize (xea mays) a month 






















before flowering. Jane 23 


— 


122 




69 


5,75 


0,25 


7,5 


0,25 


17,25 


58 


Ditto, in flower, July 23 


— 


81 




69 


6 


0,25 


7,5 


0,85 


17 


59 


Ditto, seeds ripe ... 


— 


46 
















60 


Stalka of ditto 


^ 


84 


^mmm. 


72,45 


5 


1 


18 


0,5 


3,05 


61 


Spikes of ditto . - 


-. 


16 
















63 


Seeds of ditto 


_ 


10 


mmmm 


62 


36 




I 


0,12 


0,88 


63 


Chafi" of barley (hordeum vutgart) 


— 


42 


«.— 


20 


7,75 


12,5 


57 


0,5 


2,25 


04 


Seeds of ditto 


— 


18 


—- 


29 


32,5 




35,5 


0,25 


2.8 


65 


Ditto 


— 


— 


.m^^ 


22 


22 


— 


21 


0,U 


29,88 


66 
67 


Oats 

Leaves of rhododendron fsrrugimum, 
raised on Jura, % lintestone moon- 




31 




I 


24 




60 


0,25 


14,75 




tain, June 20 • . 1 


— 


30 


.— . 


23 


14 


43,25 


0,75 


15,63 


15,63 


68 


Ditto, raised on Bremen, a grsuiitic 






















mountain, June 27 


« 


25 


.»— 


21,1 


16,75 16,75 


% 


5,77 


31,52 


69 


Branches of ditto, June, SO 


-. 


8 




22,5 


10 39 


OJS 


5,4 


32,48 


70 


Spikes of ditto, Jane 27 • 


. 


8 




24 


11,5 29 


I 


U 


24,5 


n 


Uavet of fir {pinus abits), nUsed on 




















Jara,Jane20 


-. 


89 




16 


12,27 43,5 


2,5 


Ifi 


84,13 


72 


Ditto, raised on Breven, Jane 27 


... 


29 




15 


12 


29 


19 


5,5 


19,5 


73 


Branches ef pine, June 20 


«. 


15 




15 












74 


Whortleberry {vaccinium myrtiltus). 






















raised on Jura, Aug. 29 


_ 


26 




17 


18 


42 


6,5 


3,12 


19.38 


75!Ditto, raised on Breven - 


- 


22 




In 


22 I22 


5, 


9,5 


17,5 



i: 106 3 

Besides the principles, the iiature of which has 
been just discussed, ©thers have been described by 
themists as belonging to the vegetable kingdom : thus 
a substance, somewhat analogous to the nluscular 
fibre of animals, has been detected by Vauquelin in 
the papaw j and a matter similar to animal gelatine by 
Braconnot in the mushroom ; but in this place it 
WQuld be improper to dwell upon peculiarities ; my 
object being to offer such general views of the consti- 
tution of vegetables as may be of use to the agricul- 
turist. Some distinctions have been adopted by sys- 
tematical authors which I have not entered into, be-^ 
cause they do not appear to me essential to this enquiry. 
Dr, Thomson, in his elaborate and learned system of 
chemistry, has described six vegetable substances, 
which he calls mucus, jelly, sarcocol, asparagin, inu- 
lin, and ulmin. He states that mucus exists in its 
purest form in linseed ; but Vauquelin has lately 
shewn, that the mucilage of linseed is, in its essential 
characters, analogous to gum ; but that it is combin- 
ed with a substance similar to animal mucus : vegeta- 
ble jelly. Dr. Thomson himself considers as a modifi- 
cation of gum. It is probable, from the taste of sar- 
cocol, that it is gum combined with a little sugar. 
Inulin is so analogous to starch, that it is probably a 
variety of that principle j ulmin has been lately shewn 
by MjT* Smithson to be a compound of a peculiar ex- 
tractive matter and potassa ; and asparagin is proba- 
bly a similar combination* If slight differences in 
chemical and physical properties be consided as sufE- 
cient to establish a difference in the species of vegeta- 
ble substances, the catalogue of them might be enlar- 



ed to almost any extent. No two compounds procured 
from different vegetables are precisely alike; and 
there are even differences in the qualities of the same 
compound, according to the time in which it has been 
collected, and the manner in which it has been pre- 
pared : the great use of classification in science is to 
assist the memory ; and it ought to be founded upon 
the similarity of properties which are distinct, charac- 
teristic, and invariable. 

The analysis of any substance containing mix- 
tures of the different vegetable principles, may be 
made in such a manner as is necessary for the views 
of the agriculturist with facility, A given quantity, 
say 200^ grains, of the substance should be powdered, 
made into a paste or mass, with a small quantity of 
water, and kneaded in the hands, or rubbed in a mor^ 
tar for some time under cold water ; if it contain 
much gluten*^ that principle will separate in a coherent 
mass. After this process, whether it has afforded 
gluten or not, it should be kept in contact with half a 
pint of cold water for three or four hours, being oc- 
casionally rubbed or agitated : the solid matter should 
be separated from the fluid by means of blotting pa- 
per : the fluid should be gradually heated ; if any 
flakes appear, they are to be separated by the same 
means as the solid matter in the last process, i. e. by 
filtration. The fluid is then to be evaporated to dry- 
ness. The matter obtained is to be examined by ap- 
plying moist paper, tinged with red cabbage juice, or 
violet juice to it ; if the paper become fed, it contains 
acid matter ; if it become green, alkaline matter ; and 



I 108 .] ^ 

the nature of the acid or alkaline matter may be 
known by applying the tests described page 97,98,100. 
If the solid matter be sweet to the taste, it must be 
supposed to contain sugar ; if bitterish, bitter prin- 
ciple, or extract ; if astringent, tannin : and if it be 
nearly insipid, it must be principally gum or mucilage. 
To separate gum or mucilage from the other princi- 
ples, alcohol must be boiled upon the solid matter, 
which will dissolve the sugar and the extract, and 
leave the mucilage j the weight of which may be as- 
certained. • ^ 

To separate sugar and extract, the alcohol must 
be evaporated till crytals begin to ^11 down, which are 
sugar; but they will generally be coloured by some 
extract, and can only be purified by repeated solu- 
tions in alcohol. Extract may be separated firom su- 
gar by dissolving the solid, obtained by evaporation 
from alcohol, in a small quantity of water, and boiling 
it for a long while in contact with the air. The ex- 
tract will gradually fall down in the form of an insolu- 
ble power, and the sugar will remain in solution. 

If tannin exist in the first solution made by cold 
water, its separation is easily effected by th^ prpcess 
described page 83. The solution of isinglass must be 
gradually added, ta prevent the existence of an excess 
of animal jelly in the solution, which might be mista- 
ken for mucilage. 

When the vegetable substance, the subject of ex- 
periment, will afford no more principles to cold water, 
it must be exposed to boiling water. This will unite 
to starch if there be any, and may likewise take up 



C 109, ] 

more sugar, extract, and tannin, provided they be in- 
timately combined with the other principles of the 
compound. 

The mode of separating starch is similar to that 
of separating mucilage. 

If after the action of hot water any thing remain, 
the action of boiling afcohol is then to be tried. This 
will dissolve resinous matter ; the quantity of which 
may be known by evaporating the alcohol. 

The last agent that may be applied is ether, 
which dissolves elastic gum, though the application is 
scarcely ever necessary ; for if this principle be pre- 
sent, it may be easily detected by its peculiar qualities. 

If any fixed oil or wax exist in the vegetable 
substance, it will separate during the process of boil- 
ing in water, and may be collected. Any substance 
not acted upon by water, alcohol, or ether, faiust be 
regarded as woody fibre. 

If volatile oils exist in any vegetable substances, 
it is evident they may be procured, and their quantity 
ascertained, by distillation. 

When the quantity of fixed saline, alkaline, met- 
allic, or earthy matter in any vegetable compound is 
to be ascertained, the compound must be decomposed 
by heat, by exposing it. if a fixed substance, in a cru- 
cible, to along continued red heatj and if a vola- 
tile substance, by passing it through an ignited porce- 
lain tube. The nature of the matter so produced, 
maybe learnt by applying the tests mentioned in 
page los. 



C 110 3 

The only analyses in which the agricultural che- 
mist can often wish to occupy himself, are those of 
substances containing principally starch, sugar, gluten, 
oils, mucilage, albumen, and tannin. 

The two following statements will afford an idea 
of the manner in which the results of experiments 
may be arranged. 

The first is a statement of the composition of 

ripe peas, deduced from experiments made by Einhof ; 

the second are of the products afforded by oak bark, 

deduced from experiments conducted by myself. 

parts, 
3840 parts of ripe peas afford, of starch 1265 

Fibrous matter analogous to starch, 1 

with the coats of the peas J ^*^ 

A substance analogous to gluten 550 

Mucilage .... 249 

Saccharine matter - - - 81 . 

Albumen . . - . 66 

Volatile matter • - - - 540 
Earthy phosphates - - - 1 1 

Loss 229 

1000 parts of dry oak bark, from a small tree 
deprived of epidermis, contain, 

Of woody fibre - - - . - 876 

— tannin - - - - - 57 

— extract - - - - - 31 
■p- mucilage - - - - - 18 

— matter rendered insoluble during evapor-1 

ation, probably a mixture of albumen &gt; 9 
and extract - - . ' - J 

-— loss, partly saline matter . . 30 



t; in ] 

To ascertain the primary elements of the dif- 
ferent vegetable principles^ ai^d the proportions in 
which they are combined, different methods of analy- 
sis have been adopted. The most simple are their de- 
composition by heat, or their formation into new prq- 
ducts by combustion. 

When any vegetable principle is acted on by a 
strong red heat, its elements become newly arranged. 
Such of them as are volatile are expelled in the gas- 
eous form ; and are either condensed as fluids, or re- 
main permanently elastic. The fixed remainder is 
either carbonaceous, earthy, saline, alkaline, or metal- 
lic matter. 

To make correct experiments on the decomposi- 
tion of vegetable substances by heat, requires a 'com- 
plicated apparatus, much time and labour, and all the 
resources of the philosophical chemist ; but such re- 
sults as are useful to the agriculturist may be easily 
obtained. The apparatus necessary, is a grieen glass 
retort, attached by cement to a receiver, connected 
with a tube passing under an inverted jar of known 
capacity, filled with water.* A given, weight of the 
substance is to be heated to redness in the retort over 
a charcoal fire ; the receiver is to be kept cool, and 
the process continued as long as any elastic matter is 
generated. The condensible fluids will collect in the 
receiver, and the fixed residuum will be found in the 
retort. The fluid products of the distillation of vege- 
table substances are principally water, with some 

* See Fig. 14. 



•C 113 3 

acetons and mucous acids, and empyreumattc oil^ or 
tar, and in some cases ammonia. The gasses are car- ^ 
bonic acid gai^, carbonic oxide, and carburetted hydfo- 
gene ; sometimes &gt;^th olefiant gas, and hydrogene ; 
and sometimes, but more rarely, \(dth azote. Car- 
bonic acid is the only one of those gasses rapidly ab» 
sorbed by water ; the rest are infiammable ; olefiant 
gas burns with a bright white lights carburetted hy* 
drogene with a light like wax ; carbonic oxide with a 
feeble, blue flame. The properties of hydrogene and 
azote have been described in the last Lecture. The 
specific gravity of carbonic acid gas, is to that of air 
as 20.7 to 13.7, and it consists of one proportion of 
carbon 11 .4, and two of oxygene 30. The ^ecific 
gravity of gaseous oxide of carbon, is taking the same 
standard 13.2, and it consists of one proportion of 
carbon, and one of oxygene. 

TTie specific gravities of carburetted hydrogene and 
olefiant gas are respectively 8 and 13 ; both'tontain 
four proportions of hydrogene ; the first contains one 
proportion, the second two proportions of carbon. 

If the weight of the carbonaceous residuum be 
added to the weight of the fluids ccmdensed in the 
receiver and they be subtracted from the whole weight 
of the substance, the remainder will be the weight of 
the gaseous matter. 

The acetous and mucous acids, and the ammonia 
formed are usually in very small quantitides ; and by 
comparing the proportions of water and charcoal with 
the quantity of the gasses, taking into account their 
qualities, a general idea may be formed of the compo- 
sition of the substance. The proportions of the ele- 



C us - 3 

ments in the greater number of the vegetable sub- 
stances which can be used as food, have been already 
ascertained by pfailosoplucal chemists, and have been 
stated in the preceding pages ; the analysis by distil- 
lation may, however, in some cases, be us^l in esti- 
mating the powers of manures in a manner that will 
be explained in a future lecture. 

The statements of the composition of vegetable 
substances, quoted from M. M. Gay Lussac and Then* 
ard were obtained by these philosophers by exposing * 
the substancesto the action of h^ted hyper-oxymu- 
riate of potassa ; a body that consists of potassium, 
chlorine, and oxygene; and whkh afforded bxygene to 
the carbon and the hydrogene. Their experiments 
were made in a peculiar apparatus, and required great 
cautioii, and were of a very delicate nature. It will 
' not'dierefdre be necessary to enter upon any detaib 
of them. 

It is evident from the whole tenor of the state- 
ments which have been made, that the most essential 
vegetable substances consist of hydrogene, carbon, 
and oxygene in dMerent proportions generally alone, 
but in some few cases coihbined with azote. The 
adds, alkalies, earths, metallic oxides, and saUne com- 
pounds, though necessary in the vegetable ceconomy, 
must be considere4 as of less importance, particularly 
in their relation to agriculture, than the other princi- 
ples : .and as it appears from M. de Saussure's table, 
and from other experiments, they difier in the same 
species of vegetslbie when it is raised on different soik. 



C "* 3 

M. M. Gay Lussac and Thenard have dedib^ed 
thi^e propositions, which they hai^e called laws from 
their experiments ^bn vegetable substances. The first 
is, *' that a vegetable substance is always acid when* 
ever the oxygrae it contains is to the hydrogene in a 
greater prq&gt;ortion than in water/' 

The secondj f * that a vegetable substance is always 
redlnous or cnly. or spirituous whenever it contains 
oxygene in a smaller proportion to the hydrogene than 
• exists ia water.** 

The thirds ^* that a vegetable substance is neither 
add nor resinous ; but is either saccharine or mudla^ 
ginous, or analogous to woody fibre or Starch, when* 
ever the oxygene and hydrogene in it are in the sanie 
proportions as in water/* 

New experiments upon other vegetable sub- 
stances, besides those examined by M. M. Gay Lussac 
and Thenard, are required before these interesting 
conclusions can be fully admitted. Their researches 
establish, however, the close analogy between several 
vegetable compounds differing in their sensible quali- 
ties, and combined with those oi other chemists, oflFer 
simple explanations of several processes in nature and 
art, l^y which different vegetable substances are coa- 
verted into each other, or changed into, new conuN* 
pounds. 

Gum and sugar affbrd nearly die same elements 
by analysis : and starch d^ers from them only in ccm- 
taining a little more carbon. The peculiar piroperties 
of gum and sugar must dqiend chiefly upon the dif- 
ferent arrangement, or de^ee of condensation &lt;^ their 



[ 115 3 

elements ; and k would be natmat to ctmcmhftom 
the compo«do&amp; of these bocBes, as well as that of 
i^rch that all three would be easily eonvertit^ one 
into the other ; which is actually the case.^ 

At the time of the ripening of^^cmi^ die saccha- 
2«ie matter inthe gicain, and thai icarried 6rdta theittp 
vessels into the grain, becomes coaguta^d, and form&amp; 
starch. And in the process, of nudtiqgr the camem^ 
ehsmge oceuis. Thestareh of geam is conWrted imo^ 
sugar. As there is a^ hide idisorptsoh o£o3ty^ne, arid a 
foraiatbii of carbine add in tins case, it is probidsifa? 
diat^ search bses a fittle;cairbcm, vd^ich combines 
vnAk the osEygtsne. to fcnrm carbonic acid ; and prdbabty 
the oxygene tands to acidify the glutto of the grai^, 
and dius breaks down the texture of the slarcb; ^ves 
a new arrangc^menl^to its elements, and renders it so* 
iuble ia water. . 

Mr. Cruikshank, by exposing syrup to a.^ubn 
stance named phospfauret of . lime, which ^ has |a great 
tendency^to decompose water,, omwited a part of the 
sugar into a matter ansJogou^f to mndils^. And M^ 
Kir&lt;;hhoflr, recently, has comrerted starch into sugar by 
a very simple process, dmt of tx&gt;iling in very diluted 
sulphuric add. The propcfftions are lOD parts of 
slarcli, 400 parts of water^ and 1 psa* of sulphuric 
acid 1^ Wf%ht. This mixture is to Jie kept 4)c»feg 
for 40 hours j the loss of water by evaporation bdog 
supplied )&gt;y |iew ^uantid^. The acid is to be neii% 
taralized by liine j and the sugar icrystallized by cooU 
ing. This experiment has bem tried with sttCcess by 
many persons, pr. Tudiill, from a pound and a half 



C 118 a 

Fabroni has shewn that the giuten in most is 
essential to fermentation ; and &amp;izt chemist has made 
saccharine matter iferment, by adding to its solutimi 
in water, coihmbn vegetable gluten and tartaric acid* 
Gay Lussac has demonstrated that n^ust will not fer- 
ment when freed from air by boilmg, and placed otit 
of the contact of oxygene , but that fermentatibn be- 
gins as soon as it is exposed to the o:&amp;ygene of air^ a 
little of that principle being absorbed ; and that it tben 
continues independent of the presence- of the atinos- 
phere. . i 

In the manufacture of ale and pbeter, the sugar 
formed during the gerimnation of: barley is made to, 
ferment by dissolving it in water with :a. little y^ist, 
which contains gluten in Ae state proper for pax)duc- 
ing fermentation^ and exposirigitto the requisite tem- 
perature ; carbonic acid gas is given, off as in the 
fermentatioii of must, and; the lk}U0r gradually be- 
comes ${&gt;irituou$. ; j' . f • : . . f 

Similar phasnqmena occur in the fermentetion of 
the sugar in the juice of apples, and other ripe fruits* 
It appears that fermentation depends entirely upon a 
new arrangement : of the elements of sugar ; part o£ 
the carbon uniting to oxygene to form carbonic acid, 
and the remaining carbon, hydrogene^ and oxygene 
combining as alcohol; and the use of the gluten or 
yeast, and the primary exposure to air seems to be to 
occasion the formation of a certain quantity of car- 
bonic acid; and this change being once produced is 
continued; its agency may be coolpared to that of a 
spark m produci^ the inflammadon of gunpowder y 



E 119 3 

the increase of temperature occasioned by the forma- 
tion of one quantity of carbonic acid occasions the 
combidation pf the elements of another quiuatity. 

The results obtain^ by different chemists in ex- 
periments on the analysis of alcohol differ so much, 
that no general conclusions can be drawn from them. 
If it be supposed that one proportion of carbonic acid 
is formed in the fermentation of sugar ; then accord- 
ing to Dr. Thomson's analysis of sugar, vihich gives 
its composition as S proportions of carbon, 4 of oxy- 
gene, and 8 of hydrogene, alcohol would consist of 
2 proportions of carbbn, 2 of oxygene, and 8 of hy- 
drogene ; and it might be considered as containmg the 
same elements as two proportions of olefiant gas, with 
two proportions of oxygene. 

Alcohol in its purest known form, is a highly 
inflanmiable liquid, of specific gravity 796, at the 
temperature of 60° ; it boils at about 170o Fahrenheit. 
This alcohol is obtained by repeated distillation of the. 
strongest common spirit from the salt called by che- 
mists muriate of lirne^ it having been previously heat- 
ed red hot. 

The strongest alcohol obtained by tht distillation 
of spirit without salts, has seldom a less specific gravi- 
ty than 825 at 60^; and it contains, according to 
Lowitz's experiments, 89 parts of the alcohol of 796, 
and 11 parts of water. The spirit established zs proof 
spirit by act of parliament passed in 1762, ought to 
have the specific gravity of 916 ; and this contains 
nearly equal weights of pure alcohol and water. 



I 120 3 

The alcohol in fennented liquors is in combina* 
tion with water, coloming matter, sugar, mudUge, 
and the vegetable adds. It has been often doubted 
whether it can be procured by any other process than 
distilladon ; and some persons have even supposed 
that it is formed by ^isdlladon. The recent experi- 
ments of Mn Srande are conclusive against both 
these opinions. That gentleman has shewn that the 
colouring and add matter in wines may be, *for the 
most part, sepaiated in a solid form by the action of a 
solution of sugar of lead (acetate of lead), and that the 
alcohol may be then obtained by abstracting the water 
by means of hydrate of potassa or muriate of lime, 
without artificial heat 

Hie intoxicating powers of fermented liquors 
depend on the alcohol that they contain ; but their 
action on the stomach is modified by the acid, saccha- 
rine, or mudlaginous substances they hold in solu- 
tion. Alcohol probably acts with more efficacy when 
it is most loosely combined ; and its energy seems to 
be impaired by union with large quantities of water, 
or with sugar or acid, or extractive matter. 

The f6llowing table contains the results of Mn 
Brande's experiments on the quantity of alcohol of 
825 at 6(f^ in diflFerent fermented liquors. 



121 





Pnoportion of 




Proportion of 


Wine* 


Alcohol, per 


Wine. 


Alcohol, per 




Cent.hyMea. 




Cent. byMea- 




sure. 




sure. 


Port - - - 


ai&gt; 


White Hermitage - 


17/13 


Ditto • . - 


M,30 


Red Hermitage 


12,33 


toitto - r 


33^9 


Hock - 


14,37 


Ditto ... 


83,71 


Ditto - - . 


8,88 


Ditto *. t 


U,99 


Vinde Grave - 


13,80 


Ditto - 


35.83 


Frontignac 


12,79 - 


Madcim - - 


19,34 


CotiRoti 


13,33 


Ditto - '-' 


31,40 


Rousillon 


17,20 


Ditto . 


33,93 


Cape Madeira 


18,11 


Ditto . 


34,43 


Cape Muschat 


- 18,35 


Sherry - - - 


W,S5 


Constantia - 


19.75 


Ditto - 


18,79 


Tent . - - 


13,30 




19,81 


Sheraaz 


15,53 


Ditto . . - 


19,83 


Syraeuse 


15,38 


Claret - - - 


12,91 


Nice . . - - 


14,63 


Ditto ... 


14^8 


Tokay - - - 


9,88 


Ditto . - - 


1«,33 


Raisin Wine - 


35,77 


Calcavella 


18,10 


Grape Wine - 


18,11 


Lijbon . - 


«8,94 


Currant Wine 


30,55 


Malaga . 


17,36 


Gooseberry Wme &gt; 


11,84 


Bttcellas - r 


18,49 


Rider Wine - 


^ 9,87 


Red Madeira . 


18,40 


Cyder . 


9,07 


Malmiey Madeira - 


16,40 


Perry ... 


9,87 . 


Marsala - . 


«5,87 


Brown Stoat - 


6,80 


Ditto . 


17,35 


Ale . - - 


8,88 


• lied diampagne - 


li,30 


Brandy . - - 


53,39 


White Champagne - 


13,80 


Rum ... 


53,68 


Burgundy • 


14,53 


Hollands 


51,60 


Ditto - . 


11,95 







The spirits distilled from different fermented 
liquors differ in their flavour : for peculiar odorous 
matter^ or volatile oils, rise in most cases with the al- 
cohol. The spirit iirom malt usually has an empy- 
reumatic taste like that of the oil, formed by the dis- 
tillation of vegetable substances. The best brandies 
seem to owe their flavour to a peculiar oily matter, 
formed probably by the action of the tartaric acid on 
alcohol ; and ^um derives its characteristic taste from 
a principle in the sugar cane. All the common spirits 
may, I find, be deprived of their peculiar flavour by 
tepeatedly digesting them with a mi2:ture of well burnt 

a 



I 122 3 

chare(^ and quicklime ; they then afford pure alco- 
hol hj distillation. The cognac brandies^ I find, con- 
tain vegetable prussic acid, and their flavour may be 
imitated by adding to a solution of alcohol in water of 
the same strength, a few drops of the ethereal oil of 
wine produced during the formation of ether,* and a 
similar quantity of vegetable prussic acid procured 
from laurel 4eaves or any bitter kernels. 

I have mentioned ether in the course of this Lec- 
ture ; this substance is procured from alcohol by distil- 
ling a mixture of equal parts of alcohol and sulphuric 
acid. It is the lightest known liquid substance, being 
of specific gravity 6S2 at 60°. ]^ i&amp;jirery volatile, and 
rises in vapour even by the heat of the body* It is 
highly inflammable. In the formation of ether it is 
most probable thit carbon and the elemei^ts of water 
are separated from the aIcohc4, and that ether differs 
from alcohol in containing less oxygene and carbon ; 
but its compositicm has not yet been accurately ascer- 
tained* Like alcohol it possesses intoxicating povtjpc^ 

A number of the changes taking place in the ve- 
getable {mnciples depend upon the separation of oxy* 
gene and hydrogene as wstter from the compound ; 
but there is one of very great importance, in which a 
new combination of the elements of water is the prin- 
cipal operation* This is in the maaufactm*e of bread* 
When any kind of flour, which consists principally of 



* In the process of the diittUaiion of deohol and tBlphuric aeid after t&amp;e ether 
is procured; by a higher degree of heat* a ydtow fluid is produecd* which it the 
Sttbstsiiko in question. It has a fragrant smell and an if reeahle taste. 



C 123 3 

starch, is made into a paste with water, and immedi* 
ately and gradually heated to about 440*, it increases 
in we^ht, and b found entirely altered in its proper- 
ties.; it has lost its solubility in water, and its power 
•of being converted into sugar. In this state it is un« 
leaveiMd bread. 

When the flour of com or the starch of potatoes, 
mixed with boiled potatoes, is made into a paste with 
water, kept warm, and suffered to remain SO or 40 
hours, it ferments, carbonic acid gas is disengaged 
from it, and it becomes filled with globules of elastic 
fluid. In this state it is raised dough, and affords^ 
baking, leavened bread ; but this bread is sour and 
disagreeable to the taste ; and leavened bread for use 
is made by mixing a little dough, that has fermented, 
with new dough, and kneading them together, or by 
kneading the bread with a small quantity of yeast. 

In the formation of wheaten bread more than 1*4 
of the elements of water combine with the flour ; 
more water is consolidated in ^e formation of bread 
from barley, and. still more in that from oats ; but 
the gluten in wheat, being in much larger quantity 
than in other grain, seems to form a combination with 
the starch and water, which tenders wheaten bread 
more digesdble than the other species of bread. 

The arrangement of many of the vegetable prin- 
ciples in the different parts of plants has been inciden- 
tally mentioned in this Lecture ; but a more particular 
statement is required to afford just views of the rela- 
tion between their organization and diemical constitu* 
tion^ which is an object of great importance. The 



[ 124 3 

tubes and hexagonal cells in the vascular system of 
plants are composed of woody fibre ; and when diey 
are not filled with fluid matter they contain some of 
the solid materials which formed a constituent part of 
the fluids belonging to them. 

In the roots, trunk, and branches, the bark, al- 
burnum, and faeartwood, the leaves and flowers ; the 
great basis of the solid parts is woody fflbre. It forms 
by far the greatest part of the heart wood and bark ; 
there is le^ in the alburnum, and still less in the leaves 
atad flowers. The alfourtium of the birch contains so 
much sugar and mucilage, that it is sometimes used 
in the North of Europe as a substitute for bread. The 
leaves of the cabbage, broccoli, and seacale, contain 
much mucilage, a little saccharine matter and a little 
albumen. From a lodo parts of the leaves of com- 
mon cabbage I obtained 41 parts of mucilage, 24 of 
sugar, and 8 of albuminous matter. 

In bulbous roots, and Sometimes in common 
roots, a large*quantity of starch, albumen, and mucil* 
age, ar^ often found dq&gt;osited in the vessels ; and 
they are iiiost abundant after the sap has ceased to 
flow : aod afibrd a nomishment for the early shoots 
made ia spring. The potaitoe is the bulb that contains 
the largest qnsmtity of soluble ma^r m its cells and 
vessels; and it is of most importance in its appli- 
cation as food. Potatoes in general afford firom ' to 4 
their weight of dry starch. From 100 parts of the 
common Kidney potatoes^ Dr. Pearson obtamed from 
32 to 28 parts of meal, which contained from 23 to 
20 of starch smd mucilage: and 100 parts of the if/- 



C 125 ] 

pie patatoe in various experiments, afforded me fix&gt;m 
18 to 20 parts of pure starch. From iive pounds of 
the variety of the potatoe called Captain hari^ Mr. 
Sbrimshire, jun. obtained 1^ oz. of starch, from die 
same quantity of the Rmgh Ted potatoe lOr 02., from^ 
the Mtfvdion white 11?, from the Torksbire kidney 
1(^ oz., from Hundred eyes 9 oz., from Purple red 8l, 
from Ox noble 8i. Ttie other soluble substances ia. 
the potatoe are albumen and mucilage. 

From the analysis of Etnhoff it appears that ^680 
parts of pottttde| afford 

Of starch - - - • 1153 
-— Fibrous matter analogous to starch 540 
' — Albuni^i - - . ^ 107 

-^ Mudlage in the state of a saturated 1 

■ ■ ■ I' 



solution . - - . » ^ 



2112 
So that a fourth part of the weight of the potatoe at 
least may be considered as nutritive matter* 

The turnip, carrot, and parsnip, afibrd principally 
saccharine, mudla^ous, and extractive matter. I 
d&gt;tained from 1000 parts of common turnips 7 parts 
of mudlage, 84 of saccharine matter, and nearly 1 
part of albumen. 1000 parts of carrots furnished 
95 parts of si^ar, 3 parts of mucilage, and 7 part of 
extract ; 1000 parts of parsnip afibrded 90 parts of 
saccharine matter, and 9 parts of mudlage. The 
Walcberen or white carroty gave ia 1000 parts, 98 
parta of sugar, 2 parts of mucilage^ and 1 of extract. 



C 126 3 

Fruits, in the organization of their soft parts, 
approach to the nature of bulbs. They contain a cer« 
tain quantity of nourishment laid up in their cells for 
die use of the embryon plant ; mucilage, sugar, starch 
are found in many of them often combined with vege* 
table acids. Most of the fruit tree6 common in Bri- 
tain have been naturalized on account of the saccha- 
rine matter they contain, which^ united to the vegeta- 
ble acids and mucilage, renders them at once agreea- 
ble to the taste and nutritive. 

The value of fruits for. the manufacture pf fer- 
mented liquors may be judged of ft*om the specific 
gravity of their expressed juices. The best cyder and 
perry are made from those apples and pears that af- 
ford the densest juices ; and a comparison between 
different fruits may be made with tolerable accuracy 
by plunging them together into a saturated solution of 
salt, oV a strong solution of sugar ; those that sink 
deepest will afford the richest juice. 

Starch or coagulated mucilage forms the greatest 
part of the seeds and grains used for food ; and they 
are generally combined with gluten, oil, or albumin- 
ous matter. In com, with gluten, in peas and beans, 
with albuminous matter; and in rape-seed, hemp* 
seed, linseed, and the kernels of most nuts, with cSk. 

I found 100 parts of good full grained wheat 
ttwn in autumn to afford 

Of Starch - - - 77 
— Glujten - . • 19 
100 parts of wheat sown ik spring. 

Of starch *. . • 70 
*«- Gluten- . - - 24 



C 127 ] • 

100 parts of Barbary wheat. 

Of starch - - . - 47 

-T Gluten . ' • 23 

100 parts of Sidiian wheat. 

Of starch - - - 75 

— Gluten . . . 21 

I have examined diiferent specimens of North 
American wheat, all of them have contained rather 
more gluten than the British. la general the wheat 
of warm climates abounds more in gluten, and inin« 
soluble parts ; and it is of greater specific gravity, 
harder, and more difficult to grind. 

The wheat of the south of Europe, in conse- 
quence of the larger quantity of gluten it contains, is 
peculiary fitted for making macaroni, and other pre- 
parations of flower in which glutinous quality is con- 
sidered as an excellence. 

In some experiments made on barley^ I obtained 
from 100 parts of full and fair Norfolk barley. 
Of Starch ... 79 

— Gluten - . I. 6 

— Husk ... 8 
The rems^ning 7 parts saccharine matter. 

Einhoflf has published a minute analysis of barley 
meal. He found in S840 parts. 

Of volatile matter . . . 360 
— -Albumeu . . . . 44 

— Saccharine matter - * 200 
^—Mucilage .... 176 
-~ Phosphate of lime, with some albumen 9 

— Gluten •, . • . 135 V 



I 128 X 

Of Husk, with some gliitcn and starch 260 
~ Starch not quite free from gluten 2580 

— Loss 78 

Rye afforded to Einhoff, in S840 parts ; 2520 

meal, 930 husk, and S90 moisture ; and the same 

quantity of meal analysed gave. 

Of Starch . - . . 2345 
-—Albumen - - . . 126 

^ — Mucilage - - - .. 426 

— Saccharine matter - • 126 

— Gluten not dried • - 364! 
Remainder husk and los&amp; 

I obtained from 100 parts of rye, grown in Suf- 
folk, 61 parts of starch, and 5 parts of gluten. 

106 parts of oats, from Susse:!^, afforded me 59 
parts of starch, 6 of gluten, and 2 of saccharine mat- 
ter. 

1000 parts of peas, grown in Norfolk, afforded 
me 501 parts of starch, 22 parts of saccharine matter, 
35 parts of albuminous matter and 16 parts of ex- 
tract, which became insoluble during evaporation of 
the saccharme fluid. 

From 3840 parts of marsh beans (VidafabaJ^ 
jCinhoff obtained. 

Of Starch - - - . 1312 

*— Albumen - - - . SI 

-~ other matters which may be con-^ 
ceived nutritive ; such as gum- 
my, starchy, fibrous matter an- ^^^^ 
alogous to animal matter J 



C 129 3 

The same quantity of kidn^ beans {Phaseolus 
^vulgaris) afforded^ 

Of matter analogous to starch ^ 1 805 

-«- Albumen and matter approaching 1 

to animal matter in its nature j ^"^^ 

— Mucilage - - * - 799 

From 3840 parts of lentiies he obtained 1260 
parts of starch, and 1433 of a matter analogous to 
animal matter* 

The matter analogous to animal matter is des- 
cribed by Einhoff; as a glutinous substance insoluble 
in water j soluble in alcohol when dry, having thS ap« 
pearance of glue } probably a peculiar modificati(»i of 
gluten. 

From 16 parts of hemp-seeds Bucholz obtained 
3 parts of oil, 32 parts of albumen, about If of sac- 
charine and gummy matter* The insoluble husks 
and coats of the seeds weighed 6? parts. 

The different parts ot flowers contain different 
substances : the pollen, or impregnating dust of die 
date, has been found by Fourcroy and Vauquelin to 
s contain a matter analogous to gluten, and a soluble 
extract abounding in malic acid. link found in the 
pollen of the hazle tree, much tannin and gluten. 

Saccharine matter is found in the nectarium of 
flowers, or the receptacles within the corolla, and by 
tempting the larger insects into the flowers, it renders 
the work of impregnation more secure } for the pollen 
is often by their means applied to the stigma; and 
this is particularly the case when the male and female 
organs are in different flowers or differex^t plants. 



A., 



It has been stated that the fragrance 9f flowers 
depends upon the volatile oils they contain ; and these 
oils, by their constant evaporation, surround the 
flower with a kind of odorous atmosphere ; which, at 
the same time that it entices larger insects, may pro- 
bably preserve the parts of fructification from the ra^ 
* vages of the smaller ones. Volatile oils, or odorous 
substances, seem particularly destructive to these mi- 
nute insects and animalcules which feed on the sub- 
stance of vegetables ; thousands of aphides may be 
usually seen in the stalk and leaves of the rose ; but 
uone of them are ever observed on the flower. Cam- 
phor is used to preserve the collections of naturalists* 
The woods that contain aromatic oils are remarked 
for their indestructibility ; and for their exemption 
from the attacks of insects: this is particularly the 
*case with the cedar, rose- wood, and cypress. The 
gates of Constantinople, whiqh were ^nade of this last 
^wood, stood entire from the time of Constantine, their 
founder, to that of Pope Eugene IV. a period of 1 100 
years. 

The petals of many flowers aflFord saccharine and 
mucilaginous matter. The white lily yields mucilage 
abundantly ; and the orange lily a mixture of mucil? 
age and sugar ; the petals of the convolvulus aflford 
sugar, mudbge, and albuminous ttH&amp;teit. 

The chemical nature of the cobujnbg matters of 
flowers ha^ not as yet been subject to any very accu- 
rate observation. These colouring matters, in gen- 
eral, are very transient, particularly ih^ blues and 
reds i alkalies change the colours of most flowers to 
green, and acids to red. An imitation of the coloi^- 



[ m 3 

uig matter may be made by digesting solutions of gall- 
nuts with chalk: a green fluid is obtained, which be- 
coines red by the action of an acid; and ha$ its greeo 
colour restored by means of alkalies. 

The yellow colouring matters of flows^rs are the 
most permanent; the carthamus contains a red and a 
yellow colouring matter; the yellow colouring matter 
is easily dissolved by water, and from the red, rouge 
1$ prepared by a process which is kept secret. 

The same substances as exist in the solid parts of ' 
plants are fpund in their fluids, with the exception of 
woody fibre, fixed and volatile oils containing resin 
or camphor, or analogous substances in solution exist 
in the cylindrical tubes belonging to a numbar of 
plants. Different species of Euphorbia emit a milky 
juice, which when ea^posed to afar deposit a substance 
analogous to 9tarch, and another similar to gluten. ^ 

Opium, gum elastic, gamboge^ the poisons of the 
Upas Antiar and Tieute^ and other substances tha^' 
exude firom plants; may be considered as peculiar 
juices belonging to appropriate vessels. 

The ss^ of plants, in general, is very cc»npound 
in its nature; and contams most saccharine, mudlagin- 
pus, sg^td albnminous matter in the alburnum; and 
most tanmn and extract in the bark. The cambium, 
which is the mucil^guious fluid found in trees between 
the wood mi the bark, and which is essential to the 
formation of new pairt^^ seems to be derived from these 
two kinds of sap^ an4 probably h a cc«nbtnation of 
the muolagu^oua and albuminous matter of one, with 
;the astringent ma^tter of the other, in a state fitted to 
becon^e org«w*ed by ^ separation of its watery parts 



C 132 3 

The alburnous saps of some trees have been che* 
mically examined by Vauquelin. He found in those 
of the elm, beech, yoke elm, hornbeam and birch, ex- 
tractive and mucilaginous matter, acetic add combin* 
cd Mrith potassa or lime. The solid matter afforded 
by their evaporation yielded an ammoniacal smell, pro- 
baUy owing to albumen: the sap of the birch afibrded 
saccharine matter. 

Deyeux in the s^p of the vine and the yoke elm 
has detected a matter analogous to the curd of milk. 
I found a substance similar to albumen in the sap of 
the wa^ut tree. 

I found the juice which exudes from the vessels 
df the marshmallow when cut, to be a solution of 
mucilage. 

The fluids contained in th&amp;€Sip vessels of wheat 
and barley, afforded in some experiments which I made 
on them, mucilage, sugar, and a matter which coag- 
ulated by heat} which last was most abundant in wheat. 
The following table contains a statement of the 
quantity of soluble or nutritive matters contained in' 
varieties of the different substances that have been 
menticmed, and of some others which are used as arti- 
cles of food, either for man or cattle. The analyses 
are my own; and were conducted with a view to a 
iinowledge of the general nature and quantity of the 
products, and not of their intimate ch^nical composi- 
tion. The soluble matters afforded by the grasses, 
except that from the fiorin in winter, were obtained 
by Mr. Sinclair, gardener to the duke ofBedford, 
from given weights of the glasses cut when the seeds 
were ripe; they were sent to me by his Grace's desire 



C \33 ] 



for chemical examination; and form pan of the results 
of animportant and extensive series of experiments on 
grasses, made by direction of the Duke, at Wobum 
Abbey, the fall details of which I shall hereafter have 
the pleasure of stating. 

Table of the Quantities of soluble or nutritive Matters 
i^orded hy 1000 parts rf different vegetable Sub" 
stances. 



^^VegeCables or vegetable 
Sobstanee. 


quantity of 
or nutritive 
itter. 


S 


h 




ill 

o g 




•^2 S 


1* 


J8 


1 « B 




II 




1 


3 


all 


Middlesex wheat, average 














98S 


765 


' «•. 


190 




Spring wheat 


940 


700 


» 


240 




Mildewed wheat of 1800 


SIO 


178 


. 


32 




Blighted wheat of 1804 


650 


520 


•. 


130 




Thidtekinned SicUiaa 












wheat of 1810 


955 


725 


^ 


330 




Thin.«kinned. SicilUa 












wheat of 1810 '- 


9^1 


7» 


— 


239 




Wheat from Pidand • 


950 


750 


^ 


200 


,^ 


Korth American, whealf 


^55 


730 


— 


225 




Norfolk barley - 


9S0 


790 


70 


60 




Oats from Scotland - 


74S 


641 


15 


87 




Rye from Torkshire - 


79t 


645 


38 


109 




Common bean 


570 


436 




103 


41 


Dry peas ... 


574 


501 


28 


35 


16 


Potatoes - - -'\[ 


fromuo 


fromSOO 


from SO 


from 40 




to 200 


to 155 


to 15 


to 30 




Linseed cake 


151 


183 


11 


IT, 




Red beet 


148 


14 


121 


13 




' White beet 


136 


13 


119 


4 




Parsnip 


99 


9 


00 






Carrots - . . 


98 


3 


95 






Common tnmipt - 


4% 


7 


34 






Swedish turnips • 


64 


9 


^1 




% 


Cabbage . 


« 


41 


84 






Broad-leared elover - 


39 


31 


3 




3 


Long-rooted clover 


30 


30 








. White elover 


3S 


29 








Sainfoin 


39 , 


28 








Lucerne - . . 


S3 


18 




,. 




Meadow fox-tail grass 


33 


84 




» 




Perennial rye grass - 


39 


26 




. 




Fertile meadow grass - 


78 


fi«^ 




- ,^ 






39 


«9^ 




^ 




Crested dog's-tail grass 


35 


88 




«. 




^iked feseoe grass • 


19 


15 




w 




Sweet-scented soft grass 


81 


72 




^ 






50 


43 




^ 




Fiorin 


54 


46 




1 




Plorin cat in winter - 


7ft 


64 




1 





Z J94 3 

All these 6ut&gt;stance8 were submitted to iexperi* 
ifimi gre^, and in their natural states. It is proba^b 
that th^ excellence of the differept spticles as food 
will be found to be in a great measure proporti&lt;mal to"^ 
the quantities of soluble or nutritive matters they 
afford; but still these quantities cannot be regarded a$ 
absolutely denoting their v^ue. Albuminous or glutin- 
ous matters have the characters of animal substances; 
sugar is more nourishing, and extractive matter less 
nourishing, than any other principles composed of car- 
bon, hydrogene, and oxygene. Certain combinations 
likewise of these substances may be more nutridve 
than others. 

I have been informed by Sir Joseph Bai^ks, that 
the Derbyshire miners in winter, prefer oat cakes to 
wl^eaten br^ad; finding that this kind of nourish* 
ment enables them to support their strength and per- 
form their labour better. In sununer» they say oat 
cake heats them, and they then consume the finest 
wheaten bread they can procure. Even the skin of 
the kernel of oats probably has a nourishing power, 
^d is rendered partly soluble in the stomach with the 
starch and gluten. In most countries, of Etirope, ex- 
cept Britain, and in Arabia, horses are fed with barley 
mixed with chopped straw; and the chopped straw 
jseems to act the same part as the husk of the oat. In 
the mill 14lbs, of good wheat yield on an average 
ISlbSi. of flour, thesaitie quantity of barley 12lbs. and 
of oats only 8lbs. 

In the south of Europe, hard or thin-skinned 
wheat is in hig;her estimation, than soft or thick-skin- 



t 185 ] 

ned wbekt: the reason of which is obvious, from the 
larger quantity of gluten and nutritive matter it con- 
tarns* I have made an analysis of oply one specimen 
of thin-skinned wheat, so that other specimens may 
|)05slbly contain more nutridve matter thaii that in the 
Table: the Barbary and Sicilian wheats, before refer- 
red to, were thick-skinned wheats, in England the dif- 
ficulty of grinding thin-skinned wheat is an objection; 
but this difficulty is easily overcome by moistening the 
com.* 



* For the following note on this subject I aun indebted to the kindness oC the 
^ight Horn Sir Jofeph Banfctj Bart. K. B. 
In/brMOtiMttctiJud from yohn ytffery, Esq. Ht$ Maj$*ty s Ctiuul Geturaiat Liibcti, 

in Anrm$r toQutrm transmitted to him, from the Comm. of P, C.for Trade, 

dated yan. \%,Wi, 

To grind hard corn with the miU^stones used iri £ngUnd,the wheat most b# 
well J^reened, then sprinkled with water at the miller's discretion, andlaid in heaps 
and fre&lt;iiiently turned and thoroughly mixed* whieh will soften the hosk so as to 
make it separatofrom the floor in grinding* and of course give the Aoor a brighter 
coloftr; otherwise fhe 4inty quality of the wheat&gt; and the thinness of the' skin wilt 
prevent its separation, and will render the flour unfit for making into bread. 

Ijam. informed by a miller of oontiderablo experienee^ and who woiks his Aiilhi 
entirely wiUi the stones from England or Ireland, that he frequently prepares this 
hardBatbary corn by immVsingSt In water in close wicker baskets, and spreading 
it thinly on a floor to dry; much depends «m the judgment and skill of the miller id 
preparing the com for the mill aecording to its relatire quality. I beg to observe^ 
that it is not from this previous process of Wetting th&lt; com that the weight in tfao 
floor of hard eom is encreatsds bat firom its- natural quality it imbibes considerably 
more water in making it into broad. The mill^ones must not be cut too deep, but 
the ftvrows very fifle» and picked in the usual way. The milk should work with lesa. ' 
velocity in grinding hard corn than with soft, and set to work at first with soft. 
eom, till the mill ceases to work Well; then put on the hard corm |Iard wheat al- 
ways sells at a higher price ia the market than soffc wheat, on an average of ten td 
fifteen per cent; as it produees more flour in proportion, and less bran than the 
soft eorn&lt; 

Flour made from haxd whe^ is more esteemed than what h made from sof^ 
c(9b and both soitB are api»Iied to eVerjTl^rpote. 



136 ] 



LECtURE IV. 

On SoUs: their constituent Parts. On the analysis rf 
Soils. Of the Uses of the Soil. Of the Rocks and 
Strata found beneath Soils. Of the impravemep 
.of Soil. 
No subjects are of more importance to the far- 
mer than the nature and improvement of soils; and no 
parts of the doctrines of agricukure are more capable 
of being illustrated by chemical enquiries* 

Soils are extremely diversified in appearance and 
quality; yet as it was stated in the introductory Lec- 
ture, they consist of different proportions of the same 
elements; which are in various states of chemical com- 
bination, or mechanical mixture. 

The substances which constitute soils have been 
already mentioned. They are certain compounds of 
the earths, silica, lime, alumina, magnesia, and of the 
Oxides of iron and manganesum; animal and vegetable 
matters in a decomposing state, and saline, acid or al- 
kaline combinations. 

In all chemical experiments qn the composition 
of soils connected with agriculture, the constituent 



. The floor of hard wheat is in general roperlor to that made from soft; and 
thece U no difference in the process Of making them into bread; but the flour from 
hard wheat will imbibe and retain more water in making into bread; and will con- 
se&lt;inently produce more weight of bread: it is the practice here, and which I am 
persuaded it would be adviseable to adopt &gt;in England* to make bread with flour of 
hard and soft wheat, which» by being mixed» will make the bread muqh better. 

{Signed) JOHN JEFFSRT. 



C »87 J 

parts obtained are comppunds; and they act as com- 
pounds in nature: it is in this state, therefore, that I 
shall describe their characteristic properties. 

1. Silica^ or the earth of JlintSy in its pure and 
crystallized form, is the substance known by the name 
of rock crystal, or Cornish diamond. As it is procur- 
ed by chemists, it appears in the form of a white 
impalpable powder, . It is not soluble in the common 
acids, but dissolves by heat in fixed alkaline lixivia. 
It is an incombustible substance, for it is saturated 
with oxygene. I have proved it to be a compound of 
oxygene, and the peculiar combustible body which I 
have named silicum; and from the experiments of Ber^- 
melius, it is probable that it contains nearly equal 
weights of these two elements. 

2. The sensible properties of lime are well 
known. It exists in soils usually united to carbonic 
acid; which is easily disengaged from it by the attrac- 
tion of the common acids. It is sometimes found 
combined with the phosphoric and sulphuric acids. 
Its chemical properties and agencies in its pure state 
will be described in the Lecture on manures obtained 
from the mineral kingdom. It is soluble in nitric and 
muriatic acids, and forms a substance with sulphuric 
acid, difficult of solution, called gypsum. It is not 
soluble in alkaline solutions. It consists of one pro^* 
portion 40 of the peculiar metallic substance, which I 
have named calcium; and one proportion 15 of oxy« 
gene. 

S. Alumna exists in a pure and crystallized state 
in the white sapphire, and united to a little oxide of 



C 138 3 

iron ;and silica in the other oriental gems. In the state 
in which it is procured by chemists, it appears as a 
white ppwder, soluble in acids and fixed alkaline li- 
quors. From my experiments, it appears that alumi- 
na consists of one proportion 33 of aluminum, and 
one 15 of oxygene. 

4. Magnesia exists in a pure crystallized state, 
constituting a mineral like talc found in North Ame- 
rica, In its common form it is the magnesia tista^ or 
calcined magnesia of druggists. It generally exists in 
soils combined with carbonic acid. It is soluble in all 
the mineral acids; but not in alkaUne lixivia. It is dis- 
tinguished from the other earths found in soils by its 
ready solubility in solutions of alkaline carbonates, 
saturated with carbonic acid. It appears to consist of 
38 magnesium and 15 oxygene. ' ^ 

5. There are two well known oxides of iron^ the 
black and the brown. The black is the substance that 
flies off when red hot iron is hammered. The brown 
oxide may be formed by keeping the black oxide red 
hot, for a long time in contact with air. The first 
seems to consist of one proportion of iron 103, and 
two of oxygene 30; and the second of one proportion 
of iron 103, apd three proportions of oxygene 45. 
The oxides of iron sometimes exist in soils combined 
with carbonic acid; They are easily distinguished from 
other substances by their giving when dissolved in 
acids a black colour to solution of galls, and a bright 
blue precipitate to solution of prussiate (^ potassa and 
iron. 

6. Tbe oxide ofmanganesum is the substance com- 
monly called manganese, and used in bleeching. It 



C ^39 3 

aippears to be cotnposied of cme proportion of manganr 
esum lis, and three of oxygene 45. It is distinguish- 
ed from the other substances found in soils, by its pro- 
perty of decomposing muriatic acid, and converting it 
into chlorine* 

T. Vegetable and animal matters are known by their 
sensible qualities, and by their property of being de- 
composed by heat. Their characters may be learnt 
from the details in the last Lecture. 

8. The saline compounds found in soils, are com- 
'moi^salt, ^sulphate of magnesia, sometimes sulphate of 
iron, nitrates of lime and of magnesia, sulphate of po- 
tassa, and carbonates of potassa and soda. To des- 
cribe their characters minutely will be unnecessary; the 
tests, for most of them have been noticed p. lOS. 

The silica in soils is usually combined with alumi- 
na and oxide^of iron, or with alumina, lime, magnesia, 
and oxide of iron, forming gravel and sand of differ* 
ent degrees of fineness. The carbonate of lime is 
usually in an impalpable form, but sometimes in the 
state of calcareous sand. The magnesia, if not com- 
bined in the gravel and sand of soil, is in a fine pow- 
der united tp carbonic acid. The impalpable part of 
the soil, which is usually called clay or loam, consists 
of silica, alumina, lime, and magnesia; and is, in fact^ 
usually of the same composition as the hard sand, but 
more finely divided. The vegetable or animal, mat- 
ters, (and the first is by £ir the most common in soils) 
exist in different states of decomposition. They are 
sometimes fibrous, sometimes entirely broken down 
and mixed with the soilt 



I 1*0 ] 

To form a just idea of soil$, it is necessary to 
conceive different rocks decomposed, or grpund into 
parts and powder of different degrees of fineness; 
some of their soluble parts dissolved by wiater, and 
that water adhering to the mass, and the whole mixed 
with larger or smaller quantities of the remains 'qf ve- 
getables and animals, in different stages of decay. 

It will be necessary to describe the processes by 
which all the varieties of soib niay be analysed* I 
shall be minute in these particubrs, and, I fear, tedi- 
ous; but the philosophical farmer will, I trusty feel the 
propriety of full details on this subject. 

The instruments required for the analyds of soils 
are few, and but little expensive. They are a balance 
capable of containing a quarter of a pound of com-* 
mon soil, afnd capable of turning when loaded, with 
a grain; a set bf weights froin a quarter of a pound 
Troy to a grain; a wire sieve, sufficiently coarse to ad- 
mit a mustard seed through its apertures; an Argand 
lamp and stand; some glass bottles; Hessian crucible; 
jporcelain, or queen's ware * evaporating basons; a 
Wedgewood pestle and mortar; some filtres made of 
half a sheet of blotting paper, folded so as to contain a 
pint of liquid, and greased at the edges; a bone knife, 
and an apparatus for collecting and measuring aeriform 
fluids. 

The chemical substances or reagents required 
for separating the constituent parts of the soil, have, 
for the most part, been mentioned before: Aey are 
muriatic acid (spirit of sali\ sulphuric acid, pure vola- 
tile alkali dissolved in water, solution of prussiate of 



C 141 3 

potash and iron, succinate of ammonia, soap lye, or 
solution of potossa, solutions of carbonate of ammo- 
nia, of muriate of ammonia, of neutral carbonate of 
potash, and nitrate of j^mmoniac, 

; in cases when the general nature of the soil of a 
field is to be ascertained, specimens of it should be 
taken from different places, two or three inches below 
the surface, and examined as to the similarity of their 
properties. It sometimes happens, that upon plains 
the whole of the upper stratum of the land' is of the 
same kind, and in this case, one analysis will be suf5« 
cient ; but in vallies, and near the beds of rivers, there 
are very great differences, and it now and then occurs 
that one part ®f a field is calcareous, and another 
part siliceous ; and in this case, and in analogous ca^ 
ses, the portions different from each other should be 
separately submitted to experiment. 

Soils wh«n collected, if they cannot be imme- 
diately examined, should be preserved in phials quite 
filled with them, and closed with ground glass stop* 
pers. 

The quantity of soil most cdnvenient for a perfect 
analysis, is from two to four hundred grains. It 
should be collected in dry weather, and exposed to 
the atmosphere till it becomes dry to the touch. 

The specific gravity of a soil, or the relation of 
its wdght to that of water, may be ascertained by in- 
troducing into a phial, which will contain a known 
quantity of water, equal volumes of water and of soil^ 
and this may be easily done by pouring ia water till it 
is balf full, and then adding the soil till the fluid rises 



C 1*2 3 

to the mouth ; the difference between the weight of 
the soil and that of the water, will give the result* 
Thus if the bottle contains four hundred grains of 
water, and gains two hundred grains when half filled 
with water and half with soil,^the specific gravity of 
the soil will be 2, that is, it will be twice as heavy as 
water,and if it gained one hundred and sixty-five grains, ' 
its specific gravity would be 1825, water being 1000. 

It is of importance, that the specific gravity of a 
soil should be known, as it affords an indication of 
the quantity of animal and vegetable matter it con^ 
tains ; these substances being always most abundant 
in the lighter soils. 

The other physical properties of soils should 
likewise be examined before the analysis is made, as 
they denote, to a certain extent, their composition, 
and serve as guides in directing the exp^ments. 
Thus siliceous soils are generally rough to the touch, 
and scratch glass when rubbed upon it ; ferruginous 
soils are of a red or yellow colour j and calcareous 
soils are soft. 

1. Soils, though as dry as they can be made by 
continued exposure to air, in all cases still contain a 
considerable quantity of water, which adheres with 
great obstinacy to the earths and animal and vegeta- 
ble matter, and can only be driven off from them by 
a considerable degree of heat. The first process of 
analysis is, to free the given weight of soil from as 
much of this water as possible, without in other res. 
pects, affecting its composition ; and this may be done 
by heating it for t^n or twelve minutes over an Ar- 



t 148 ] ♦ 

gand*s lamp, in a bason of porcelain, to a. temperature 
equal to 300 Fahrenheit ; and if a thermometer is not 
used, the proper degree may be easily ascertained, by 
keeping a piece of wood in contact with the bottom of 
the dish ; as long as the colour of the wood remains 
unaltered, the heat is not too high ; but when the 
wood begins to be charred, the process must be stop- 
ped. ' A small quantity of water will perhaps remain 
in the soil even after this operation, but it always af- 
fords useful comparative results j and if a higher 
temperature were employed, the vegetable or animal 
matter would undergo decomposition, and in conse- 
quence the experiment be wholly unsatisfactory. 

The loss of weight in the process should be care- 
fully noted, and when in four hundred grains of soil 
it reaches as high as 50, the soil may be considered 
as in the greatest degree absorbent, and retentive of 
water, and will generally be found to contain much 
vegetable or animal matter, or a large proportion of 
aluminous eartli. When the loss is only from 20 to 
10, the land may be considered as. only slightly absor- 
bent and retentive, and siliceous earth probably forms 
the greatest part of it. 

2. None of the loose stones, gravel, or large 
vegetable fibres should be divided from the pure soil 
till after the water is drawn off j for these bodies are 
themselves often highly absorbent and retentive, and 
in consequence influence the fertility of the land. The 
next process, however, after that of heating, should be 
thar separation, which may be easily accomplished by 
the sieve, after the soil has been gently bruised in a 



[ 144 3 

qiortar. The weights of the vegetable fibres or wood, 
and of the gravel and stones should be separately 
noted down, and the nature of the last ascertained ; 
if calcereous, they will effervesce with acids ; if sili- 
ceous, they will be sufficiently hard to scratch glass ; 
and if of the common alumihous class of stones, they 
will be soft, easily cut with a knife, and incapable of 
effervescing with acids. 

3. The greater number of soils, besides gravel 
and stones, contain larger or smaller proportions pf 
sand of different degrees of fineness ; and it is a neces- 
sary operation, the next in the process of analysis, to 
detach them from the parts in a state of more minute 
division, such as clay, loam, marie, vegetable and ani- 
mal matter, an!d the matter soluble in water. This 
may be effected in a way sufficiently accurate, by boil- 
ing the soil in three or four times its weight of water ; 
and when the texture of the soil is broken down, and 
the water cool ; by agitating the parts together, smd 
then buffering them to rest. In this case, the coarse 
sand will generally separate in a minute, ahd the finer 
in two or three minutes, whilst the highly divid^ earthy, 
animal, or vegetable matter will remain in a state of me- 
chanical supension for a much longer time ; so that by 
pouring the water from the bottom of the vessel, after 
one, two or three minutes, the sand will be principally 
separated from the other substances, which, with the 
water containing them, must be poured intp a filtre, 
and after the water has passed through, collected, 
dried, and weighed. The sand must likewise be 
weighed, and the respective quantities noted down. 



C 145 ] 

The water of Uxiviation must be preserved, as it will 
be found to contain the saline and soluble animal or 
vegetable matters, if any exist in the soil. 

4f. By the process of washing and filtration, the 
soil is separated into two portions, the most important 
of which is generally the finely divided matter. A 
minute analysis of the sand is seldoni or never neces- 
sary, and its nature may be detected in the same man- 
ner as that of the stones or gravel. It is always either 
siliceous sand, or calcareous sand, or a mixture of 
both. If it consist wholly of carbonate of lime, it will 
be rapidly soluble in muriatic acid, with effervescence; 
but if it consist partly of this substance, and partly of 
siliceous matter, the respective quantities may be as- 
certained by weighing the residuum after the action of 
the acid, which must be applied till the mixture has 
acquired a sour taste, and has ceased to effervesce. 
This residuum is the siKceous part: it must be washed, , 
dried, and heated strongly in a crucible; the difference 
between the weight of it and the weight of the whole, 
indicates the proportion of calcareous sand. 

5. The finely divided matter of the soil is usually 
very compound in its nature; it sometimes contains all 
the f6ur primitive earths of soils, as well as animal and 
vegetable matter; and to ascertain the proportions of 
these with tolerable accuracy, is the most difficult part 
of the subject. 

The first process to be performed, in this part of 
the analysis, is the exposure of the fine matter of the 
soil to the action of muriatic acid. This substance 
should be poured upon the earthy matter in an eva- 

u 



C 146 3 

poratiiig bason, in a quantity equal to twke the wdgbt 
of the earthy matter; but dihited with double its volume 
of water. The mixture should be often stirred, and 
suffered to remain for anliour, or an hour and a half; 
before it is examined. 

If any carbonate of lime or of magnesia eidst in 
the soil, they will have been dissolved in this time by 
the acid, which sometimes takes up likewise a little 
oxide of iron; but very seldom any alumina* 

The fluid should be passed through a filtre; the 
solid matter collected, washed with rain water, dried 
at a moderate heat, and weighed. Its loss will denote 
the quantity of solid matter taken up. The washings 
must be added to the solution, which if not sour to the 
taste, must be made sq by the addition of fresh add, 
when a little solution of prussiate of potassa and iroDi 
must be mixed with the whole. If a blue precipitate 
Occurs,, it denotes the presence of oxide of iron, and 
the solution of the prussiate must be dropped in till 
no ferther effect is produced. To ascertain its quan« 
tity, it must be collected in the same manner as other 
^lid precipitates, and heated red; the result is oxide 
ef iron, which may be mixed with a little oxide of 
manganesum. 

Into the fluid freed from oxide of iron, a solu- 
tion of neutralized carbonate of potash must be pour- 
ed dll all effervescence ceases in it, and till its taste and 
smell indicate a considerable excess of alkaline salt. 

The precipitate that falls down is carbonate of 
lime; it must be collected on the filtre, and dried at a 
heat below that of redness. 



C W7 3 

The remaining fluid must bebdled for a quarter 
of an hour, when the magnesia, if any exist, \idll be 
precijntated from it, combined with carbonic add, and 
its quantity is to be ascertained in the same manner as 
that of the carbonate of lime. 

If any minute proportion of* alumina should, 
from peculiar circumstances, be dissolV^ed by die add, 
it ymll be foimd in the predpitate with the carbonate of 
lime, and it may be separated from it by boiling it for 
a few minutes with soap lye, sufficient to cover the 
solid matter; this substance dissolves alumina, with* 
out acting upon carbonate of lime. 

Should the finely divided soil be sufficiently cal- 
careous to effervesce very strongly with adds, a very 
simple method may be adopted for ascertaining the 
quantity of carbonate of lime, and one sufficiently ac- 
curate in all common cases. 

Carbonate of lime, in all its states, contains a de- 
terminate proportion of carbonic acid, i. e. nearly 43 
per cent, so that when the quantity of this elastic fluid 
giv^n out by any soil during the solution of its calcare- 
ous matter in an add is known, either in wdght or 
measure, the quantity of carbonate of lime may be 
easily discovered. 

^ When the process by diminution of wdght is 
empbyed, two parts of the add and one part of the 
matter of the soil must be wdghed in two separate bot- 
tles, and* very slowly mixed together rill the efferves- 
cence crises; the difference between their wdght be- 
fore and after the experiment, denotes the quantity 
of carbonic carbonic add lost; for every four grains 



11^ 1 

and a quaiter of vfHch^ ten graiiiS of , carbonate of 
liipe must be estimated. 

The best method of collecting the carbonic acid, 
so as to discovjer its volume, is by a peculiar pneumat- 
ic, apparatus * in which its bulk may be measured by 
the qu^tity of .water it dissolves, 

6. Afterj^lft calcareous parts of the soil has been 
acted upo^ by muriatic acid, the next process is to as- 
certain the (quantity of finely divided insoluble animal 
at^ vegetable matter th^t it contains. 

This may be done with sufficient precision, by 
strongly igniting it in a crucible over a common fire 
till no blackness remains in the mass. It should be 
often stirred with a metallic rod, so as to expose new 
surfaces continually to the air; the loss of weight that 
it undergoes denotes the quantity of the substance 
that it contains destructible by fire and zxt. 

It is not possible, without very refined and diffi- 
cult experiinents, to ascertain whether this substance 



*Fig. 15/A,B, C, D, represent the difij^rent parts of this apparatus. A. Repre- 
sents the bottle for receiring the soil. B. the bottto c^ntaifting the acid&gt; furnished 
willh a stop-coelh C. the tobe oennected with a flaceid bladder. D. The gradoated 
measure. E. The bottle for containing the bkidder. IVhen this instrument is used 
» given quantity of soil is introduced into A. B is filled with muriatic acid diluted^ 
vri»h«n e^nal quantity of water; and^tbe ttop-cock being closedii? connected with 
the. upper orifice of A&gt; which is ground to receive it. The tubeD is introduced 
into the lowerorlfiCeof A, and the bladder connected with k placed in &gt;» flaccid 
f taJte into B, which is filled with wat^« * The graduated measure is placed under the 
tnbe of E. When the stop-cock of B is turned* the acid flows into A, and acts 
upon the soil; the elastic fluid generated passes through C into the bladder, and 
4i«plafi»f a qnwtity of water in E» equal to it in bulk, and this water flows through 
the tnbe into the graduated measure: and gives by its volume the indication of 
the proportion of carbonie acid disengaged from the sml; for every ouace measure 
of whi^^wagrains of Qarbontte of lime may be estiaftted. 



P.U8 




.-•^ 



C 149 3 

is wholly animal or vegetable matter, or a mixtiire of 
both. When the smell emitted during the incinera- 
tion is similar to that of burnt feathers, it is a certain 
indicatiph of some substance either animal or analo- 
gous to animal matter ; and a copious blue flame at 
the time of ignition, almost always denotes a consi- 
derable propoirtion of vegetable matter. In cases 
when it is necessary that the experiment should be 
very quickly performed, the destruction of the decom- 
posable substances may be assisted by the agency of 
nitrate of ammoniac, which at the time of ignition may 
be thrown gradually upon the heated mass in the 
quantity of twenty grains for every himdred of residual 
soil. It accelerates the dissipation of the animal and 
vegetable matter, which it causes to be converted into 
eliastic fluids ; ^nd it is itself at the same time decom^- 
posed and lost. 

7. The substances remaining after the destruc- 
tion of the vegetable and animal matter, are generally 
minute particles of earthy matter, containing usually 
alumina and silica, with combined oxide of iron or 
of mangsmesum. 

To separate these from each other, the solid mat- 
ter should be boiled for two or three hours with sul- 
l^uric acid, diluted with four times its weight of wa- 
ter J the quantity of the acid should be regulated by 
the qusmtity of solid residuum to be acted on, allow- 
ing for every hundred grains, two drachms or one 
hundred and twenty grains of acid. 

The substance remaining after the action of the 
acid, XjKiay be considered as siliceous j and it must be 



C 150 ] 

separated and its Affreight ascertained, after washing 
and drying in the usual mantier. 

The alumina and the oxide of iron and mangane- 
sum if any exist, are all dissolved by the sulphuric acid ; 
they may be separated by succinate of ammonia, ad- 
ded to excess: which throws down the oxide of iron, 
and by soap lye, which will dissolve the alumina, but 
not the oxide of manganesum ; the weights of the 
oxides ascertained after they have been heated to red- 
ness will denote their quantities. 

Should any magnesia and lime hav^ escaped so- 
lution in the muriatic acid, they will be found in the 
sulphuric aqid ; this, however, is rarely the case ; but 
the process for detecting them, and ascertaining their 
quantities, is the same in both instances. 

The method of analysis by sulphuric acid, is suf- 
ficiently precise for all usual experiments ; but if very 
great accuracy be an object, dry carbonate of potassa 
must be employed as the agent, and the residuum of 
the incineration (6) must be heated red for a half hour, 
with four times its weight of this substance, in a cruci- 
ble of silver, or of well baked porcelain. The mass 
obtained must be dissolved in muriatic add, and the 
solution evaporated till it is nearly solid; distilled 
water must then be added, by which the oxide of iron 
and all the earths, except silica, will be dissolved in 
combination as muriates. The silica, after the usual 
process of lixiviation, must be heated red j the other 
substances may be separated in the same manner as 
from the muriatic and sulphuric solutions. 



This process is the one usually employed by 
chemical phibsophers for the analysis of stories. 

8. If any valine matter, or soluble vegetable or 
animal matter is suspected in the soil, it will be found 
in the water of Hxiviation used for separating the 
sand. 

This water must be evaporated to dryness in a- 
proper dish, at a heat below its boiling point. 

If the solid ittatter obtained is of a brown colour 
and inflammable, it may be considered as partly vege- 
table extract. If its smell, when exposed to heat, be 
like that of burnt feathers, it contains animal or albu- 
minous matta:; if it be white, crystalline, and not 
destructible by heat, it may be considered as principal- 
ly saline matter ) the nature of which may be known 
by the tests described page 103. 

9. Should sulphate or phosphate of lime be sus&lt; 
pected in the entire soil, the detection of them re- 
quires a particular process upon it. A given weight 
of it, for instance four hundred grains^ must be heat- 
ed red for half an hour in a crucible, mixed with otie- 
third of powdered charcoal. The mixture must be 
boiled for a quarter of an hoar, in half a pint of water, 
and the fluid collected through the filtre, and exposed 
for some days to the atmos[Aere in an open vessel. 
If any notable quantity of sulphate of lime (gypsum) 
existed in the soil, a white precipitate will gradually 
form in the fluid, and the weight of it will indicate the 
proportion. 

Phosphate of lime, if any exist, may be separated 
from the soil after the process for gypsum. Muriatic^ 



C 152 ] 

acid must be digested upon the soH, in quantity more 
than suiEcient to saturate the soluble earths ; the 
solution must be evaporated, and water poured upon 
the solid matter. This fluid will dissolve the com- 
pounds of earths with the muriatic acid, and leave the 
phosphate of lime untouched. 

It would not fall within the limits assigned to this 
Lecture, to detail any processes for the detection of 
substances which may be accidentally mixed with the 
matters of soils. Other earths and metallic oxides 
are now and then found in them, but in quantities 
too minute to bear any relation to fertility or barren- 
ness, and the search for them would make analysis 
much more complicated without rendering it more 
useful. 

10. When the examination of a soil is comple- 
ted, the products should be numerically arranged, 
and thejf quantities added together, and if they nearly 
equal the original quantity of soil, the analysis may be 
considered as accurate. It must, however, be noticed, 
that when phosphate or sulphate of lime are disco- 
vered by the independent process just described, (9,) 
a correction must be made for the general process, by 
subtracting a sum equal to their weight from the 
quantity of carbonate of lime, obtained by precipita- 
tion from the muriatic acid. 

In arranging the products, the form should be in 
the order of the experiments by which they were pro- 
cured. 

Thus, I obtained from 400 grains of a good sili- 
ceous sandy soil from a hop garden near Tunbridge, 
Kent, \ 



t W3 3 

grains. 
Of water of absorption - • - 19 

Of loose stones and gravel principally ^liceous 53 

Of undecompounded vegetable fibres - 14 

Of fine siliceous sand - * - 212 

Of minutely divided matter separated by agitation^ . 

and fiiltration, and consisting of 

Carbonate of lime - - - 19 
Carbonate of magnesia - ' ^. 3 
Matter destructible by heat, principally 

vegetable - - * - 15 

Silica - - ^ ^ . 21 

Alumina - - - . - - IS 
Oxide of iron - - - - 5 

Soluble matter, principally comn]i^Q 
salt and vegetable extract * 3 

Gypsum * - - - • 2 

. — 81 

Amouht of all the products 379 
Loss - . - . 21 

The loss in this analysis is^ not more than usually 
odcurs, and it depends upon the impossibility of collec- 
ting the whole quantities of the different precipitates ; 
and upon the presence of more moisture than is ac 
counted for ili the water of absorption, and which is lost 
in the different processes. 

When the experimenter is become acquainted 
with the Use of the; different instruments, the proper- 
ties of the reagents, and the relations between the ex- 
ternal and chemical qualities of soils, he will seldom 
find it necessary to perform, in any one case, all the 

X 



processes that l^ve been describefl. When his soil, 
for instance, contains no notable proportion of cal- 
careous matter,' the action of the muriatic acid (7) 
may be omitted. In examining peat soilSj he will 
principally have to attend to the operation by fire 
alnd air (8) ; and in the analysis of chalks and loams, 
he will often be able to omit the experiment by sul- 
phuric acid (9). 

In the first trials that are made by persons unac- 
quainted with chemistry, they must not expect much 
precision of result. Many difficulties will be met 
with : but in overcoming them, the most useful kind 
of practical knowledge will be obtained ; and nothing 
is so instructive in experimental science, as the detec- 
tion of mistakes. The correct analyst ought to be well 
grounded in general chemical information; but perhaps 
there is no better mode of gaining it, than that of at* 
tempting original investigations. In pursuing" his expe- 
riments, he will be continually obliged to learn the pro- 
perties of the substances he is employing or acting 
upon i and his theoretical ideas will be more valuable 
in being connected with practical operations, and ac- 
quired for the purpose of discovery. 

Plants being possessed of no locomotive powers, 
can grow pnly in places where they are supplied with 
food j and the soil is necessary to their existence, 
both as affording them nourishment, and enabling 
them to fix themselves in such a manner as to obey 
those mechanical laws by which their radicles are kept 
below the surface, and their leaves exposed to the free 
atmosphere. As the systems of roots,' branches, and 



[ 155 ] 

leaves are very different in different vegetables, sathey 
flourish most in different soils : the plants that have 
bulbous roots require a looser and a lighter soil than 
such as have fibrous roots ; and the pliints possessing 
only short fibrous radicles demand a firmer soil than 
such as have tap roots, or extensive lateral roots. 

A good turnip soil from Holkham, Norfolk, af- 
forded me 8 parts out of 9 siliceous sand j and the 
finely divided matter consisted 

Of carbonate of lime ... 63 
-i- silica - . - - • 15 

— alumina - - - - 11 

i— oxide of iron - - - - 3 "- 

— vegetable and saline matter - 5 
-— moisture - - - - 3 

I found the soil taken from a field at Sheffield* 
place in Sussex, remarkable for producing flourishing 
oaks, to consist of six parts of sand, and one part 
of clay and finely divided matter. And one hundred 
parts of the entire soil submitted to analysis produced 





parts. 


SiUca . . . . . 


54s 


Alumina - . - . - . 


28 


Carbonate of lime • - 


3 


Oxide of iron - ... 


5 


Decomposing vegetable matter 


4 


Moisture and loss 


- 3 


An excellent wheat soil from the m 


^ighbourhood 


of West Drayton,, Middlesex, gave 3 part 


s in 5 of sill- 



C 15^ 3 

ceous sand; and the finely divided matter con^s* 

ted of 

Carbonate of lime - - - 28 
Silica - - . - . 82 

Aluniina - , , . . ^ 29 
Animal or vegetable matter and moisture 1 1 

Of these soils the last was by far the most, and 
the first the least, coherent in texture. In all cases 
the constituent parts of the soil which give tenacity and 
coherence ar.e the. finely divided matterisj and they 
possess the power, of giving those qualities in the 
highest degree when they contain much alumina. A 
. small quantity of finely divided matter is sufficient to 
fit a soil for the production of turnips and barley ; and 
I have seen a tolerable crop of turnips on a soil con- 
taining 1 1 parts out of 12 sand. A much greater pro- 
portion of sand, however, always produces absolute 
sterility. The soil of Bagshot heath, which is entire- 
ly devoid of vegetable coverings contains less than /^ 
of finely divided matter. 400 parts of it, which had 
been heated red, afforded me 380 parts of coarse sili- 
ceous sand ; 9 parts of fine siliceous sand; and 1 1 
parts of impalpable matter which was a mixture of fer- 
ruginous clay, with carbonate of lime. Vegetable or 
animal matters, when finely divided, aot only give co- 
herence, but likewise softness and penetrability j but 
neither they nor any other part of the soil must be in 
too great proportion ; and a soil is unproductive if it 
consist entirely of impalpable matters. 

Pure alumina or silica, pure caii^onate of lime, 
or carbonate of magnesb, are incapable of supporting 
healthy vegetation* 



C 157 3 

No soil is fertile that contains as much as 19 parts 
out of 20 of any of the constituents that have been 
mentioned, . 

It will be asked, are the piire earths in the soil 
jnerely active as mechanical or indirect chemical 
agents^ or do they actually afford food to the plant? 
This is an important question; and not difGcult of sol- 
ution. 

The earths consist, as I have before stated, of 
metals united to oxygene; and these metals have not 
beeii decomposed; there is consequently no reason to 
suppose that the earths are convertible into the ele- 
ments of organized compounds, into carbon, hydro- 
gene, and azote« 

Plants have been made to grow in given quanti- 
ties of earth. They consume very small portions only; 
and what is lost may be accounted for by the quantities 
found in their ashes; that is to say, it has not been 
converted into any new products. 

The carbonic acid united to lime or magnesia, if 
any stronger acid happens to be formed in the soil 
during the feitnentation of vegetable matter which will 
^disengage it from the earths, may be decomposed: 
but the earths themselves cannot be supposed convert- 
ible into other substances, by any process taking place 
in the soil. 

In all cases the ashes of plants contain some of 
the earths of the soil in which they grow; but these 
earths, as may be seen from the table of the ashes af- 
forded by diflfer^t plants given in the last Lecture, 
never equal more than tV of the weight of the plant 
consumed. 



C 158 ] 

If they be considered as necessary to the vegeta- 
ble, it is as giving hardness and firmness to its organi- 
zation. Thus, it has been mentioned that wheat, oats, 
and many of the hollow grasses, have an epidermis 
principally of siliceous earth; the use of which seems 
to be to strengthen them, and defend them from the 
attacks of insects aiid parasitical plants. 

Many soils are popularly distinguished as cold; 
and the distinction, though at first view it may appear 
to be founded on prejudice, is really just. 

Some soils are much more heated by the rays of 
the sun, all other circumstances being equal, than 
others; and soils brought to the same degree of heat 
cool in different times, /. e* some cool much faster 
than others. 

This property has been very little attended to in 
a philosophical point of view; yet it is of the highest 
importance in agriculture. In general, soils that con- 
sist principally of a stiflf white clay are difficultly heated; 
and being usually very moist, they retain their heat 
only for a short time. Chalks are similar in one res- 
pect, that they are difficultly heated; but bring drier 
they retain their heat longer, less being consumed in 
causing the evaporation of their moisture, 

A black soil, containing much soft vegetable mat- 
ter, is most heated by the sun and air; and the col- 
oured soils, and the soils containing much carbonace- 
ous matter, or ferruginous matter, exposed under » 
equal circumstances to sun, acquire a much higher 
temperature than pale-coloured soils. 



C 159 3 

When soils are perfectly dry, those that most 
readily, become heafed by the solar rays likewise cool 
most rapidly; but I have ascertained by experiment, that 
the darkest coloured dry soil (that which contains 
abundance of animal or vegetable matter; substances 
which most facilitate the diminution of temperature,) 
when heated to the same degree, provided it be with- 
in the common limits of the eflfect of solar heat, will 
cool more slowly than a wet pale soil, entirely coto- 
posed of earthy matter. 

I found that a rich black mould, which contained 
nearly i of vegetable matter, had its temperature in- 
creased in an hour* from 65^ to 88° by exposure to 
sunshine; whilst a chalk soil was heated only to 69^ 
under the same circumstances. But the mould re- 
moved into the shade, where the temperature was 62'', 
lost, in half an hour, 15"^; whereas the chalk, under 
the same circumstances, had lost only 4^. 

. A brown fertile soil, and a cold barren clay were 
each artificially heated to 88''^ having been previously 
dried: they were then exposed to a temperature of 57^; 
in half an hour the dark soil was found to have lost 9® 
of hejtt; the clay had lost only 6^ An equal portion 
of the clay containing moisture, after being heated to 
88% was exposed in a temperature of 55% in less than 
a quarter of an hour it was found to have gained the 
temperature of the. room. The soils in all these ex- 
periments were placed in small tin plate trays two 
inches square^ and half an inch in depth; and the tem- 
perature ascertained by a delicate thermometer. 

Nothing; can be more evident, than that the 



C 160 3 

genizl heat of the soil, particularly in spring, must be 
of the highest importance to the rising plant. And 
when the leaves are fiilly developed, the ground is 
shadedj and any injurious influence, which in the sum- 
mer might be expected from too great a heat, entirely 
prevented: so that the temperature of the surface; 
when bare and exposed to the rays of the sun, affords 
at least one indication of the degrees of its fertility; arid 
the thermometer may be sometimes a useful instru* 
ment to the purchaser or improver of larids* 

The moisture in the soil influences its tempera- 
ture; and the manner in which it is distributed through, 
or combined with, the earthy materials, is of great 
importance iri relation to the nutriment of the plant. 
If water is too strongly attracted by the earths, it will 
not be absorbed by the roots of the plants; if it is in 
too great quantity, or too loosely united to them, it 
tends to injure or destroy the fibrous parts of the 
roots. 

There are two states iri which water seems to 
exist in the earths, and in animal and vegetable substan* 
ces: in the first state it is united by chemical, in the 
other by cohesive attraction. 

If pure solution of ammonia or potassa be poured 
into a solution of alum, alumina fells down combined 
with water; and the water dried by exposure to air will 
afibrd more than half its weight of water by distilla- 
tion; in this instance the water is united by chemical 
attraction. The moisture which wood, or muscular 
fibre, or gum,, that haue been heated to 212% afford 
ty distillation at a red heat, i« likewise water, the ele- 



[ 161 3 

ments of which were united in the substance by che- 
mical combination. , , 

When pipe-clay dried at the temperature of the 
atmosphere is brought in contact with water, the fluid 
is rapidly absorbed j this is owing to cohesive attrac- 
tion. Soils in general, vegetable, and animal sub- 
stances, that have been dried at a heat below that of 
boiling water, increase in weight by exposure to air, 
owing to their absorbing water existing in the state of . 
vapour in the air, in consequence of cohesive attrac- 
tion. 

The water chemically combined amongst the ele- 
ments of soils, unless in the case of the decomposition 
of animal or vegetable substances, caimot be absorbed 
by the roots of plants j but that adhering to the parts 
of the soil is in constant use in vegetation. Indeed 
there are few mixtures of the earths found in soils, 
that contain any chemically combined water ; water 
is expelled from the earths by most substances that 
combine with them. Thus, if a combination of lime 
and water be exposed to carbonic acid, the carbonic 
acid takes the place of water ; and compounds of alu- 
mina and silica, or other compounds of the earths, do 
not chemically unite with water: and soils, as it has 
been stated, are formed either by earthy carbonates, 
or compounds of the pure earths and metallic oxides. 

When saline substances exist in soils, they may 
be united to water both chemically and mechanically j 
but they are always in too small a quantity to influence 
materially the relations of the soil to water. 



t 162 3 

The powpr of the soil to absorb water by cohe- 
sive attraction, depends in great measure upon the 
state of division of its parts ; the more divided they 
are, the greater is their absorbent power. The differ- 
ent constituent parts of soils likewise appear to act, 
even by cohesive attraction, with different degrees of 
energy. Thus vegetable substances seem to be more 
absorbent than animal substances ; animal substances 
more so than compounds of alumina and silica ; and 
compounds of alumina and silica more absorbent than 
corbonates of lime and magnesia : these differences 
may, however, possibly depend upon the differences 
in their state of division, and upon the surface ex- 
posed. 

The power of soils to absorb watCT from air, is 
much connected with fertility. When this power is 
great, the plant is supplied with moisture in dry sea- 
sons ; and the effect of evaporation in the day is coun- 
teracted by the absorption of aqueous vapour from 
the atmosphere, by the interior parts of the soil during 
the day, and by both the exterior and interior during 
night. 

The stiff clays approaching to pipe-clays in their 
nature, which take up the greatest quantity of water 
when it is poured upon them in ,a fluid form, are not 
the soils which absorb most moisture from the atmos- 
phere in dry weather. They cake, and present only a 
small surface to the air ; and the vegetation on them 
is generally burnt up almost as readily as on sands. 

The soils that are most efficient in supplying the 
plant with water by atmospheric absorption, are those 



in which there is a due mixture of sand, finely divided 
clay, and carbonate of lime, with some animal or ve- 
getable matter ; and which are so loose and light as 
to be freely permeable to the atmosphere. With res- 
pect to this quality, carbonate of lime and animal and 
vegetable matter are of great use in soils ; they give 
absorbent power to the soil without giving it likewise 
tenacity : sand, which also destroys tenacity, on the 
contrary, gives little absorbent power. 

I have compared the absorbent powers of many 
soils with respect to atmospheric nioisture, and I have 
always found it greatest in the most fertile soils : so 
that it affords one method of judging of the produc- 
tiveness of land. 

1000 parts of a celebrated soil from Ormiston, 
HI East Lothian, which cpntained more than half its 
weight of finely divided matter, of which 11 parte 
were carbonate of lime, and 9 parts vegetable matter, 
when dried at 212*^, gained in an hour by exposure to 
sur saturated wit^ moisture, at temperature 62% 18 
grains. 

1000 parts of a very fertUe soil from the bai^ 
of the river Parret, in Somersetshire, under the same 
circumstances, gained 16 grains. 

MXX) parts of a soii from Mersea, in Essex, 
worth 45 shillings an acre, gained IS grains. 

IQOO grains of a fine sand from Essex, worth 
28 dullings an acre, gained i 1 grains. 

1000 pf a coarse sand worth 15 shillings an acre, 

gained only 8 grains. 

1000 q£ the soil of Bagshot-heath gained only 3 
grains. 



C 164 3 

Water, and the decomposing animal and vegeta* 
ble matter existing in the soil, constitute the true 
nourishment of plants ; and as the earthy parts of the 
soil are useful in retaining water, so as to supply it 
ia the proper proportions to the f-oots of the vegeta- 
bles, so they are likewise efficacious in producing the 
proper distribution of the animal or vegetable matter ; 
when equally mixed with it they prevent it from de- 
composing too rapidly ; and by their means the solu- 
ble parts are supplied in proper proportions. 

Besides this agency, which may be considered as 
mechanical, there is another agency between soil$ and 
organizable matters, which may be regarded as che- 
mical in its ngiture. The earths, and even the earthy 
carbonates, have a certain degree of chemical attrac- 
tion for many of the principles of vegetable and ani- 
mal substances. This is easily exemplified in the in- 
stance of alumina and oil ; if an acid solution of alu- 
mina be mixed with a solution of soap, which consists 
of oily matter and potassa ; the oil and the alumina 
will unite and form a white powder, which will sink 
to the bottom of the fluid. 

The extract from decomposing vegetable matter 
when boiled with pipe-clay or chalk, forms a combinap 
tion by which the vegetable matter is rendered more 
difficult of decomposition and of solution. Pure silica 
and siliceous sand$ have little action of this kind ; and 
the soils which contain the niost alumina and carbon- 
ate of lime, are these which act with the greatest che- 
mical energy in preserving manures. Such soils 
merit the appellation which is conunonly given to them 



C 165 3 

of rich soils ; for the vegetable nourishment iis long 
preserved in them, unless taken up by the organs of 
plants. Siliceous sands, on the contrary, deserve the 
term hungry, which is commonly applied to them ; for 
the vegetable and animal matters they contain not be- 
ing attracted by the earthy constituent parts of the 
soil, are more liable to be decomposed by the action of 
the atmosphere, or carried oflF from them by water. 

In most of the black and brown rich vegetable 
moulds, the earths seem to be in cdmbination with a 
peculiar extractive matter, afforded during the decom- 
position of vegetables : this is slowly taken up, or at- 
tracted from the earths by water, and appears to con- 
stitute a prime cause of the fertility lof the soil. 

The standard of fertility of soils for different 
plants must vary with the climate ; and must be parti- 
cularly influenced by the quantity of rain. 

The power of soils to absorb moisture ought to 
be much greater in warm or dry counties, than in cold 
and moist ones ; and the quantity of clay, or vegeta«- 
ble or animal matter they contain greater. Soils also 
on declivities ought to be more absorbent than in 
plains or in the bottom of vallies. Th^ir productive- 
ness likewise is influenced by the nature of the sub- 
soil or the stratum on which they rest. 

When soils are immediately situated upon abed 
of rock or stone, they are much sooner rendered dry 
by evaporation, than where the subsoil is of cl^y or 
marie ; and a prime cause of the great fertility of the 
land in the moist climate of Ireland, is the proximil;y 
of the rocky strata to the soil. 



I 166 3 

A clayey subsoil will sometimes be of material 
advantage to a sandy soil; and ia this case it will i^* 
tain moisture in such a manner as to be capable of 
supplying that lost by the earth above, inconsequence 
of evaporation, or the consumption of it by plants* 

A sandy, or gravelly subsoil, often corrects the 
imperfections of too great a degree of absorbent power 
in the true soil. 

In calcareous countries, where the surface is a 
species of marie, the soil is often found only a few 
inches above the limestone; and its fertility is not im- 
paired by the proximity of the rock; though ia a less 
absorbent spil, this situation would occasion barren- 
ness; and the sandstone and limestone hills |n Derby- 
shire and North Wales, may be ea^ly distinguished at 
a distance in summer by the differei^ tints of the ve- 
getation. The grass on tie sandstone hills usually 
appears brown and burnt up; that onthf limestone 
hills, flourishing and green. 

In &lt;Jevoting the different parts of an estate to the 
necessary crops, it is perfectly evident from what has 
been said, that no general principle caji be laid down, 
except when all the circumstances of the n?iture, com- 
position, and situation of the soil and subsoil are 
known. 

The methods af cultivatioli likewise must be dif- 
ferent for different soils. The satoe practice which will 
be excellent in one case may be destructive in another. 

Deep ploughing may be a veiy profitable practice 
in a rich thick soil; and. in a fertile shallow soil, situa^. 
ted upon cold clay or sandy subsoil, it may be ex- 
tremely prejudicial. 



167 3 

In a moist clirtiate where the quantity of rain that 
falls annually equals from 40 to 60 inches, as in Lan- 
cashire, Cornwall, and some parts of Ireland, a silice- 
ous sandy soil is much more productive than ill dry 
districts; and in such situations, wheat and beans will 
require a less coherent and absorbent soil than in 
drier* situations; and plants having bulbous roots, will 
flourish in a soil containing as much as 14 parts put 
of 15 of Sahd. ^ 

Even the exhausting powers of crops will be in- 
fluenced by like circumstances. In cases where plants 
cannot absorb sufficient moisture, they must take up 
more manure. Ahd in Ireland, Cornwall, and the 
.weisterfl Highlands of Scotland, corn will exhaust less 
than in dry inlarfd Situations. Oats, particularly in 
dry climates, are impoverishing in a much higher de- 
'gree than in moist ones. 

Soils appear to have been originally produced ia 
consequence of the decomposition of rocks and strata. 
It often happens that soils are found in an utmltered 
state upon the rocks from which they were derived. 
It is easy to form an idea of the manner in which 
rocks afe converted into soils, by referring to the in- 
stance of s^ft grafiite, tyrprocelain granite. This sub- 
stance consists of three ingredients, quartz, feldspar, 
and mica. The quartz is almost pure siliceous earth, 
in a crystalline form. The feldspar and mica are very 
compounded substances; both contain silica, alumina, 
'^d oxide of iron; in the feldspar there is usually 
-lifrt^ and potstssa; in the mica, lime and magnesia* 



[ 168 3 

When a granitic rock of this kind has been long 
exposed to the influence of air and water, the lime 
and the potassa contained in its constituent parts are 
acted upon by water or carbonic acid; and the oxide 
of iron, which is almost always in its least oxided state, 
tends to combine with more oxygene; the consequence 
is, that the feldspar decomposes, and likewise the 
mica; but the first the most rapidly. The feldspar, 
which is as it were the cement of the stone, forms a 
fine clay: the mica partially decomposed mixes with 
it as sand; and the undecomposed quartz appears as 
gravel, or sand of different degrees of fineness. ' 

As soon as the smallest layer of earth is formed ou 
the surface of a rock, the seeds of lichens, mosses, and 
other imperfect vegetables which are constantly float- 
ing in the atmosphere, and which have made it their 
resting place, begin to vegetate; their death, decompo-^ 
sition, and decay afford a certain quantity of organi- 
zable matter, which mixes with the earthy materials of 
t;he rock; in this improved soil more perfect plants are^ 
capable of subsisting; these in their turn absorb nour- 
ishment from water and the atmosphere; and after per- 
ishing afford new materials to those already provided: 
the decomposition of the rock still continues; and at 
length by such slow and gradual processes, a soil is 
formed in which even forest trees can fix 'their roots, 
and which is fitted to reward the labours of the culti- 
vator. 

In instances where successive generations of vege- 
tables have grown upon a soil, unless part of their pro- 
duce has been carried off" by man, or consumed by 



t m y 

animals, the vegetable matter increases in such a pro^ 
portion, that th^ soil approaches to a peat in its na- 
ture ; and if in a situation where it can receive water 
from a higher district, it becomes spongy, and per- 
meated with that flukl and is gradually rendered in- 
capable of supporting the nobler classes of vegettibles. 

Many peat-mosses seem to have been formed by 
the destruction of forests, in consequence of the impru- 
dent use of the hatchet by the early cultivators of the 
country in which they exist : when the trees are fel- 
led in die out-skirts of a wood, those in the interior ex- 
posed to the influence of the winds ; and having been 
accustomed to shelter, become unhealthy, and 
die in their new situation; and their leaves and 
branches gradually decomposing, produce a stratum 
of vegetable nmtten In many of the great bogs in 
Ireland and Scotland, the larger trees that are found 
in the out-skirts of them, bear the marks of having 
been felled. In the interior, few enthre trees are 
found ; and the cause is, probably, that diey fell by 
gradual decay ; and diat the fermentation and decom- 
position of the vegetable matter was most rapid where 
it was in the greatest quantity^ 

Lakes and pools of water are some times filled 
up hy the accumulation of the nmahis of acquatic 
plants } and in this case a sort of spurious peat is 
formed. The fennentation in these cases, however, 
seems to be of a differrat kind« Much more gaseous 
matter is evolved } wd the neighbourhood of moras- 
ses in which aquatic vegetables decompose^ t« usually ^ 
aguish and unhealthy ; whilst that of die txjfe peat, oir "^ 



C 170 ] 

peat foiti^d on soils originally dry, is always salu« 
brious* 

The earthy matter of peats is uniformly analo« 
gous to that of the stratum on which they repose ; the 
plants which have formed them must have derived 
the earths that they contained from this stratum. 
Thus in Wiltshire and Berkshire, where the stratum 
below the peat is chalk, calcareous earth abounds in 
the ashes, and very little alumina and silica. They 
likewise contain much oxide of iron and gypsum, both 
of which may be derived from the decomposition of 
the pyrites, so abundant in chalk. 

Diflferent specimens of peat that I have burnt, 
from the granitic and schistose soils of different parts 
of these islands have always given ashes principally 
siliceous and aluminous and a specimen of peat from 
the county of Antrim, gave ashes which afforded very 
nearly the same constituents as the great basaltic stra* 
turn of the county. 

Poor and hungry soils, such as are produced 
from the decomposition of granitic and sandstone 
rocks, remain very often for ages with only a thin co- 
vering of vegetation. Soils from the decomposition 
of limestone, chalks, and basalts are often clothed by 
nature with the perennial grasses ; and afford^ wheii 
ploughed up, a rich bed of vegetation for every specie 
of cultivated plant. 

Rocks and strata from which soils have been de* 
rived, and those which compose the more interior 
solid parts of the globe, are arranged in a certain or* 
der ; and as it often happens that strata very different 



C 171 1 

id their nature are associated together, and that the 
strata immediately beneath the soil contain materials 
which may be of use for improving it, a general view 
of the nature and position of rocks and strata in na« 
ture, will not, I trust, be unacceptable to the scientific 
farmer. 

Rocks are generally divided by geologists into 
two grand divisions, distinguished by the names of 
primary and secondary. 

The primary rocks are composed of pure crystal- 
line matter, and contain no fragments of other rocks. 

The secondary rocks, or strata, consist only part- 
ly of crystalline matter ; contain fragments of other 
rocks or strata ; often abound in the remains of vege- 
tables and marine animals; and somedmes contain 
the remains of land animals. 

The primary rocks are generally arranged in 
large masses, or in layers vertical, or more or less 
inclined to the horizon. 

The secondary rocks are usually disposed in 
strata or layers, parallel, or nearly parallel to the 
horizon. 

The number of primary rocks which are com- 
monly observed in nature are eight. 

First, granite^ which, as has been mentioned, is 
composed of quartz, feldspar, and mica ; when these 
bodies are arranged in regular hyers in the rock, it is 
called gneis* 

Second, micaceous schistusy which is composed of 
quartz and mica arranged in layers, which are usually 
curvilineal. 



C "« 3 

Third) iienite, which consists of die sobsta&amp;ce^ 
called hornblende and feldspar. 

Fourth, serpentine^ which is constituted by fidd&lt; 
spar and a body named resfdendent hornblende ; -and 
their separate crystals are often sp small as to give 
the stone a uniform appearance : this rock abounds 
in veins of a substance called steatite^ or soap reek. 

Fifth, porphyry^ which constists of crystals of 
feldspar, embaided in the same material, but usuaUy 
•f a different colour* 

Sixth, granular marble^ which omsists endrely 
of crystals of carbonate of lime ; and which, when its 
colour is white, and texture fine, is the substance used 
by statuaries. 

Seventh, ebkrite seiisU which consists of chio* 
lite, a green or grey substance somewhat analpgous 
to mica and feldspar. 

Fight, quartzose roek^ which k composed of 
quartz in a granular form, sometimes united to small 
quantities of the crystalline elements, which have 
been mentioned as belonging to the other rocks. 

The secondary rocks are more numerous than 
Ae primary \ but twelve varieties include all that are 
usually found in these islands* 

First, gramuacke^ which consists of fragments of 
quarts, or chlorite schist, embedded in a cement, 
principally composed of feldspar^ 

Second, siliceous sandstone^ which is con^Kised of 
fine quartz or sand&gt; united by a siliceous cement. 

Third, limestone^ conasting of carbonate of lime, 
more Compact in its texture than in the granular mar« 
blej and often abounding in marine esttviat 



Foiuthy aluminous schist^ or sbide^ consisting ^ 
the dKomposed materials of different rocks cemented 
by a small quantity of ferruginous (ur siliceous matter; 
and often containing the impressions of vegetables. 

Fifth, calcareous sandstone^ which is calcareous 
sand, cemented by calcareous matter. 

Siacdi, irone stone ^ formed of nearly the same ma- 
terisds ^ sduminous schist, or shale ; but containing a 
much larger quantity of oxide or iron. 

Seventh, basalt or wbinstone^ which consists of 
feldspar and hornblende with materials derived from 
the decomposition of the primary rocks; the crystals 
are generally so small as to give the rock a homo* 
geneous appearance; and it is often disposed in very 
r^kr columns^ having usually five or six sides* 

Eighth, b^uminous or commm coaL 

Kinth, gypsum J the substance so well known by 
that name, wUch consists of sulphate of lime; and of- 
t^ contams sand. 

Teaih^ rod salt. 

Eleventh, cbali^ which usually abounds in re- 
mains of marine animals, and contains horizontal 
layers of flints. 

Txfrdfthy plunhpudding stone^ consisting of pebbles 
cemented by a ferruginous or aliceous cement. 

Ta describe more particularly the constituent 
parts dP the different rocks and strata will be unnecesi- 
sary; at any tune, indeed, detdls on this subject are 
useless, unless the specimens are exanuned by the 
eye; and a close inspectioa and comparison of the dif* 



C 174 3 

ferent species, will, in a short time, enable the most 
common observer to distinguish them. 

The highest mountains in these islands, and in- 
deed in the whole of the old continent, are constituted 
by granite; and tHis rock has likewise been found at 
the greatest depths to which the industry of man has 
Sis yet been able to penetrate; micaceous schist is often 
Ibuiid immediately upon granite; serpentine or marble 
upon micaceous schist: hut the order in which the 
primairy rocks are grouped together is various. Mar- 
ble and serpentine are usually found uppermost; but 
granite, though it seems to form the foundation of the 
rocky strata of the globe, is yet sometimes discovered 
above micaceous schist. 

The secondry rocks are always incumbent 021 the 
primary; the lawe^ of them is usually grauwacke: up^ 
on this, Smestone or sandstone is oft^n founds coal 
generally occurs between sandstone or shale; basalt 
often exists above sandstone and limestone; rock salt 
almost always occurs associated vnth red sandstone 
and gypsum. Coal, basalt, sandstone, and limestone^ 
are often arranged in differait alternate layers, of no 
considerable thickness, so as to form a great extent of 
country. In a depth of less than 500 yards, 80 of 
these different alternate strata have been counted. 

The veins whi^h afford metallic substances, are 
fissures more or less vertical, filled with a material 
different from the rock in which they exist. This 
material is almost always crystalline; and usually con- 
sists of calcareous spar, fluor spar, quartz, or heavy 
spar, either separate or together. The metallic sub- 



C 1-75 3 

Stances are generally dispersed through, or confusedly 
mixed ivith these crystalline bodies. The vdns iik 
hard granite seldom afford much Useful metal^ but ia 
the veins in soft ;grai^ke^ and in gneis, tin, cop)&gt;er, and 
lead are founds . Copper and iron ard the only m&amp;tUs 
usually found in the veins in serpentine* ^^caceous 
schist, sienite^ and ^anular marble, are seldom me- 
talliferous rocks. Leadi tin, copper, iron, and many 
other metals are found in the veins in chlorite schist. 
Grauwacke, when it contains few fragments and exists 
in large masses, is often a metallifejrous rock. The^ 
precious metals, likewise iron, lead, and antimkony, are 
found in it^ and sometimes it contains veins or masses 
of stone coal^ or coal free from bitumen. Limestone 
is the great metalliferous rock of the secondary family^ 
and lead and copper are the metals most usually found 
in it* No metallic veins have ever been found in 
shale, chalk, or calcareous sandstone; smd.they are 
very rare in basalt and siliceous sandstoi^e.* 

In cases wher$ vejnsi in rocks are exposed to the 
atmosphere, indications of the metals they contain may 
be oftai gained from their superficial appearance.. 
Whenever fluor spar is found in a vein, there is al- 
v^ys strong reason to suspect that it is associated 
with metallic substances* A brown powder at the 
suf£ice of a vein always indicates iron, and often tin; 
a pak yellow powder lead; and a green colour in a 
vein denotes the presence of copper. 



* ^ig. 10» will fire ft seaer»l Idfjipf the ftpptwrance ai^l airftDgemttit of rogks 
•nd veiiift. 



E 176 ] 

It may not b^ improper to ^ve a general descrip^ 
lion of ihe geolopcal constitution of Great Britamand 
Ireland. Granite fofims the great ridge of hUls ex- 
tending from Land's End through Dartmoor into De- 
votohire. The highest rocky strata in Somersetshire 
are grauwacke and limestone. The Malvern hitb are 
composed of granite, sienite, and porphyry. The 
highest mountains in Wales' are chlorite schist, or 
grauwacke. Granite occurs at mount Sorrel in Lei- 
cestershire. The great range of the mountains in 
Cumberland and Westmoreland, are porphyry, chlo- 
rite schist, and grauwacke; but gramte is found at their 
western boundary. Throughout Scotland the most 
elevated rocks are granite, sienite, and micaceous 
schistus. No true secondary formations are found in 
South Britain, west of Dartmoor; and no basalt south 
of the Severn. The chalk district extends from the 
we^em part of Dorsetshire, to the eastern coast of 
Norfolk. The coal formations abound in the district 
between Glamorganshire and t)erbyshire} and like- 
vise in the secondary strata of Twkshire, Durham, 
Westmoreland, and Northumberland. Serpaitin^ is 
found only in three places in Great Britain; near Cape 
Lizard in Cornwall, Portsoy in Aberdeenshu^, and in 
Ayrdiire. Black and grey granular marble is found 
near Padstow in Cornwall; and other coloured prunary 
marbles exist in the neighbourhood of Plymouth* 
Coloured primary marbles are abundant in Scotland; 
and white granular marble is found in the Isle of Sky, 
in Assynt, and on the banks of Loch Shin in Suther- 
land: the principle coal formations in Scotland are in 



C 177 3 

Dumbartonshire. Ayrshire, Fifeshire, and on ''the 
banks of the Brora in Sutherland. Secondary lime- 
stone and sandstone are found iqi most of the low 
^ countries north of the Mendip hills* 

In Ireland there are five great associations of pri- 
mary mountains ; the mountains of Morne in the 
county of Down ; the mountains of Donegal ; those 
of Mayo and Galway, those of Wicklow, and those 
of Kerry. The rocks composing the four first of 
these mountain chains are principally granite, gneis, 
sienite, micaceous schist, and porphyry. The moun- 
tains of Kerry are chiefly constituted by granular 
quartz, and chlorite schist. Coloured marble is found 
near Killarney; and white marble on the western coast 
of Donegal. 

Limestone and sandstone are the common secon- 
dary rocks found south of Dublin. In Sligo, Ros» 
common, and Leitrim, limestone^ sandstone^ shale, iron 
stone, and bituminous coal are found. The second- 
ary hills in these counties areof considerable eleva- 
tion ; and many of them have basaltic summits. The 
northern coast of Ireland is principally basalt ; this 
rock commonly reposes upon a white limestone, con- 
taining layers of flint, and the same fossils as chalk ; 
but it is considerably harder than that rock. There 
are some instances, in this district, in which columnar 
basalt is found above sandstone and shale, alternating 
with coal. The stone coal of Ireland is principally 
found in Kilkenny, associated with limestone and 
grauwacke. 

A 2 



It is evident from what has been said concerning 
the production of soils from rocks, that there must be 
at least as many varieties of soils as there are species 
of rocks exposed at the surface of the earth ; in &amp;ct 
there are many more. Independent of the changes 
produced by cultivation and the exertions, of human 
labour, the materials of strata have been mixed to- 
gether and transported from place to place by various 
great alterations that have taken place in the system 
of our globe, and by the constant operation of water. 

To attempt to class soils with scientific accuracy y*^ 
would be a vain labour j the distinctions adopted. by 
farmers are sufficient for the purposes of agriculture ; 
particularly if some degree of precision be adopted in 
the application of terms. The term sandy, for instance, 
should never be ajpplied to any soil that does not con- 
tain at least i of sand j sandy soils that effervesce with 
acids should be distinguished by the name of calcare- 
ous sandy soil, to distinguish them from those that 
are siliceous. The term clayey soil should not be 
applied to any land which contains less than ^ of im- 
palpable earthy matter, not considerably effervescing 
with acids : the word loam should be limited to soils, 
contsuning at least one thurd of impalpable earthy mat- 
ter, copiously effervescing with acids. A soil to be 
considered as peaty, ought to contain at least one half 
of vegetable matter. 

In cases where the earthy part of a soil evidently 
consists of the decomposed matter of one particular 
rock, a name derived from the rock may with propriety 
be applied to it, Thus^ if a fine red earth be found 



I 179 3 

iounediately above decomposing basalt^ it may be de^ 
nominated basaltic soiL If fragments of quartz and 
mica be found abundant in the materials of the soil, 
which is often the case, it may be denominated granitic 
soil ; and the same principles' may be applied to other 
like instances. 

In general, the soils, the materials of which are 
the most various and heterogenous, are those called 
alluvial, or which have been formed from the deposi- 
tions of rivers ; many of them are extremely fertile. 
I have examined some productive alluvial soils, which 
have been very diflferent in their composition. The 
soil which has been mentioned page 163, as very pro- 
ductive, from the banks of the river Parret in Somer- 
setshire, afforded me eight parts of finely divided 
earthy matter, and one part of siliceous sand j and an 
analysis of the finely divided matter gave the follow- 
ing results. 

360 parts of carbonate of lime, 

25 alumina, ^ 

20 ■ silica, ♦ 

8 ' oxide of iron. 

19 — vegetable, animal, a»d saline matter. 

A rich soil from the neighbourhood of the Avon, 
in the valley of Evesham ii^ Worcestershire, afforded 
me three fifths of fine sand, and two fifths of impalpa- 
ble matter ; the impalpable matter consisted of, 

35 Alumina, 

41 Silica, 

14 Carbonate of lime, 
3 Oxide of iron, 
7 Vegetable, animal, and saline matter. 



C J82 ] 

of trees, or wh^ their surfec^e entirely consists of liv- 
ing vegetables, the wood or the vegetables must either 
by carried off, or be destroyed by burning* In the 
last case their ashes afford earthy ingredients^ fitted to 
improve the texture of the peat. 

The best natural soils are those of which the ma* 
terials have been derived from different strata; which 
have been minutely divided by air and water, and are in- 
timately blended together: and in improving soils arti- 
ficially, the farmer cannot do better than imitate the 
processes of nature. . 

The materials necessary for the purpose are sel- 
dom far distant: coarse sand is often found immedi- 
ately on chalk; and beds of sand and gravel are 
common below clay. The labour of improving the 
texture or constitution of the soil^ is repaid by a great 
permanent advantage; less manure is required, and its 
fertility insured: and capital laid out in this way secures 
for ever, the productiveness, and consequently the 
value of the land. 



I 18S 



LECTURE V. 

On the nature and Constitaim of the Atmosphere} and 
its Influence on Vegetables. Of the Germination of 
Seeds. Of the functions of Plants in their differ* 
ent Stages of Growth; with a general view of the 
Progress of Vegetation. 

The constitution of the atmosphere has been a!U 
ready generally referred to in the preceding Lectures. 
Water^ carbonic acid gas, oxygene, and azote, have 
been mentioned as the principal substances compo- 
sing.it; but more minute enquiries respecting their na* 
ture and agencies are necessary to afford correct 
views of thcTuses of the atmosphere in vegetation. 

On these enquiries I now propose to enter; the 
pursuit of them, I hope, will ofier some objects of 
practical use In fiairming; and present some philosophi- 
cal illustrations of the manner in which plants are 
nourished; their organs unfolded, and their functions 
developed. 

If some of the salt called muriate of lime that 
has been just heated red be exposed to the air, even 
in the driest and coldest wheather, it will increase in 
weight and become moist; and in a certain time will be 
converted into a fluid. If put into a retort and heated, 
it will yield pure water; will gradually recover its 
pristine state; and, if heated red, its former weight: so 
that it is evident, that the water united to it was derived 



[ m 3 

from the ain And that it existed in the air in an invis- 
ible and elastic form, is proved by the circumstance, 
that if a given quantity of air be exposed to the 
salt; its volume and weight will diminish^ provided the 
experiment be correctly made. 

The quantity of water which exists in air, as va- 
pour, varies with the temperature. ^ In proportion as 
the weather is hotter, the quantity is greater. At 50"* 
of Fahrenheit ajr contains about ^V of its volume of 
vapoury and as the specific gravity of vapour is to that 
/^f air nearly as 10 to 15, this is about tV of its weight. 

At 1 W, supposing that there is a free commu* 
nication with water, it contains about i\ parts in vol- 
ume, or TT in weight. It is the condensation of va- 
pour by diminutioxi of the temperature of the atmos- 
phere, which is probably the principal cause of the 

formation of clouds, and of the deposition of dew, 
wist, snow, or hail. 

The power of different substances to absorb 
aqueous vapour from the atmosphere, by cohesive at- 
traction was discussed in the last Lecture. The leaves 
of living plants appear to act upon the vapour likewise 
in its elastic form, and to absorb it. Some vegetables 
increase in weight from this cause, when suspended in 
the atmosphere and unconnected with the soil; such 
^re the houseleek,* and different species of the aloe. 
In very intense heats, and when the soil is dry, the 
life of plants seems to be preserved by the absorbent 
f pwer of their leaves: and it is a beautiful circumstance 
in the oeconomy of nature, that aqueous vapour 18 
0iO3t abundant in the atmosphere when it is most need* 



[ 185 ] 

ed for the purposes of life ; and that "^hen other 
sources of its supply are cut off, this is most copious* 

The compound nature of water has been referred 
to. It may be proper to mention the experimental 
proofs of its decomposition into^ and composition 
from) oxygexie and hydrogene. 

If the metal called potassium be exposed in a 
glass tube to a small quantity of wjtter^it will ^(it upon 
it with great violence ; elastic fluid will be disengaged^ 
which will be found to be hydrogene ; axid the same ef- 
fects will l?e produced upon the potas^um, as if it had 
absorbed a small quandty of oxygene; ai^d the hydro- 
gene dis^ngaged^ and the oxygene added to the potas- 
sium are in weight as 2 to 15 ; and if two in volume of 
hydrogene^.and one in volume of oxygene, which have 
the weights of 2 and 15, be introduced into a close ves-* 
sel, and sm electrical spsurk passed through them, they 
will inflame and condense into 17 parts of pure water. 

It is evident from the statements given in the third 
Lecture, that water forms by far the greatest part of 
the sap of plants ^ and that this substance, or its ele- 
ments, ^ters largely into the constitution of their or- 
gans and solid productions. 

Water is absolutely necessary to the oeconomy of 
vegetation in its elastic and fluid state; and it is not 
devoid of use even in its solid form. Snow and ice 
are bad conductors of heat ; and when the ground is 
covered with snow, or the surface of the soil or of 
water is frozen, the roots or bulbs- of the plants be* 
neath are protected by the congealed water from the 
influence.of the atmosphere^ the temperature of wiitch 

b2 



t . i«6 1 

in Northern winters is usually very; much below the 
freezing point ; and this water becomes the first nour* 
^ ishment of the plant in early spring. The expansion 
of water during its congelation, at which time its 
volume increases T25 and its comraction of bulk dur- 
ing a thaw, tend to pulverise the soil; to separate itsi 
parts from each other, tod to make it more permeable 
to the influence of the air. 

If a' solution of lime in ^ater be exposed to Ae 
air, a pellicle will speedily form upon it, and a solid 
inatter will gradually fell to the bottom of the water, 
and in a certain time the water will become tasteless ; 
this is owing to the conbination of the lime, which 
^vas dissolved in the water, with carbonic acid gas 
which existed in the atmosphere, as may be proved 
by collecting the film and the solid matter, and ignit- 
ing them strongly in a little tube of plathia or iron ; 
they will give off carbonic add gas, and will become 
quicklime, which added to the same water, will again 
bring it ta the state of lime water. 

The quantity of carbonic acid*gas in the atmos^ 
phere is very small. It is not easy to determine it 
with precision, and it must di£Fer in different situ^ 
tions J but where there is a free circulation of air, it 
?s probably never more than 7^1^ nor less than tfrr of' 
the volume of air. Carbonic add gas is nearly i hea* 
vier than the other' elastic parts of the atmosphere in 
their mixed state : hence at first view it might be sup- 
posed that it would be most abundant in the lower 
regions of the atmosphere } but unless it has been 
immediately produced at the surface of the earth itt 



some chemicall process, this does not seem to be the 
ease : elastic fiidds of different Specific gravities have 
a tendency to equable niixttireby a species of attrac- 
tion, and the different parts of the atmosphere are 
constantly agitated ^d blended together by winds or 
otha: causes. De Saussure found lime water preci- 
pitated on Mount Blanc, the highest point of land in 
Europe ; and carbonic acid gas lias been always found 
apparently in due proportion, in the air brought down 
from- great heights in the atmosphere by aerostatic 
;adyeriturers. » 

The experimental proofs of the eon^osition of 
carbonic acid gas are very simple. If 13 grains of 
well burnt charcoal be inflamed by a burning-glas$ in 
100 cubical inches of oxygene gas, the charceal will 
entiriely disappear. ; and provided the. experiment be 
correctly made, all the oxygene except a few cubical 
inches, will be found converted into* carbonic acid ; 
and what is very remarkable, the volume of the gas is 
not changed. On this last circumstance it is easy to 
found a correct estimation of the quantity of pure 
charcoal and oxygene in carbonic acid gas : the weight 
of lOO cubical inches of oxygene gas is to that of 100 
.cubical inches of oxygene gas, as 47 tp 34 : so that 
47 parts in weight of carbonic acid gas, .musit be 
&lt;:omposed of 34 parts of oxygene and 13 oF charcoal, 
whioh correspond with the numbers given in the se- 
•cond Lecture. 

Carbonic acid is easily decomposed by heatii3g 
potassium in it ; the metal combines with the oxy- 
gene, and the charcoal is deposited in the foitn.of a 
Black powder. 



I m 1 . 

'Xhe principal consumption of the c^bonic acid 
in the atmosphere, seems to be in affor.ding nouri^* 
ment to plants } and some of them' appear to be sup- 
plied with carbon chiefly from this source. 

Carbonic acid gas is formed during fermentation^ 
combustion, putrefaction, respiration, and a number 
of operation^ taking place uppn the surface of tb^ 
(earth -, and there is no other process known in nature 
by which it can be destroyed but by vegetation* 

After a given portion of air has been deprived of 
aqueous vapour and carbonic acid gas, it appears little 
altered in its properties ; it supports coQibustion and 
animal life. There are many modes of separating its 
principal constituents, oj^ygene and azote, from each 
other. A simple one is by burning phosphorus in a 
confined volume of air : this absorb^ the oxygene and 
leaves the azote ; and 100 parts in volume of air, in 
which {^bK&gt;sphorus has beoi burnt, yield 79 parts of 
azpte; and by mixing this azote with 21 parts of 
fresh oxyg^e gas artifically procured, a substance 
having the original characters of air is produced. To 
procure pure oxygene from air, quicksilver may be 
kept heated in it, at about 600^, till it becomes a red 
powder ; this powder, when ignited, will be restored 
to the state of quicksilver by giving off oxygene. 

Oxygene is necessary to some functions of vege- 
tables i but its great importance in nature is injts rda« 
tion to the oeconomy of animals. It is absolutely ne* 
cessary to their life, ' Atmospheric air taken into the 
lungs of animals, lor passed in solution in .water 
through the gills of fisdies, loses oxygene ; and for 



ih^ oxygene lost, about aa equal volume of carbonic 
acid appears. 

The effects of azote in vegetation are not distinct- 
ly known. As it is found iii some of the products c^ 
vegetation, it may be absorbed by certain plants from 
the atmo^here. It prevents the action of oxygene froii 
being too energetic, and serves as a medium in which 
die more essential parts of the air act; nor is this cir- 
cumstance unconformable to the analogy of nature; for 
the elements most abmidant on the solid surface of 
the globe, are not those whidh are the most essential 
to the existence of the living beings belonging to it. 

.The action of the atmosphere on plants differs 
at different periods of their growth, and varies with 
th^ various stages of the devdopement and decay dF 
their organs; some general idea of its influence may 
have been gaitied from circumstances already mention* 
ed: I shall now refer to it more particularly, and endea- 
' vour to connect it with a general view of the progress 
of vegetation. 

If a healthy seed be moistened and exposed to 
air at a.temperature not below 45^, it soon germinates; 
it shoots forth a plume which rises upwards, and a 
radicle which descends. 

If the air be confined, it is found that in the prO'* 
cess of germination thef oxygene, or a part of it is ab- 
sorbed* The azote remains unaltered; no carbonic 
acid is taken away from the air, on the contrary some 
is added. 

Seeds are incapable of germinating, except when 
0xyge&amp;e is present. In the exhausted receiver of the 



t 190 ] 

'^-puilip, in pure azote, in pure carbonic acid, when 
moistened they swell, but do not vegetate; and if kept 
In these gasses lose their living powers, and undergo 
putrefaction. 

If a seed be exiamined before germination, it wiil 
i&gt;e found more or less insipid, at least not sweet; but 
after germination it is always sweet. Its coagulated 
mucilage, or starch, is converted into sugar i^ (he pro- 
cess; a substance difficult of solution is changed into 
one easily soluble; and the sugar carried through the 
cells &lt;xr vessels of the cotyledons, is the nourishment 
of theinfant plant, iris easy to undacstand 4;he nature 
of the change, by referring to the facts mentbi^d in 
the third Lecture; and the production of carbonic 
acid renders probable the idea, that the principal che- 
mical difference between sugar and mucilage depends 
upon a slight differencein the proportions of their cai?»&gt; 
bon. 

The absorption of oxygene by the seed in. germin- 
ation, has been compared to its absorption in produ- 
cing the evolution of foetal life in the egg; but this an- 
alogy is only remote. All animals, from the most to 
the least perfect classes, require a supply of oxygene*-* 



* irhp impregnated eggs of insects, and «ven fi»hes, do not prodaee yonng ones, 
vnless they are supplied with air, that is, unless the fstas ean respire. I have 
foond'thikC the eggs of moths did not produce larvse when coniioed in pure earbonlc 
acid; and when they were exposed in common air, theoxygene partly disappeared* 
and carbonic acid was formed. The fish in the egg or the spawn, ^ains its oxygene 
from the air ^MoUtd in water; and those fishes that spawn in spring and suiflmer 
in still water, such a^ the pike, carp, perch, and bream, deposit their eggs upon 
sabaquatic vegetables, the leaves of which, in performing their healthy functions, 
•Qpply oxygene to rhe watefr. The £sh that spawn in winter ^nch as the salm«| 



From the moment the heart begins to pulsate till it 
ceases to beat, the aeration of the blood is constant^ 
and ihe function of respiration invariable; carbonic 
acid is given off in the process, but the chemical 
change produced in the blood is unknown; nor is there 
any reason to suppose the formation of any substance 
similar to sugar. In th6 production of a plant from a 
seal, some reservoir of nourishment is needed before 
the root can supply sap; and this reservoir is the coty- 
kddn in which it is stored up in an insoluble form, and 
protected if necessary during the winter, and rendered 
soluble by agents which are constantly present on the ^ 
surface. The change of starch into sugar, connected 
with the absorption of oxygene, may be rather com- 
pared to a process of fermentation than to that of re- 
s{mtion} it is a change effected upon unorganized 
matter, and can be artificiaUy imitated; and in most of 
the chemical changes that occur when vegetable com- 
pounds are exposed to air, oxygene is absorbed, and 
carbonic acid formed or evolved. 

It is evident, that in all cases of dllage the seeds 
should be sown so as to be fully exposed to the influ- 
ence of the air. And one cause of the unproductive^ 
ness of cold clayey adhesive soils is, that the seed is 
, coated with matter impermeable to air. 



and troat, seek 9pou where there ir a cdnstant lapplf of fresh water, aa near the 
sources of streams as possible, and in the tao«t rapid currents where all stagnation 
» prevented, and where the water is satvu-ated with air, to wht6h it has Seen ev 
posed during its deposition from clouds. It is the instinct leading these fish to 
seek a supply of air for their eggs which carries them from seas/ or Ukes into the 
mountain country; which induces 'them to move against tile stream, and to endea? 
oar to OTcVleap weirs, nviU-dams, and cataracts. 



In sandy soils the earth is always sufficiently pen- 
etrable by the atmosphere; hut in clayey soils fliere 
can scarcely be too great a mechanical divi^on of 
parts in the process of tillage. Any seed not fully 
supplied with air, always produces a weak and diseas- 
ed plant 

The process of malting, which has been already 
referred to, is merely a process in which germination 
is artificially produced; and in which the starch of the 
cotyledon is changed into sugary which sugar is after- 
wards, by fermination, converted into spirit. 

It is very evident from the chemical principles of 
germination, ths^t the process of malting should be 
carried on no farther than to producg the sprouting of 
the radicle, and should be checked as soon as' this has 
made its distinct appearance. If it is pushed to such 
a degree, as to occasion the perfect development of the 
radicle and the plume, a considerable quantity of sac- 
charine matter will have been consumed in producing 
their expansion, and there will be less spirit formed in 
fermentation, or produced in distillation. 

As this circumstance is of some importance, I 
made in October 1806, an experiment relating to it. 
I ascertained by the action of alcohol, the relative pro- 
portions of saccharine matter in two equal quaijtitieS 
of the same barley; in one of which the germination 
had proceeded so far as to occasion protrusion of the 
radicle to nearly a quarter of an inch beyond the graia 
in most of the specimens, and in the other of which it 
had been checked before the radicle was a line in 
length; the quantity of sugar afforded by the last was 
to that in the first nearly as six to five. 



C 193 ] 

» 

The saccharine matter Irt the cotyledons at the 
tiine of their changeinto seed-leaves, renders them ex;- 
ceedingly liable to the attacks of insects : this princi- 
ple is at once a nourishment of plants , and animal^ 
and the greatest ravages are committed lupon crops in 
the first ^age of their.growth. 

The turnip fly, an insect of the colyoptera genus^ 
^ fixes itself upon the seed-teaves of .the turnip at the 
time that they are beginning to perform their func- 
tions ; and when the rough leaves of the plume are 
thrown forth, it is mcapable of injuring the plant to 
any extent. 

Several methods have been proposed for destroy- 
ing the turnip fly, or for preventing it from injuring 
the crop. ^ It has been proposed to sow radish-seed 
with the tumip-$eed, on the idea that the insect is fon- 
der of the seed-leaves of the radish than those of the 
turnip ; it is said that this plan has not been success- 
ful^ and that the fly feeds indiscriminately on both* 

There are several chemical menstrua which ren- 
der the process of germination much more rapid, 
when the seeds have been steeped in them. As in 
these cases the seed-l^ves are quickly produced, and 
more speedily perform their functions, I proposed it 
as a subject of experiment to exfimine whether such 
menstrua might not be useful in raising the turnip 
more speedily to that state in which it would be se- 
cure from the fly ; but the result proved that the prac- 
tice was inadmissible ; for seeds so treated, though 
they germinated much quicker, did not produce 
healthy plants, and often died soon after'sprouting. z 

.c2 



C 194 ^ ] 

I Steeped radish seeds in September 1807, for 12 
hours, in a solution of chlorine, and similar seeds in 
very diluted nitric acid, in Viery diluted sulphuric acid, 
in weak solution of oxysulphate of iron, and some in 
common water. The seeds in solutions, of chlorine 
and oxysulphate of iron^ threw out the germ in two 
days ; those in nitric acid in tj|iree days, in sulphuric 
acid in five, and those in water in seven days. But 
in th^ cases of premature germination, though the 
plume was very vigorous for a short time, yet it be- 
came at the end of a fortnight weak and sickly ; and 
at that period less vigorous in its growth than the 
sprouts which had been naturally developed, so that 
there can be scarcely any useful application of these 
experiments. Too rapid growth and premature de- 
cay seem invariably connected in organized struc- 
tures ; and it is only by following the slow operations 
of natural causes, that we are capable of making im^ 
prgveraents. 

There is a number of chemical substances which 
are very oflFensive and even deadly to insects, which 
do not injure, and some of which even assist v^eta- 
tion. Several of these mixtures have been tried with 
various success; a mixture of sulphur and lim^, 
which is very destructive to slugs, does not prevent 
the ravages of the fly on the young turnip crop. His 
Grace the Duke of Bedford, at my suggestion, was 
so good as to order the experiment to be tried on a 
considerable scale at Wobum hrm : the mixture of 
Ume and sulphur was strewed over one part of a field 
sown with turnips j nothing was applied to the other 



C 195^ 3 

part, but both were atta^rked nearly in the same man- 
ner by the fly. 

Mixtures of soot and quicklime, and urine and 
quicklime, ^11 probably be more efficacious. The 
volatile alkali given off by these mixtures is offensive 
to insects ; and they afford nourishment to the phnu 
Mr. T. A. Knight^ informs me, that he has tried 
the method by amihcmiacal fumes wkh success ; but 
more extensive trials are necessary to establish its gen- 



* Mr. Knight has been so good as to furmsh me with the foUovring note on 
this sab^ect. 

(' The experiment whtoh I tried the yeat&gt; befoK last, aod^ last: year, to pre- 
serve turnips from the fly, has not l&gt;een sofficientty often repeated to enable rae f 
«peak with any degree of decision ; and last year all my tnmips sneceeded per- 
lectiy well. In'conseqaence of your snggestion, when I had the pleasure to. meet 
yvia some years ago at Holkham, that lime daked with urine inight possibly be 
found to kill, or drive off, the inseets from a tiiraip crop, I tried that preparsttioa 
in mixture with three parts of soot, which was put into a small barrel with gim- 
blet holes round it, to permit a certain quantity of the. composition, about four 
bushels to an acre, to pass out, and to fall into the drills with the turnip seeds. 
Whetber it was by affording highly stimulating foo4 to the plant, or giving some 
flavour which the flies did not like, I cannot tell ; but in the year 1811, the adjoin- 
iog rows were eaten away, and those to which the composition was applied, aa 
above described, were scarcely at all touched. It is my intention in future to drill 
my crop in, first, with the composition on the top of the ridge ; and then to sow 
at least a pound of seed, broadcast, over the whole groand. The expeaie of this 
will be very triiiag, not more thait %s, per acre ; and the Morse-hoe wUi iaatantly 
sweep away all the supemunieraries between the rows, should those escape the 
flies, to which however they will be chiefly attracted ; because it will always be 
feand that those insects prefer tarnips growing in poor, to ^ose in rieh ground. 
One advantaga. seems to be the accelecation given ta the growth of the plants, 
by the highly stimulative eflects of the food cbey instantly receive as soon as their 
growdi ooramences, and long hefi»re their radicles have reached the duo^^ ^ Hie' 
directions above given apply only to tnmips sewed" uppn ridges, .with the manure 
immediately under them ; amd X am quite certain, tlut in all soils turnips should 
be thas cultivated* The elose viciaSty of die maaore, and the consequent shore 
time required to carry the food into the leaf, and return the oi|^izable mattec to 
the roots, are, in ray hypothesis, points of vast importance ; and the results in 
practice are oocrespandent/* * 



eral efficacy. It may, however, be safely adopted, for 
if it should fail in destroying the fly, it will at least be* 
an useful manure to the land. 

- After the roots and leaves of the infant plant are 
formed, the cells and tubes throughout its structure 
become filled with fluid, which is usually supplied from 
the soil, and the function of nourishment is perform- 
ed by the action of its organs upon the e:!!:temal ele- 
ments* The constituent parts of the air are subser« 
vient to this process ; but, as it might be expected, 
they act differently under different circumstances. 

When a growing plant, the roots of which are sup- 
plied with proper nourishment, is exposed in the pre- 
sence of solar light to a given quantity of atmospheric 
cal air, containing its due proportion of carbonic acid, 
the carbonic add after a certain time is destroyed, and 
a certain quantity of oxygene is found in its place. If 
new quantities of carbonic acid gas be supplied, the 
same result occurs ; so that carbon is added to plants 
from the air by the process of vegetation in sunshine ; 
^d oxygene is added to the atmosphere. 

This circumstance is proved by a number of ex- 
periments made by Drs. Priestley, Ingenhousz and 
Woodhouse, and M. T. dcSaussure j many of which 
Ihave repeated with similar results. • The absorption 
of carbonic acid gas, and the production of oxygene 
are performed by the leaf; and leaves recently separ- 
ated from the tree effect the change, when confined in 
portions of air containing carbonic acid ; and absorb 
carbonic acid and produce oxygene, even when im- 
mersed in water holding carbonic acid in solution* 



C 197 3 

The carbbnic add is probably absorbed by the 
fluids in the cells of the green op parenchymatous part 
of the leaf; and it is from this part that oxygene gas 
is produced during the presence of light. M. Senne* 
bier found that the leaf, from which the epidermis was 
stripped off, continued to produce oxygene when 
placed in water, contsdning carbonic acid gas, and the 
globules of air rose from the denuded parenchyma; 
and it is shewn both ftam the experiments of Senne- 
bier and Woodhouse, that the leaves most abundant 
in parenchymatous parts produce most oxygene in 
water impregnated with carbonic acid. 

Some few plants * will vegetate in an artificial at- 
mosphere, consisting principally of carbonic acid, and 
many will grow for some time in air, containing from 
one-half to one-third; but they are not so healthy as 
when supplied with smaller quantities of this elastic ^ 
substance* ' 

Plants exposed to light have been founds to pro« 

dvice oxygene gas in an elastic medium and in wa- 
ter, containing no carbonic acid gas; but in quantities 
much snialler than when carbonic add gas was pre- 
sent. 

In the dark no oxygene gas is produced by 
plants, whatever be the elastic medium to which they 
are exposed; and no carbonic add absorbed. In most 
cases, on the contrary, oxygene gas, if it be present, is 
iibsorbed, and carbonic add gas is produced. 



* I found the ArenarM tenaifolia to produce oxygene ta oacbonic aeid, which 
wa« nearly ipttre. 



C 198 3 

In the changes that take place in th^ composition 
of the organized parts, it is probable that saccharine 
compounds are principally formed during the absence 
of light; gum, woody fibre, oils, and resms during 
its presence; and the evolution of carbonicadd gas, or 
its formation during the night, may be necessary to 
give, greater solubility to certain compounds in the 
plant. I once suspected that all the cadtionic acid gas 
produced by plants in the night, or in shade, might be 
owing to the decay of some plut of the leaf, or epider^ 
mis; but the recent experiments of Mr* - D. Ellis, are 
opposed to this idea; and I found that a perfectly 
. healthy plant of celery, placed in a given portion of air 
for a few hours'only, occasioned a production of cair^ 
bonic acid gas, and an absorption of oxygene. 

Some persons have supposed that plants exposed 
in the free atmosphere to the vicissitudes of sunshizie 
and shade, light and darkne^, consume more oxy- 
gene than they produce, and that thdr perman^t agen^ 
cy upon air is similar to that of animals; and thisopi»- 
ion is espoused by the writer on th;e subject I have 
just quoted, in his ingenious researches on vegetatJofl. 
But all the experiments brought forwards in feivour of 
this idea, and particularly his e:jtperiments, have been 
made under circumstances unfavourable to accuracy 
of result. 'The plants have been tonfined and sappU" 
ed with food in an unnatural manner; and the influ- 
ence of light upon them has been very much dimin- 
ished by the nature of the media through which it pas- 
sed. Plants confined in limited portions of atmos- 
pheric air soon become diseased; their leaves decay. 



C 199 3 

tod by their decomposition they rapidly destroy the 
oxygene of the ain In some of the early experiments 
of Dr. Priestley before he was acquainted with the 
agency of light upon leaves, air that had supported 
combustion and respiration, was found purified by ^he 
growth of plants when they were exposed in it for suc- 
cessive days and nights ; and his experime;its are the 
more unexceptionable, as the plants, in many of them, 
grew in their natural states ; and shoots, or branches 
from them, only where introduced through water into 
the confined atiQosphere. 

I have made some few researches on this subject, 
^nd I shall describe their results. On the 12th of 
July, 1800, I place a turf four inches square, clothed 
with grass, principally meadow fox-tail, and white 
clover, in a porcelain dish, standing in a shallow tray 
filled with water ; I then covered it with a jar of flint 
glass, containing 380 cubical inches of common air in 
its natural state. It was exposed in a garden, so as 
to be liable to the same changes with respect to light 
as in the common air. On the 20th of July the results 
were examined. There was an increase or the volume 
of the gas, amounting to fifteen cubical inches ; but the 
temperature had changed from 64^ to 71^ ; and the 
pressure of the atmosphere, which on the 12th had 
been equal to the support of SO.l inches of mercury, 
Fas now equal to that of S0.2. Some of the leaves of 
die white clover, and of the fox-tail were yellow, and 
the whole appearance of the grass less healthy than 
when it was first introduced. A cubical inch of the 
g^s, agitated in lime-water, gave a slight turbidness to 



C 200 3 

the water ; and the absorption was not quite ttt of its 
volume. lO parts «of the residual gas exposed to a 
solution of green sulphate of iron^ impregnated with 
nitrous gas, a substance which rapidly absorbs oxygene 
from air, occasioned a diminudbn to 80 parts. 00 
parts of the au* of the'gardm occasioned a diminution 
to 7d parts. 

If the results of this experiment be calculated 
upon, it will appear that the air had been slightly 
deteriorated by the action of the grasses. But the^ 
weather was unusually cloudy during the progress of 
the experiment ; the plants had not been supplied in a 
natural manner with carbonic acid gas ; and the quan- 
tity formed during the night, and by the action of the 
faded leaves, must have been partly dissolved by the 
water ; and that this was actually the case, I proved 
by pouring lime-water into the water, when an imme- 
diate precipitation was occasioned. The increase of 
azote I am inclined to attribute to commcm air dism» 
gaged from the water. 

The following experiment I consider as conduct- 
ed under circumstances more analogous to those exis- 
ting in nature. A turf four inches square, from an 
irrigated meadow, clothed with common meadow 
grass, meadow fox-tail grass, and vernal meadow gritss, 
was pbced in a porcelain dish, which swam onthe sur- 
&amp;ce of water impregnated with carbonic acid gas. A 
vessel of thin flint glass, of the capacity of 230 cuIh- 
cal inches, having a funnel furnished with stop-cock 
inserted in the top, was made to cover the grass ; and 
the apparatus was exposed in an open place j a small 



/- 



Fiqll 



V. JGl 




^ E 26Sr ] 

quality ot water was daily supplied to the grass by 
meaiis of the stop^cock.* Every day likewise a tertam 
quatotity of water was removed by a siphon, and water 
staturated with carbonic acid gas supplied in its place"; 
so that it may be prei^med, that a small quantky of 
carbcmic acid gas was eonstatitly pr&gt;esent in the re- 
ceiver. On dje 7th of July, J^807, the ij^t day^of 
the experiment, the weather was clolidy in memoitir 
ing,«but fine in thp afternoon; the thermonjeter at 
67&gt; the barometer 30.3 : towaards the lewning of this 
day a slight increase qf the gas was p^ceivjed, the oexj 
three ^ays were ba-ight ; but in the ntox^g of the 
lith the sky was clouded ; a tonsidetaUe increase of 
the volume of the gas was now observed : tbe 12th 
was cloudy, with gleams of sunshine ; there was.^ill 
an increase, but les§ than in the bright days ; the ISth 
was bright. About mne o'clock A.M, on the 14th 
the receiver was quite full ; sind con^dering JEh« ori- 
ginal quantity 4it the jar, it must have^l^n increase^ 
by at least 30 cubical inches of elastic £uid : a| ripie$ 
dui^g tfcm xiay glqbules of gas escai)edv At ten on 
the mc3^ing of the l^jh, J examined a;pQri:i&lt;« of ihe 
gass J it coatsined fess !thaB ^ c£cai!bonic iacid ^s : 
] 00 pilots of it exposed jto the impnegoated sotuMooi 
baft only 75 parts ; so ihat the air was fowr per ceErt. 
purer than -the air of the. atmosphere; 

I shall detail Udoth^ sknilar jescperiment made 
with equally idecisive results. A ^oriit fix»n a vine&gt; 
hftving fiiie^ Jheakhy Jeaves belongmg to it, attached 



• See Fig. 17. 

, d2 



to its parent tree, was bent so as to be placed juiul^ 
the receiver which had b6en used in the last experi* 
tnent ; the watef confining the common air was ke|lt in 
the same manner impregnated with carbonic acid gas : 
the experiment was carried on from Augqst 6th till 
August. 14th9 1807; during this time, though the 
weather jjnd b^n generally clouded, and there had 
been some rain, the volume of elastic fluid continued to 
increase. Its quality was examinei on the morniilg of 
the 15th ; it contained ^^ of carbonic acid gas, and 
100 parts of it afforded 23.5 of oxygene gas. 

These facts confirm the popular opinion, that 
when the leaves of vegetables perform their healthy 
functions, they tend to purify the atmosphere in the 
common variations of weather, and changes from light 
to darkness. 

In germination, and at the time of the decay of 
the leaf, oxygene must be absorbed ; but when it is 
considered how large a part of the^ surface of the 
earth is clothed with perennial grasses, and that half 
of the globe is always exposed to the solar, light, it ap- 
pears by far the most probable opinion, that more 
oxygene is produced than consumed during the pro* 
cess of vegetation ; and that it is this circumstsmce 
which is the principal cause of the uniformity of the 
cottstitutioii^ of the atmosj^ere. 

Aiiimals produce no oxygene gas during the ex- 
ercise of any oid^ functions and they are constantly , 
consuming it ; but the exl^t of the animal, conipar- 
ed to that dF the vegetable, kingdom b very small ; 
and the quantity of carbonic acid gas produced 



[203 3 ^ 

in respiration, and in various processes of com^ 
bustion and fermentation, bears a proportion ex* 
tremely mintlte to the whole volume of the atmos* 
phere: if every plant during the progress of its life 
makes a. very small addition of oxygeneto the air, and 
occasions a very small consumption of carbonic acid, 
the effect may be conceived adequate to the wants of 
nature. ' 

It may occur tis an objection to Aese views, thatv 
if the leaves of plants purify the atmosphere, towards 
the end of autumn, and through the winter, and early 
spring, the air in our climates must become impure, 
the oxygaie in it diminish, and the carbonic acid gas 
increase, which is not the case ; but there is a very 
satisfactory answer to this objection. The different 
parts 'Qf the atmosph^e are Constantly mixed together 
by winds, which when they are strong, move at the 
rate oi from ^O to 100 miles in an hour. In our win- 
ter, the south-west gales convey air^ which has been 
purified by the vast forests and savannas of Sdutb 
America, and which, passing over the ocean, arrives 
in an uncontaminated state. The storms and tempests 
which often ocqir at the beginning, and towards the 
middle of our winter, and which generally blow 
from the same quarter of thegldbe, have a salutary 
influence. By constant agitation and motion, the 
equilibrium of the constituent parts of the atmosphere 
is preserved ; it is fitted for the purposes of life ; and 
diese events, which the superstitious formerly refer- 
red to the wrath of .haven, or the agency of evil 
spirits, and in which they saw only 'disorder and con- 



C 20* 3 

fusion, are demonstrated by sciemie, to be mimstf ar 
tions of divine intelligence, and conoected with the or* 
der and harmony of our system. 

I have reasoned, in a former part of this lecture, 
against the close analogy which some persons, have as- 
sumed between the absorption of oxygene and the for- 
mation of carbonic acid gas in germination, and in the 
respiration of the foetus. Similar arguments will ap«&gt; 
ply against the pursuit of this analogy between the 
functions of the leaves of the adult plant, and those of 
the lungs of the adult animal. Plants grow vigorous- 
ly only when supplied with light ; and most sped^ 
die if deprived of it. It cannot be supposed that the 
production of oxygene from the leaf, which is known 
to be connected with its natural colour, is the exertion 
of a diseased &amp;nction, or that it can acquire cai4)on in 
die day-time, when it is in most vigorous growth, 
vi^en the sap is rising, when all its powers of obtain- 
ing nourishment are exerted ; merely for the purpose 
of giving it dS again in the night, wh^n its leaves are 
closed, v^hen the motion of the sap is imperfect, and 
when it is in a state approaching to that of quiescence. 
Many plants that grow upon rocks, or soils, contain- • 
falg^ no carbonic matter, can only be supposed to ac- 
quire their charcoal from the carbonic acid ga? in the 
atihosphere ; aftd the leaf may be considered at the 
samte time as an organ of absorption, and an organ 
in which the sap may undergo different chemical 
changes. 

When pur6 wafer only is absorbed by the roots 
of plants, the fluid, in passing into the leaves, will 



,C 205 3 

probably have greater power to absorb carbonic acid 
from the atmosphere^ when the water is saturated with 
carbonic iacid gas/ some of this substance, even in the ^ 
sunshine, may be given off by the leaves; but a part of* 
it likewise will be always decomposed, which has been . 
proved by the ei^feriments of M. Sennebier. 

When the fluid taken up by the roots of plants 
contains much .carbonaceous matter, it is probable 
that plants may give off carbonic acid from their leaves, 
even in the sunshine. In short, the function of the 
leaf must vary according to the composition of the sap 
passing (through it. When sugar is to be produced^ 
as in early spring at the time of the devdopment cdT 
buds^and flowers, it is probable that less oxygene will 
be given off, than at the time of the ripening of the 
ijeed, when starch, or gums, or soils, art formedj and 
the process of ripening the seed usually takes place 
when the agency of the solar light is most intense. 
Whentheacidjyices of fruits become saccharine in the 
natural process of vegetation, more oxygene, there 
is every reason to believe, must be given off, or new- 
ly combined, than at other times; for, as it was shewn 
in the third Lecture, all the vegetiible acids cojitain 
more oxygene than sugar. It appears probable, that 
in some cases, in which oily and ruinous bodies are 
formed in vegetation, water may be decomposed: its 
oxygene set free, audits hydrogene absorbed. 

I have already mentioned, that some plants pro- 
duce oxygene in pure water; Dr. Ingenhousz found 
this to be the case with species of the conferva; I 
have tried the leaves of nu^y plants, particularly those 



t 206 '3, 

that produce volatile oils* When such leaves are ex- 
posed in water saturated with oxygene gas, oxygene 
is given off in the solar light; but the quantity is very 
small and always limited; nor* have I been able to as- 
certain with certainty, whether the vegetative powers 
of the leaf were concerned in the operation, though it 
seems probable. I obtained a considerable quantity of 
oxygaie in an experiment made fifteen y^rs ago, 
in which vine leaves were exposed to pure water; but 
on repeating the trial often since, the quantities have 
always been very much smaller; I am ignorant whe&gt; 
ther this difference is owing to. the peculiar stite of riie 
leaves, or to some confervas which inight have adher- 
ed to the vessel, or to other sources of fallacy. * 

The most important and most common products of 
vegetables, mucilage, starch, sugar, and woody fibre, 
are composed of water, or. the elements of water in 
their due proportion, and charcoal^ and these, or some 
of them, exist in all plants; and the decomposition of 
carbonic acid, and the combination ot water in vege* 
table structures, are processes which must occur al- 
most universally. 

When glutenous and albuminous substances ex- 
ist in plants, the azote they contain may be suspected 
to be derived from the atmosphere; but no experi- 
ments have been made which prove this; they might 
easily be instituted upon mushrooms and fungusses. 

In case^ in which buds are formed, or shoots 
thrown forth from roots, oxygene appears to be uni- 
formly absorbed^ as in the germination of seeds. I 
exposed a. small pcttatoe moistened with common wa- 



C 207 



4 . 



ter to 24 ciibical inches of atmospherical air, at a tem- 
perature of S9\ It b^;an to throw forth a shoofi^a 
dte third day; when it was a half an inch loqg I ex- 
amined the air; nearly a cubical inch of oxygene was 
absorbed, and about three-fourths of a cubical mch of 
carbonic acid formed* The juices in the shoot se{&gt;ar« 
ated from the potatoe, had a sweet taste; and the ab- 
sorption of dxygene, and llie production of carbonic 
acid, were probably ccnmected with the conversion of 
a portion of j^arch into sugar. When potatoes that 
l^ve been frozm are thawed, they become sweet; pro- 
bably bxjTgene is absorbed in tlus process; if so, the 
^ange may be prevented by thawing them crut of the 
contact oL air, under water, fpr instance, that has 
been recently boiled* 

In the tillering of corn that is, the production of 
new stalks round the origi§ftl plume, there is every rea- 
son to believe that oxygene must be absorbed; for the 
stal^ at i^duch the tillering ta^^es place, always con- 
tiins sugar, and the shoots arise from a part derived of 
light. The drill husbandry favours this process; for 
loose earth is thrown by hoeing round the stalks; th^ 
ave preserved from light, an4 yet supplied with oxy- 
gene. I have counted from forty to one hundred and 
twenty stalks; produced from i, grain of wheat, in a 
moderately good crop of drilled vrheat. And we are 
informed by Sir Kenelm Digby in 1660, that there was 
in the possession of the Fathers of the Christian Doc- 
trine at PariS) a plant of barley which they, at that time/ 
k^t l^ tjiem as a curiosity, and which consisted of 249 
stalks springipg from one root, or grain; and in which 
they counted above 18,000 gnuns, or seeds of barley. 






E 208 3 

Tbe great increase which takes place in the trans^ 
]^(|fttation of wheat, depends upon the circumstance^ 
that each lay«r thrown out in tillering may be rem^- 
ed, and treated as a distinct plant. In the I%ilosophi- 
cal Transactions, Vol. LVIII, p. 203, the following 
statement may be found: Mr. C Miller, of Cam- 
bridge, sowed some wheat on the 2d of June, 1766 ; 
and on the 8th of August, a plant was taken and 
separated into 18 parts, and replanted; these plants 
were again taken up, and divided in the, months c^ 
Septemba: and Octjober, and plaated separately to 
stand the winter, which division produced 67 plants* 
They wer^ again' taken up in March and April, and 
produced 500 plants: the nnmiber o/ear^dius form- 
ed from one grain of wheat was i21109, vrhitk gave 
three pecks and three quarters^)f com that weighed 
47lbs. 7ozs. } and that i|pre estimated at 576840 « 
grains. ,. , 

It is evident from the statements just given, thsyt the 
change which ts^s place in the juices of the lesfcf by the 
the action of the solar Kght, must tend to mcf^es^e the 
proportion of inflammable matter to their -odfier Con- 
stituent parts. And the leaves of the plants that grow 
in darkness, or in shady places, a]&lt;^ umfomily pale ; 
their juices are watery and. saccharine, and they do 
not afford oils or resinous substances, I shall detafl 
an experiment on this subject. 

I took an equal weight, 400 grains, of tJie leaves 
of two plants of endive, one bright green, which had 
grown fully expdsed to light, and the other almost 
white, which had been secluded from li^t by beiiig 



t 2Q» 3 

covered with a box; after being both acted upon for 
some time by boiling water, in the state of pulp, the 
undissolved matter was dried, and exposed to the 
action of warm alcohol. The matter from the green 
leaves gave it a tinge of olive; Aat from the pa|e leaves 
did not alter, its colour. Scarcely any solid matter 
was produced by evaporation of the alcohol that had 
been digested on the pal^ leaves; whereas by the eva« 
poration of that from die green leaves, a considerable 
residuum was obtained, five grains of which were se- 
parated from the vessel in which the evaporation was 
carried on; they burnt with flame, ^d appeared partly 
matter analogous to resin. 53 grains of woody fibre 
were obtained from the green leaves, and only 31 
from the pale leaves. 

It has been mentioned in the Third Lecture, that 
the sap probably, in common cases, descends from the 
leaves into the bark; the bark is usually so loose in its 
texture, that the atmosphere may possible act upon it 
In die cortical layers; but the changes taking place in 
the leaves, appear sufScient to expkdn the difference be* 
tween the products obtained from the bark and from&lt;|» 
the alburnum; the first of which contains more cajbo-* « 
mceous matter than the last. 

When the similarity of the elements of different &gt;. 
vegetable products is considered, according to the 
views givai in the third Lecture, it is easy to conceive 
how the different organized parts may be formed from 
the same sap, according to the manner in which it is 
acted on by heat, light, and air. By the abstraction 

of oxyg^e, the different inflammable products, fixed 

e2 



and volatile oils, resins, camphor, woody fibre, &amp;c* 
may be produced from saccharine or mucilaginous 
fluidsj and by the abstraction of carbon and hydro- 
gene, starch, sugar, the different vegetable acids and 
substances soluble in water, may be formed from high- 
ly combustible and insoluble substances. Even the 
limpid volatile oils which convey the fragrance of the 
flower, consist of different proportions of the same 
essential elements, as the dense woody fibrej and both 
are formed by different changes in the same organ3, 
from the same materials, and at the same time. 

M. Vauquelin has lately attempted to estimate 
the chemical changes taking place in vegetation, by 
analysing some of the organized parts of the horse- 
chesnut in their different stages of growth. He found 
in the buds collected, March 7. 1812, tanning princi- 
ple, and albuminous matter capable of being obtained 
separately, but when obtained, combining with eaclj 
other. In the scales surrounding the buds, he found 
the tanning principle, a little saccharine matter, resin, 
and a fixed oil. In the leaves fully developed, he dis- ' 
covered the same principles as in the buds; and in ad- 
dition, a peculiar green resinous matter. The petals 
of the flower yielded a yellowish resin, saccharine mat- 
ter, albuminous matter, and a little wax: the stamina 
afforded sugar, resin, and tannin. 

The young chesnuts examined immediately after 
their formation, afforded a large quantity of a matter 
which appeared to be a combination of albuminous 
matter and' tannin. All the parts of the plant afford- 
ed saline combinations of the acetic and phosphoric 
acids. 



I 211 3 

M. Vauquelin could not obtain a sufficient quan- 
tity of the sap of the horse-chesnut for examination; a 
circumstance much to be regretted; and he has not 
stated the relative quantities of the different substances 
in the buds, leaves, flawers, and seeds. It is proba-^ 
ble, however, from his unfinished details, that the 
quantity of resinous matter is increased in the leaf, and * 
that the white fibrous pulp of the chesnut is formed 
by the mutual action of albuminous and astringent, 
matter, which probably are supplied by different cells 
or vessels. I have already mentioned* that the cam- 
bium, from which the new parts of the trunk and the 
branches appear to be formed, probably owes its pow- 
er of consolidation to the mixture o&amp;||wo different 
kinds of sap; one of which flows upwards from the 
roots; and other of which probably descends from the 
leaves. I attempted, in May 1804, at the time the 
cambium was forming in the oak, to ascertain the na- 
ture of the action of the sap of the alburnum upon the 
juices of the bark. By perforating the alburnum in a 
young oak, and applying an exhausting syringe to the 
aperture, I easily drew out a small quantity of sap; 
I could not, however, in the same way obtain sap from 
the bark. I was obliged to recur to the solution of 
its principles in water, by infusing a small quantity of 
fresh bark in warm water; the Gquid obtained in this 
way was highly coloured and astringent; and produc- 
ed an immediate precipitate in the alburnoua sap, the 
— - 11 1 - ' ' * " ' " 

• Page 131.., 



I 212 3 

taste of tvhich was sweetish, aud sligfitly astringent, 
and which was colourless. 

The increase of trees and plants must depend 
upon the quantity of sap which passes into the organs 
upon the quality of this sap; and on its modification 
by the principles of the atmosphere. Water, as it is 
the vehicle of the nourishment of the plant, is the sub- 
stance principally given off by the leaves. Dr. Hales 
found, that a sunflower, in one day of twelve hours, 
transpired by its leaves one pound fourteen ounces of 
water, all of which must have been imbibed by its 
roots. • 

The powers which cause the ascent of the sap 
have beea subtly tonched upon in the second and 
third Lectures. The roots imbibe fluids from the soil 
by capillary attraction; but this power alone isinsufii^ 
cient to account for the rapd elevation of the sap^mto 
the leaves. This is fully proved by the fbUo\riitg £aict 
detailed by Dr. Hales, Vol. I. of the Vegetable Statics,^ 
page 1 14. A vine branch of four or five years old was 
cut through^ and a glass tube carefully attached to 
it; this tube was bent as a siphon, and filled with quick- 
diver; so that the force of the ascending sap could be 
measured by its effect in elevating the quicksilver. In 
a few days it was founds that the s^p had been propeU 
led forwards with so much force as to raise the quick- 
silver to S8 inches, which is* a foi;ce considerably su- 
perior to that of the usual pressure of the atmosphere. 
Capillary attraction can only be exerted by the sur- 
faces of small vessels, and can never raise a fluid into 
tubes above the vessels themsdves. 



t 213 :i 

I referred in the beginning of the Thiird Lecture 
to Mr. Knight's opinion, that the contractions and 
expansions of the silver grain in the alburnum, are 
the most efficient cau§e of the ascent of the fluids con- 
tained in its pores a^d vessels. The views of this ex-^ 
cellent physiologist are rendered extremely probable 
by the facts he has brought forwards in support of 
them. Mr. Knight found that a very small increase 
of temperature was sufficient to cause the fibres of the 
silver grain to separate from each other, and that a 
very slight diminution of heat produced their contrac- 
*tion. The sap rises most vigorously in spring and 
autumn, at the time the temperature is variable ; and 
if it be supposed, that in expanding and contracting^ 
the elastic fibres of the silver grain exercise a pressure 
upon the cells and tubes containing the fluid absorbed 
by the capillary attractioh of the roots/ this £uid must 
constantly move upwards towards th^ points where a 
supply is needed. 

The experiments of Montgolfier, the celebrated 
inventor of the balloon, have shewn that water may 
be raised almost to an indefinite height by .a very 
sgiall forqe, provided its pressure be taken oflf by con* 
dnued divisions in the column of fluid. This prind- 
pie, there i$ great reason to suppose^ must operate in 
assisting the ascent of the sap in the cells and vessels 
of plants which have no Rectilineal communication, 
and which every where oppose obstacles to the per&gt;^ 
pendicuhr pressure of the sap. , ^ 

The changes taking place in the leaves and buds, 
and the degree of their power of tranpinrition, must 



[^ 214 3 

be intimately connected likewise with the motion of 
the sap upwards* This is shewn by several experi- 
ments of Dr, Hales. 

A branch from an appple tree was separated and 
introduced into water, and connected with a mercurial 
gage. When the leaves were upon it, it raised the 
mercury by the force of the ascending juices to four 
inches ; but a similar branch, from which the leaves 
were removed, scarcely raised it a quarter of an inch. 

Those trees, likewise, whose leaves are soft and 
of a spongy texture, and porous at their upper sur- 
feces, displayed by far the greatest powers with regard 
t to the elevation of the sap. 

The same accurate philosopher whom I have just 
quoted, found that the pear, quince, cherry, walnut, 
peachy gooseberry, water elder and sycamore, which 
have all soft and unvarnished leaves, raised the rtier- 
cury under fiivourable circumstances from three to 
six inches. Whereas the elm, oak, chesnut, hazel, 
sallow, and ash, which have firmer and more glossy 
leaves, raised the mercury only from one to two 
inches. And the evergreens and trees bearing var- 
nished leaves, scarcely at all affected it ; particularly 
the laurel and the lauruistinus. 

It W'ill be proper to mention the facts which 
shew, that in many cases iBuids descend through the 
bark ; they are not of the same unequivocal nature 
as those which demonstrate the ascent of the sap 
through the alburnum ; yet manj of them are satis- 
factory. 



C 215 3 

M. Baisse placed branches .of different trees in 
an infusion of madder, and kept them there for a long 
time. He found in all cases, that the wood became 
red before the? bark j and that the bark began to re- 
ceive no tinge tilt the whole of the wood was colour- 
ed, and till the leaves were affected ; and. that the co- 
louring matter first appeared above, in the baxk im- 
mediately in contact with the leaves. 

Similar experiments were made by M. Bonnet, 
and with analogous results, though not so perfectly 
distinct as those of M. Baisse. ' . 

Du Hamel found, that in differjent species of the 
pine and other trees, when strips of bark were re- ^ 
moved, the upper part of the wound only emitted fluid, 
whilst the lower part remained dry. 

This may likewise be observed in the summer 
in fruit trees, when the bark is wounded, the alburn- 
uni remaining untouched. 

I have mentioned in the Third Lecture, that when 
new bark is formed to supply the place of a ring 
that has been stripped oflf, it first makes its appearance 
upon the upper edge of the wound, and spreads slow^ 
ly downwards. J and no new ipatter appears from be- 
low rising upwards, if the experiment has been care- 
fully performed. I say carefully performed j because, if 
any of the interior cortical layer be suffered to remain 
communicating with the upper edge, new bark cover- 
ed with epiderjoiis will form below this, and appear as 
ff protruded upon the naked alburnum, and formed 
within the wound j and such a circumstance woiiid 
give rise to erroneous conclusions. 



I 216 3 

&gt; la the summer of 1804, 1 examined some elms 
at Kensington. The bark of many of them had been 
"very muph injured, and in some cases more than a 
square foot had been stripped off. In most of the 
wounds the formation of the new cordcal layers was 
from above, and gradually extending downwards 

. round the aperture ; but in two instances there had 
been very distinctly a formation of bark towards the 
lower edge. I was at first very much surprised at 
this appearance, so contradictory to the general 

" opinion ; but on passing the point of a pen-knife along 
the surface of the alburnum, from below upwards, I 
found that a part of the cortical layer, which was of 
the colour of the alburnum, had remamed communi- 
cating with the upper edge of the wound, and that 
the new bark had formed from this layer. I have had 
no opportunity of looking at the trees lately j but I 
doubt not that the phaenomenon may still be observ- 
ed ; for some years must elapse before the new forma- 
tions will be complete. 

In accounting for the experiment of M. Palisot 
de Beauvois, mentioned in the Third Lecture, it may 
be supposed that the cortical fluid flowed down the 
alburnum upon the insulated bark, and thus occasion- 
ed its increase ; or it may be conceived that the bark 
itself contained sufficient cortical fluid at the time of 
its separation to form new parts by its action upon the 
alburnous fluid. 

The motion of the sap through the bark seems 
principally to depend upon gravitation. When the 
watery particles have been considerably dissipated 



L 217 ] 

bf die traiispirmg functions iof dbie leaves, and the ma. 
^ilaginous, ix^flamiQable, and asmngejtt cofi^tituents, 
increased by the agency of heat, li^t, ttfid air, the 
continued impulse upward$ from the album^iifn, forces 
i&amp;e z^niaiinnginspisss^ted fluid into the cortical vessels? 
Mhich rebeire no other $upp]y. In these, froni Its 
meightf its natural tendency must he to descend; 
mid the rapidity of the descent m^ depend upon 
4he general consumption of the Huids of the bal^ 
wthe living processes of vege^tionj for jdbue^e is ^very 
reason to believe, that no fluid passes into the soil 
through {the roots; and it is impossible to conceive a 
j&amp;ee lateral communication between the absorbent yes- 
isds of the alburnum in the roots, and the transport- 
ing or carrying vessels of the bark; for if such a com- 
munication existed, there is no reason why the sap 
should not rise ^ougfa the bark as well as through 
the alburnum; for the same physical powers would 
4!ien operate upon bodi. 

Some authors have supposed that the sap rises i^ 
the alburnum, and descends through the bark in con^- 
sequence of a power similar to that which produces the 
circulation of the blood in animals; a force analagous 
to die muscular force in the sides of the vessels. 

Dr. Thomson, in his System of Ch^nistiy, h^A 
stated a fact which he considers as demonstrating the 
irritaUlity of living vegetable systems. When a stalk 
of spurge (Euphorbia peplis) is separated by two in- 
cisions from its leaves and roots, the milky fluid flows 
through both sections. Now^ says the ingenious au- 
thor, it is impossible that this, could happen without 

F 2 



C 218 3 

the living action of the vessels, for they cannot have 
boen more than full; and their diameter is so smaH, 
that if it were to continue unaltered, the capillary at- 
traction would be more than sufficient to contain their 
contents, and consequendy not a drop would floworut. 
Since therefore the liquid escapes, it must be driven 
out by a force different from a common physical force* 

To this reasoning it may be answered, that the 
sides of all the vessels are soft, and capable of cdlaps-* 
ing by gravitation, as veins do in animal systems long 
after they have lost all their vitality; whidi is an effect 
totally different from vital or irritable action; and the 
phenomenon may be compared to that of puncturing 
a vessel of elastic gum filled with fluid, both above and 
below; the fluid will make its way through the a- 
pei:tures, though in much larger quwtity from the 
lowest, which I have found is likewise the case with the 
Spurge. 

Dn Barton has stated, that plants grow more vi- 
gorously in water in which a little camphor has been 
infused. This has been brought forward as a fact in 
favour of the irritability of the vegetable tubular sys- 
tem. It is said that camphor can only be conceived 
to act as a stimulus, by increasing the living powers 
of the vessels, and causing them to contract with more 
energy. But this kind of speculation is very unsatis- 
factory. Camphor, we know, has a disagreeable pun- 
gent taste, and powerful smell; but physicians are far 
from being agreed whether it is a stimulant or sedative, 
even in its operation upon the human body. We 
should have no right whatever, even suf^osing the ir- 



[ 219 3 

ritabiKty^ vegetables proved, to conclude, that be- 
cause camphor assisted the growth of plants, it* acted 
on their living powers; and it is not right to infer the 
e^dstence of a property proved in no oth^ way^ from 
the operation of uncertain quafities. 

That camphor may assist the growth of plants it 
is easy to conceive; and why should we not consider. 
ks efficacy as similar to the efficacy of saicdiarine and 
mucilaginous matter, and particularly ofx&gt;iIs, to whiclt 
it is nearly allied in composition; and which afford 
food, to the plant, and not stimulus; which are materia 
als of assimilation, and not of excitement? &gt; 

The arguments in favour of a contraction siniilar 
to muscular action have not then much waght; and 
besides, diere are direct iacts which render the opinion 
highly improbable. --- 

When a single branch of a vine or other tree is 
introduced in winter into a hot-^hoiise, the trunk and 
the other branches remaining exposed to the cold at- 
mosphere, the sap wiU soon begin to move towards the 
buds in the heated branch; these buds will gradually 
unfold themselves^d begin to transpire; and at .length 
open into leaves. Now if any peculiar contiractions of 
the sap vessels or cells were necessaly for the ascent of 
the sap in the vessels, it is not possibly that the applica« 
tion of heat to a sii^le bi^nch should occasion irrita- 
ble action to take place in a trunk i£^ny feet removed 
from it, or in roots fixed in the cold soil: but allowing 
that the energy of heat raises the fluid merely by di-; 
minishing its.gravity, increasing the facility of capillary, 
action, and by producing an expansion of the fibres 



of the isilvdr gram, the fhmnomebfya is in perfect ttni* 
sbn with the views advanced in the preceeding part 
of this Lecture^. 

The ileX) or evergreen oak» preserves its lesres 
through the winter, even when grafted upon the com^ 
mdn oak; and in conse4oence of the operadcm of the 
leaves there is a certaiii motion of the sap from the oak 
towards the ilex, which, as in the last case, seems to 
b&amp; inconsistent with the theory (rf* irritable acticm* 

It is impbsuble to peruse any consida:able part 
of the'Veget£lbIe Statics of Hales, without receiving a 
deep impression of the dependence of the motion of the 
sap updii common physical agencies. Iii the same tree 
this sagadotis person observed, that in i ^old cloudy 
xhomiiig when ilo sip ascended, a sudden change wai^ 
produced by a gleam of sunshine, of half to hour; and a 
v%drou!s motion i^ the fluid. The alteration of the 
yimd from south to the north immediately chdck^d 
tile effect. On the coming on of a cold afternoon after 
a hot day, tiie sap that had been rising began to fall. 
A warm shower and a sleet storm produced opposite 
effects. 

Mfl^y of his observations likewise shew, that the 
dtifiereftt pow^s which att on the adult tre&amp;, produce 
diffident effetts at different Seasons. 

Thus in th^ early spring, before the buds ex- 
pcuid, thfe variatidils of the temperature, and changes 
df the static of the atmosphere with regard to moisture 
and dryness^ kx^dct their great effects aipon th^ expan* 
sibns and contractions c^ the vessels; and then the tree 
is in what is Called by gardeners its bleedmg season. 



C 221 3 

When the leaves are ftdly expanded, the great 
determination of the sap is to these new organs. And 
hence a tree which emits sap copiously from a woun4 
whilst the buds are opening, will no longer emit it in 
summer when the leaves are perfect ; but in the varia** 
ble weather, towards the ends of autumn, when the 
leaves are falling, it will again possess the power of 
bleeding in a very slight degree in the warm^est days } 
but at no other times. 

In all these circumstances there is nothing analo« 
gotts to the irritable acticm of animal systems. 

in animal systems the heart and arteries are in 
constant pulsation. Their functions are unceasingly 
performed in all climates, and in all seasons ; in win-&lt; 
ter, as well as in spring ; upon the arctic snows, and 
under the tro[Hcal suns. They neither cease in the 
periodical nocturnal sleep, common to most animals &gt; 
nor in the long sleep of winter, peculiar to a few spe- 
des. The power is connected with animation, is lim« 
ited to beings possessing the means of voluntary lo« 
comotion ; it co«eldsts with the first ^pearance of 
vitality ; it disappears only with the last spark of life. 

Vegetables may be truly said t6 be living systems, 
in this sense, that they possess the means of convert-^ 
ing the dements of common matter into organized 
structures, both by assimilation and reproduction ; but 
we must not suffer ourselves to be deluded by the 
very extensive application of the word /j^, to conceive 
ki the life of plants, any power dmilar to that produc- 
ing the life of animals. Jbi calling forth the vegetable 
funcdons, common physical agents alone seem to 



C 222 ] 

opertte ; but in the animal system these agents are 
made subservient to a superior principle. To ^vethe 
argument in plainer language, there are few philoso- 
phers who would be inclined to assert the existence 
of any tb|ng above common matter, any thing imma- 
terial in the vegetable oeconomy. Such a doctrine is 
worthy only of a poetic form. The imagination may 
easily give Dryads to our trees, and Sylphs to our 
flowers ; but neither Dryads nor Sylphs can be ad- 
mitted in vegetable physiology ; and for reasons near- 
ly as strong, irritability and animation ought to be ex- 
cluded. 

As the operation of the different physiijal agents 
upon the sap vessels of plants ceases, and fluid be» 
comes quiescent, the materials dissolved in it by heat, 
are deposited upon the sides of the tubes now consi» 
derably dinunished in their diameter-; and in conse- 
quence of this deposition, a nu^tiye matter is provi- 
ded for the first wants of the plant in dtrly spring, to 
assist the opening of the ^buds, and their expansion^ 
when the motion from the want of leaves is as yet 
feeble. 

This beautiful principle in the vegetable cecono- 
my was first pointed out by Dr. Darwin ; and Mr. 
Knight has given a number of experimental elucida- 
tions of it. 

Mr. Knight made numerous incisions into the al- 
burnum of the sycamore and the birch, at differept 
heights ; and in examining the sap that flowed ironi 
them, he found it ^lore sweet and niucilaginous in 
proportion as the aperture from which it flowed was 



t 22S 3 

elevated; which he could ascribe to no other cause 
than to its having dissolved sugar and mucilage, 
v^ich had been stored up through the winter. 

He examined the alburnum in different poles of 
oak in the same forest : of which some had been fel- 
led in winter, and others in summer ; and he always 
found most soluble matter in the wood felled in win* 
ter, and its specific gravity was likewise greater* 

In all perennial trees this circumstance takes 
place ; and likewise in grasses and shrubs. The joints 
of the perennial grasses contain more saccharine and 
mucilaginous matter in winter than at any other sea- 
son ; and this is the reason why the fiorin or Agrps- 
dsalba, which abounds in these joints, affords so use- 
ful a winter food. 

The roots of shrubs contain the largest quantity 
q{ oourishi^g matter in the depth of winter ; and the 
bulb in all plants possessing it, is the receptacle in 
which nourishment is hoarded up during winter. 

In annual plants the sap seems to be fully ex* 
hausted of all its nutritive matter by the production- of 
flowers and seeds 3 and no system exists by ;which it 
can be preserved. 

When perennial grasses are cropped very close 
by feeding cattle late in autumn, it has been often ob- 
served by farmers, that they never rise vigorously 
itk the spring j and this is owing to the removal of 
that part ot the stalk which would have afforded them 
conctete sap, their first nourishment. 

Ship builders prefer for their purposes that kind 
of oak timber afforded by trees that have had their 



C 224 J 

bark stripped oiBT in spring, and which have been cut 
in' the autumn or winter following. The reason of 
the superiority of this timber is, that the concrete 
sap is expended in the spring in the sprouting of the 
leaf; and the circulation being destroyed, it is not 
formed anew ; and the wood having its pores free 
from saccharine matter, is less liable to undergo fer- 
mentation from the action of moisture and air. 

In perennial trees a new alburnum, and conse- 
quently a new system of vessels, is annually produc- 
ed, and the nutriment for the next year deposited in 
them ; so that the new buds, like the plume of the 
seed, are supplied with a reservoir of matter essemial 
to their first developments 

The old alburnum is gradually converted into 
heart-wood, znd being cc«istantly pressed upon by 
the expensive force of the new fibres, becomes harder, 
densex*, and at length loses altogether its vascuUur 
structure ; and in a certain time obeys the common 
laws of dead matter, decays, decomposes, and h con- 
verted into aeriforna and carbonic feleoients ; into those 
principles from which it was originally formed. 

The decay of the heart-wood seems to constitute 
the great limit to the age and size of trees. J^d in 
yoUBg branches from old trees, it is m^ch more liable 
to decompose than in similar branches from seedlmgs. 
This is likewise the case with grafts. The graft is 
only nourished by the sap of the tree to which it 19 
transferred ; its properties are not changed by it j; th§ 
leaves, blossoms, zj^ fruits are of the same kin^ as if 
it had vegetated upon its parent stock. The only ad- 



vantage to be gained in this way, is the affording to a 
graft from an old tree a more plentiful and healthy 
food than it could have procured in- its natural state j 
it is rendered for a time more vigorous, and produces 
fairer blossoms and richer fruits. But it partakes not 
. merely of the obvious properties,* but likewise of the 
infirmities and dispositions to old age and decay, of 
the tree whence it sprung. 

This seems to be distinctly shewn by the obser- 
vations aiid experiments of Mr. Knight. He has, in a 
number of instances, transferred the young scions and . 
healthy shoots from old esteemed fruit-bearing trees 
to young seedlings. They flourished for two or three 
years; but they soon became diseased and sickly like 
their parent trees. 

It is* from this cause that so many of the apples 
formerly celebrated for their taste and their uses in the 
manufacture of cyder are gradually deteriorating, and 
many will soon disappear. The golden pippin, the 
red streak, and the moil, so excellent in the beginning 
of the last century, are now in the extremest stage of 
their decay; and however carefully they are ingraited, 
they merely tend to multiply a sickly and exhausted 
variety. 

The trees possessing the firmest and the least 
porous heart-wood are the longest in duration. 

In general Ae quantity of charcoal afforded by 
woods, offers a tolerable accurate indication of their 
durability: those most abundant in*charcoal and earthy 
matter are most permanent; and those tiiat contain the 



o2^ 



C 226 2 

largest proportion of gaseous elements are the most 
destructible. 

Amongst oiir own trees, the cheshut and the oak, 
are pre-eminent as to durability; and the chesnut af- 
fords rather more carbonaceous matter than the 
oak. 

In old Gothic buildings these woods have been 
sometimes mistaken one for the other; but they may 
be easily known by this circumstance, that the pores 
in the alburnum of the oak are much larger and more 
thickly set, and are easily distinguished; whilst the 
pores in the chesnut require glasses to be seen dis- 
tinctly. 

In consequence of the slow decay of the heart- 
wood of the oak and the chesnut, these trees under 
favourable circumstances attain an age which cannot 
be much short of a 1000 years. 

The beech, the ash, and the sycamore, most like- 
ly never Kve half as long. The duration of the apple 
tree is not probably, much more than 200 years; but 
the pear tree, according to Mr. Knight, lives through 
double this period; most of aur best apples are sup- 
posed to have been introduced into Britain by a fruit- 
erer of Henry the Eighth, and they are now in a state 
of old age. 

The oak and chesnut decay much sooner in ^ 
moist situation, than in a dry and sandy soil; and their 
timber is less firm. The sap vessels in such cases are 
more expanded, though less nourishing matter is car- 
ried into them; and the general texture of the forma- 
tions of wood necessarily less firni. Such wood splits 



r 227 3' 

more easily, and is more liable to be affected by varia- 
tions in the state ctf the atmosphere. 

The same trees, in general, are much longer lived 
in the northern than in the southern climates. The . 
reason seems to be, that all fermentation and decom- 
position are checked by cold; and at very lovi^ temper- 
atures both animal and vegetable mattere altogether 
resist putrefaction: and in the northern winter, not 
only vegetable life, but likewise vegetable decay must 
be at a stand. 

The antipatrescent quality of cold climates is ful- 
ly illustrated in the instances of the rhinoceros and 
mammoth lately found in Siberia, endre beaeat}i the 
frozen soil, in which they must probably have existed 
from the time of the deluge. I examined a part of the ' 
skin of the mammoth, sent to this country, on^ which 
there was some coarse hair; it had all the chemical 
characters of recently dried skin. 

Trees that grow in situations much exposed to 
winds, have harder and firmer wood than such as are 
considerably sheltered. The dense sap is determined 
by the agitatioa of the smaller brances to the trunk 
and large branches; where the new alburnum formed 
is consequently thick and firm. Such trees abound in 
the crooked limbs fitted for forming knee-timber, 
which is necessary for joining the decks and sides of 
ships. The gales in elevated situations gradually act, 
so as to give the tree the form best calculated to resist 
tlieir effects. And the mountain oak rises robust and 
sturdy; fixed firmly in the soil, and able to oppose the 
full force of the tempest. 



C 228 3 

The decay of the best varieties of fruit-bearing . 
trees which have been distributed through the country 
by graitSy is a circumstance of great importance. 
There is no mode of preserving them; and no re- 
source, except that of raising new varieties by seeds. 

Where a species has been ameliorated by culture, 
the seeds it affords, other circumstances bang similar, 
produce more vigorous and perfect plants; and in this 
way the great improvements in the productions of our 
fields and gardens seem to hay^ been occasioned* 

Wheat in its indigenous state, as a natural pro- 
duction of the sdl, appears to have been a very smalt 
grass: and the case is still more remarkable with the 
apple and the plum. The crab seems to have been the 
parent of all our apples. And two fruits can scarcely 
be conceived more different in colour, size, and ap- 
pearance than the wild plum and the rich magnum 
bonum. 

The seeds of plants exalted by cultivation always 
furnish large and improved varieties; but the flavour^ 
and even the colour of the fruit seems to be a matter 
of accident. Thus a hundred seeds of the golden 
pippin will all produce fine large-leaved apple trees, 
bearing fruit of a considerable size; but the tastes and 
colours of the apples from each will be different, and 
none will be the same in kind as those of the pippm 
itself. Some will be sweet, some sour, some bitter, 
some mawkish, some aromatic; some yellow, some 
green, some red, and some streaked: All the apples 
will, however, be much more perfect than those from 
the seeds of a crab, which produce trees all of the same 
kind, and all bearing sour and diminutive fruit. 



C ■ 229 3 

- The power of the horticulturist extends only to 
the multiplying excellent varieties by grafting. They 
cannot be rendered permanent; and the good fruits at 
present in our gardens, are the produce of a few seed- 
lings, selected probably from hundred of thousands ; 
the results of great labour and mdustry, and multipli- 
ed experiments. 

The larger and thicker the leaves of a seedling, 
and the more expanded its blossoms, the more it is 
likely, to produce a good variety of fruit. Short- 
leaved trees should never be selected ; for these ap- 
proach nearer to the original standard ; whereas the 
other qualities indicate the influence of cultivation. 

In the general selection of seeds, it would appear 
that those arising from the most highly cultivated va^ 
rieties of plants, are such as give the most vigorous 
produce; but it is necessary from time to time, to 
change, and as it were, to cross the breed. 

By applying the pollen, or dust of the stamina 
from one variety to the pistil of another of the same 
species, a new variety may be easily produced ; and 
Mr. Knight's experitnents seem to warrant the idea, 
that great advantages may be derived from this 
method of propagation. 

Mr. Knight's large peas produced by crossing 
two varieties, are celebrated amongst horticulturists^ 
and will, I hope, soon be cultivated by fmners. 

I have seen several of his crossed apples, which 
promise to rival the best of those which are gradually 
dying away in the cyder countries. 



[ 230 . ] 

And his experiments on the crossing of wheat,' 
which is very easi'y effected, merely by sowing the 
different kinds together, lead to a result which is of 
considerable importance. He says, in the Philosophi- 
cal Transactions for 1799, " in the years 1795 and 
1796, when almost the whole crop of cprh in the 
island was blighted, the varieties obtained by crossing 
alone escaped though sown in several soils, and in very 
dififerent situations/* 

The processes of gardening for increasing the 
number of fruit-bearing branches, and for improving 
the fruit upon particular branches, will all admit of 
elucidation from ;he principles that have been advan- 
ced in this Lecture. 

By making trees espaliers, the force of gravity is 
particularly directed towards the lateral parts of the 
branches, and more sap determined towards the fruit 
buds J and hence they are more likely to bear when 
in a horizontal than when in a vertical position. 

The twisting of a wire, or tying a thread round 
a branch has been often recommended as a means of 
making it produce fruit. In this case the descent of 
the sap in the bark must be impeded above the liga- 
ture ; and more nutritive matter consequently retain-*, 
ed and applied to the expanding parts. 

In engrafting, the vessels of the bark of the stock 
and the graft cannot so perfectly come in .contact as 
the alburnous vessels, which are as much more nu- 
merous, and equally distributed ; hence the circulation 
downwards is probably impeded, and the tendency 
of the graft to evolve its fruit-bearing buds increased* 



I 231 3 

By lopping trees, more nourishment is supplied 
to the remaining parts ; for the sap flows laterally as 
well as perpendicularly* The same reasons will ap- 
ply to explain the increase of size of fruits by dimin- 
ishing the number upon a tree. 

As plants are capable of amelioration by peculiar 
methods of cultivation, and of having the natural term 
of their duration extended ; so, in conformity to the 
, general law of change, they are rendered unhealthy 
by being exposed to peculiar unfavourable circum- 
stances, and liable to premature old age and decay. 

The plants of warm climates transported info 
cold oiies, or of cold one^ transported into warm 
ones, if not absolutely destroyed by the change of situ- 
ation, ire uniformly rendered unhealthy. 

Few of the tropical plants, as is well known, can 
be raised in this country, except in hot houses. The 
vine during the whole of our summer may be said to 
be in a feeblef state with regard to health , and its 
fruit, except in very extraordinary cases, always con- 
tains a superabundance of acid. The gigantic pine of 
the north, when transported into the equatorial cli- 
mates, becomes a degenerated dwarf; and a great 
number of instances of the same kind might be 
brought forward. 

Much has been written, and n^any very ingen- 
ious remarks have been made by different philoso- 
phers, upon what have been called the habits of pl^ts. 
Thus; in transplanting a tree, it dies or becomes un- 
healthy, unless its position with respect to the sun is 
the same as before. The seeds brought from i^arm 



t 232 3 

climates germinate here much more early in the sea- 
son than the same species brought from cold climates. 
The apple tree from Siberia, where the short summer 
of three months immediately succeeds the long winter, 
in England, usually puts forths its blossoms in the 
first year of its transplantation, on the appearance of 
mild weather; and is often destroyed by the late 
frosts of the spring. 

It is not difficult to explain this principle so rnti- 
mately connected with the healthy or diseased state of 
plants. The organization of the germ, whether in 
seeds or buds, must be different according as more or ' 
less heat or alternations of heat and cold have affected 
it during its formation ; and the nature of its expan- 
sion must depend wholly on this organization. In a 
changeable climate the formations will have been inter- 
rupted, and in different successive layers. In an equa- 
ble temperature they will have been uniform j and 
the operation of , new and sudden causes will of course 
be severely felt. 

The disposition of trees may, however, be chang- 
ed gradually in many instances ; and the operation of 
a new climate in this way be made supportablie. The 
myrtle, a native of the South of Europe inevitably 
dies if exposed in the early state of its growth to the 
frosts of our winter ; but if kept in a green-house 
during the cold seasons for successive years, and 
gradually exposed to low temperatures, it wiH, in an 
advanced stage of growth, resist even a very seyere 
cold. And in the south and west of England the^ 
myrtle flourishes, produces blossoms and seeds, in 



X 2S3 ] 

consequence of this process, as an unprotected stan- 
dard tree ; jind the layers from such trees are much 
more hardy than the layers from myrtles reared with- 
in doors. 

The arbutus, probably originally from similar 
cultivation, has become the principal ornament of the 
lakes of the south of Ireland. It thrives even in bleak 
mountain situations; and there can be little doubt bujt 
that the offspring of this tree inured to a temperate cli- 
mate might be easily spread in Britain. 

The same principles that apply to the effects of 
heat and cold will likewise apply to the ii^uence of 
moisture and dryness. The layers of a tree habitua- 
ted to a moist soil will die in a dry one: even though 
such a soil is more favourable to the general growth 
of the species. And, as was stated page 169, trees 
that have been raised in the centre of woods are soon- 
er or later destroyed, if exposed in their adult state to 
blasts, in consequence of the felling of the surround- 
ing timber. 

Trees, in all cases, in which they are exposed in 
Iiigh and open situations to the sun, the winds, and 
the rain, as I just now noticed, become low and ro- 
bust, exhibiting curved limbs, but never straight and 
graceful trunks. Shrubs and trees, on the contrary, 
which are too much sheltered, too much secluded 
from the sun and wind extend exceedingly in height; 
but present at the same time slender and feeble 
branches, their leaves are pale and sickly, and in ex* 
treme cases they do not bear fruit. The exclusion 
of light alone is sufficient to produce this species of 

H 2 



I 234 ] 

disease, as would appear from the experiments of 
Bonnet. This ingenious physiologist sowed three 
seeds of the pea in the same kind of^soih one he suf- 
fered to remain exposed to the free air; the oth^ he 
inclosed in a tube of glass; and the third in a tube of 
vood. The f)ea in the tube of glass sprouted^ and 
grew in a manner scarcely at all different from that 
under usual circumstances; but the plant in the tub^ 
of wood deprived of light, became white, and slender, 
and grew to a much greater height. 

The plants growing in a soil incapable of supply- 
ing them with sufficient manure or dead orgaa- 
ized matter, are generally very low; having brown 
or dark green leaves, and their woody fibre abounds 
in earth. Those vegetating in peaty soils, or in lands 
too copiously supplied with animal or veget2A&gt;le matter, 
rapidly expand, produce large bright green leaves^ 
abound in sap, and generally blossom prematurely. 

Where a land is too rich for com it is not an 
uncommcm pracdce to cut down the first stalks, as by 
these means its exuberance is corrected, and it is less 
likely to fall before the grain is ripe; excess of poverty 
or of richness is almost eq^ually fetal to the hopes of 
the farmer; and the true constitution of the soil for the 
beskcrop is that in which the earthy materials, the 
moisture and manure, are properly associated; and in 
which the decomposable vegetable or animal matter 
does not exceed one-fourth of the weight of the earthy^ 
constituents. 

The canker, or erosion of the bark and wood, is 
a disease produced often in trees by a poverty of soil; 



C 285 . 3 

and it is invariably connected with old age. The cause 
seems to be an excess of alkaline and earthy matter 
in the descending sap. I have often found carbonate 
of lime on the edges of the canker in apple trees; and 
ulmin, which contains fixed all«di^ is abundant in the 
canker of the elm. The old age of a tree, in this res- 
pect, is £untly analogous to the old age of animals, in 
which the secretions of solid bony matter are always in 
excess, and the tendency to ossification great. 

The common modes of attempting to cure the 
canker, are by cutting the edges of the bark» binding 
new bark upQn it, or laying on a plaister of earth; but 
these methods, though they have been much extolled, 
probably do very little in producing a regeneration of 
the part.. Perhaps the application of a weak acid to 
the canker might be of use; or where the tree is of 
•great value, it may be watered occasionally with a very 
diluted acid. The alkaline and earthy nature of the 
morbid secretion warrants the trial; but circumstances 
that cannot be foreseen m^y occur to interfere with the 
success of the experiment. 

Besides the diseases having their source in the 
constitution of the plant, or m the unfavourable opera* 
tion of external elements, there are many others per- 
haps more mjurious, depending upon th^ operations 
and powers of other living beings; and such are the 
most difficult to cure, and the most destructive to the 
labours of the husbandman. 

Parasitical plants of different species which at- 
tach themselves to trees and shrubs, feed on their 
juices, destroy their healthy, and finally their, life. 



C 286 3 

abound in all climates; and are, perhaps^ the most for- 
midable of the enemies of the superior and cultivated 
vegetable species. 

The mildew, which has often occasioned great 
havock in our wheat crops, and which was particular- 
ly destructive in 1804, is a species of fungus, so small 
a$ to require glasses to render its form distinct, and 
rapidly propagated by-^t^seeds* 

This has been shewn by various botanists; and 
the subject has received a full illustration from the en- 
lightened and elaborate researches of the President of 
the Royal Society. 

The fungus rapidly spreads from stalk to stalk, 
fixes itself in ,the cells connected with the common 
tubes, and carries away and consumes that nourish- 
iBient which should have been appropiated to the 
gorain. 

No revnedy has as yet been discovered for this 
disease; but as the fungus increases by the diffusion of 
its seeds, great .care should be taken that no mildewed 
straw is carried in die manure used for com; and in 
l^e early crop, if mildew is observed upon any of the 
stalks of com, they should be carefully removed and 
treated as weed&amp; 

The popular notion amongst farmers, that a bar- 
berry-tree in the neigfabourkood of a field of wheat of- 
ten produces the mildew, deserves examination. This; 
tree is frequently covered with a fungus, which if it 
should be shewn to be capable of degenerating into the 
wheat fungus would offer an easy explanation of the 
effect 



C 237 3 

There is every reason to believe^ from the re\ 
searches of Sir Joseph Banks, that the smut in wheat 
is produced by a very small fungus which fixes on 
the grdhk : the products that it affords by analysis are 
similar to those afforded by the puff-ball ; and it is 
difficult to conceive, that without the agency of some 
organised structure, so complete a change should be 
effected in the constitution of the grain. 

The mistletoe and the ivy, the moss and the 
lichen, in fixing upon trees, uniformly injure their ve* 
getative processess, though in very different degrees* 
They are supported from the lateral sap vessels, and 
deprive the branches above of a part of then: nourish- 
meiit. 

The insect tribes are scarcely less inj^rious than 
the parasitical plants. 

To enumerate all the animal destroyei^ and ty- 
rants of the vegetable kingdom wculd be to give a ca- 
talogue of the greater number of the classes in zoolo- 
gy. Every species of plant almost is the peculiar 
restmg place, or dominion of some insect tribe ; and 
from the locust, the caterpillar, and snail, to the mi- 
nute aphis, a wonderful variety of the inferior insects 
are nourished, and live by their ravages upon the ve- 
getable world. 

I have already referred to the insect which feeds 
on the seed-leaf of the turnip. 

The Hessian fly, still more destructive to wheat, 
has in some seasons threatened the United States with 
a famine. And the French government is* at this 



C 238 ] 

time issuing decrees with a view to acca^dn the des* 
traction of the larvae of the grasshopper. 

In general, wet weather is most favourable to Ae 
propagation of mildew, ^guses, rust» and the small 
parasitical vegetables ; dry weather to the increase of 
the insect tribes^ Nature, amidst all her changes, is 
continually directing her resources towards the pro^ 
duction and multiplication of life ; and in the wise and 
grand economy of the whole system, ev«i the agents 
that appear injurious to the hopes, and destructive to 
the comforts of man, are in fact ultimately connected 
with a more exalted state of his powers and his condi- 
tion. His industry is awakened^, his activity kept 
alive, even by the defects of climates and season. By 
the acccidents which int^ere with his efforts, he is 
made to exert his talents, to look farther into futurity, 
and to consider the vegetable kingdom not as a secure 
and inalterable inheritance, spontaneously providing 
for his wants ; but as a doubtful and insecure poss^s- 
rion, to be preserved only by labour, aind extended 
and perfected by ingenuity. 



2S9 



LECTURE VI. 

Of Manures of vegetable and animal Origin. Of the 
Manner in which they become the Nourishment of the 
Plant. Of Fermentation and Putrefaction. Of the 
different Species of Manures of vegetable Origin ; if 
the different Species of animal Origin. Of mixed 
Manures. General Principles with Respect to the 
Use and Application of such Manures, 

THAT ca'tain vegetable and animal substances 
introduced into the soil accelerate vegetation and in- 
crease the produce of crops, is a fact known since the 
earliest period oi agriculture} but the manner in 
which manures act, the best diodes of applying them/ 
their relative value and dur^ility, are still subjects of 
discussion. In tlus Lectur^I shall endeavour to lay^ 
down some settled principles on these objects } they 
are capable of being materially elucidated by the re- 
cent discoveries in chemistry ; and I need not dwell 
on their great importance to farmers. 

The pores in the fibres of the roots of plants are 
so small, that it is with difficulty they can be discovered 
by the microscope ; it is not therefore probable, tha^ 
solid substances oan pass into them from the soil. I 
tried an experiment on this subject : some impalpa* 
ble powdered charcoal procured by washing gunpow- 



C 340 3 

der was placed in a phial containing pulf^ water, in 
which a plant of peppermint was growing : the roots 
of Ihe plant were pretty generally in contact with the- 
charcoal. The experiment was made in the beginning 
of May, 1805 ; the grewth of the plant was very vi« 
gorous during a fortnight, when it was taken out of 
the phial ; the roots were cut through in different 
parts ; but no carbonaceous matter could be disco- 
vered in them, nor were the smallest fibrils blackened 
by charcoal, though this must have been the case had 
the charcoal been absorbed in a solid form. 

No substance is more necessary to plants than 
carbonaceous matter ; and if this cannot be introdu- 
ced into the organs of plants except in a state of solu- 
tion, there is every reason to suppose that other sub- 
stances les$ essential will be in the same case. 

I found by some experiments made in 1804, that 
plants introduced into strong fresh solutions of sugar, 
mucilage, tanning principle, jelly, and other substan- 
ces died ; but that plants lived in the same solutions 
aher they had fermented* At that time, I supposed 
that fermentation was necessary to prepare the food 
of plants ; but I have since found that the deleterious 
effect of the recent vegetable solutions was owing to 
their being too concentrated ; in consequence of which 
the vegetable organs were probably clogged with so- 
lid matter, and the transpiration by the leaves pre* 
vented. In the beginning of June, ist the next year, 
I used solutions of the same substances, but so much 
diluted, that there was only about ^hf part of solid ve- 
l^table or animal matter in the solutions* Plants of 



r 241 3 

miBt grew luxuriantly m all these solutions ; but least 
so in that of the astringent matter. I watere4 isome 
spots, of grass in a garden with the different solutions 
separately, and a spot with common water : the grass 
watered with solutions of jelly, sugar, and mucilage 
grew most vigorously ; and that watered with the so- 
lution of the tanning principle grew better than that 
watered with common water. 

I endeavoured to ascertain whether soluble vegetable 
substances passed in an unchanged state into the roots 
of plants, by comparing the products of the analysis 
of the roots of some plants of mint which had grown, 
some in common water, some in a solution of sugar. 
120 grains of the roots of the mint which grew in, the 
solution of sugar, afforded five grains of palegr^en 
extract, which had a sweetish taste, but which slightly 
coagulated by the action of alcohol. 120 grains of 
the roots of the, mint which had gi^own in common 
water yielded three grains and a half of extract, which 
was of a deep olive colour j its taste was sweetish, 
but more astringent than that of the other extract^ 
and it coagulated more copiously with alcohol. 

These results, thoHigh not quite decisive, favour 
the opinion that soluble matters pass unaltered into 
the roots of plants ;- and the idea is confirmed by the 
circumstance that the radical fibres of plants made to 
grow in infusions of madder are dnged red j and it may 
be considered as almost proved by the fact, that sub- 
stances which are even poisonous to vegetables are ab- 
sorbed by them. I introduced the roots of a primrose 
into a weak solution of oxide of iron in vinegar, and 

i2 



C 242 ,3 

suffered it to remain in it till the leaves became yel- 
low i the roots were then carefully washed in distiU 
led water, bruised, and boiled in a small quantity of 
the same fluid r the decoction of them passed through 
a filtre was examined by the test of infusion of mK- 
galls ; the decoction gained a strong tint of purple, 
which proves that solution of iron had been taken up 
by the vessels or pores in the roots. 

Vegetable and animal substances, as is shewn by 
universal experience, are consumed in vegetation'^; 
and they can only hourish the plant by affording solid 
matters capable of being dissolved by water, or gas- 
eous substances capable of being absorbed by the 
fluids in the leaves of vegetables ; but such parts of 
them as are rendered gaseous, and that pass into the 
atmosphere, must produce a comparatively small ef- 
fect, for gasses soon become diffused through the 
mass of the surrounding air. The great object in the 
application of manure should be to make it afford as 
much soluble matter as possible to the roots of the 
plants ; and that in a slow and gradual manner, 30 
that it may be entirely consumed in forming the sap 
or organized parts of the plant. 

Mucilaginous, gelatinous, saccharine^ oily, and 
extractive fluids, and solution of carbonic acid in wa* 
^ter, are substajdces that in their unchanged stafes con- 
tain almost all the principles necessary for the life of 
plants ; but there are few cases in which they can be 
applied as manures in their pure forms ; and vegeta* 
ble manures, in general, contain a great excess of fib- 
rous and insoluble matter, which must undergo che- 



C ^ 2.4S 3 

xmcal changes before they cm become the food of 
plants. 

It will be proper to take a scientific ^view of the 
nature of these changes ; of the causes which occasipa 
diem, and which accelerate or retard them j and qf 
the products they afford. 

If any fresh vegetable matter which contains su- 
^ar, mucilage, starch, or other of the vegttable com- ^ 
. pounds soluble in water be moistened and exposed to 
air, at a temperature from 55^ to 80% oxygene will 
soon be absorbed, and carbonic acid formed; heat 
oxriil be produced, and elastic fluids, principally car- 
bonic acid, gaseous oxide of carbon, and hydro- car- 
bonate will be evolved ; a dark coloured liquid of a 
slightly sour or bitter taste will likewise be formed j ' 
and if the process be suffered to continue for a time 
suiGdently long, nothing solid will remain, except 
earthy and saline matter, coloured black by charcoal. . 

The dark coloured fluid formed in the fermenta- 
tion always contains acetic add ; and when albumen 
or gluten exists in the vegetable substance, it likewise 
contains volatile alkali. 

In proportion as there is more gluten, albumen, 
or matters soluble in water ip the vegetable substances 
exposed to fermentation, so in proportion, all other 
circumstances bdng equal, wili the process be more 
^ rapid. Pure woody fibre alone undergoes a change 
very slowly j but its texture is broken down, and it is 
easily resolved into new elements when mixed with 
substances more liable to change, containing more 
oxygene and hydrogene. Volatil^i and fi«ed oils, reisins 



[ 244 3 

^nd wax, are more susceptible of change than woody 
fibre when exposed to air and water; but much.* 
less liable than the other vegetable compounds; and 
even the most inflammable substances by the absoip^^ 
. tion of oxygene, become gradually soluble in water. 

Animal matters in general are more liable to de- 
compose than vegetable substances ; oxygene is ab- 
sorbed, and carbonic acid and ammonia.formed in the 
process of their putrefaction. They produce foetid 
compound elastic fluids, and likewise azote : they af- 
ford dark coloured acid and oHy fluids, and leave a 
residuum of salts and earths mixed with carbonace&lt;» 
ous matter. 

The principal substances which constitute the 
different parts of animals, or which are found in their 
blood, their secretions, or their excrements, are gela- 
tine, fibrine, mucus, fatty, or oily matter, albumen, 
urea, uric acid, and diffi^rent acid, saline, and earthy 
matter. \ . . ■ 

Of these gelatine is the substance which when 
combined with water forms jelly. It is very liable to 
putrefaction. According to M. M. Gay Lussac and 
Thenard, it is composed of 
47.88 of carbon, 
27.207 — oxygene, 
7.9 14 — hydrogene* 
16.998 

These proportions cannot be considered as defi- 
tote, for they do not bear to each other the ratios 
of any ample multiples of the number represent- 
ing the elements; the case seems to be the same 



C 245 3 



V^ 



with other animal comppunds : and even m ve- 
gat^able substances, in general, as appears from the 
statements given in the Third Lecture, the propor- 
tions are far frpm having the same simple' relations 
as in the binary compounds capable of being made 
artificially;, such as acids, alkalies, oxides, and in 
salt?, • 

Ftbrine constitutes the basis of the muscular 
fibre of animals, and a similar substance may be ob- 
tained from recent fluid blood j by stirring it with a 
stick the fibrine will adhere to the stick; It is not 
soluble in water j but by the action of acids, as Mr. 
Hatchett has shewn, it becomes soluble, and analo- 
gous to gelatine. It is less disposed to putjrefy than 
gelatine. According to M. H. Gay Lussac and Then- 
ard^ 100 parts of fibrine contain 

Of carbon - - 53.360 / 
l-oxyg^ne - - 19,685 

— hydrogene - - 7.021 

— azote - - 19.934 

Mucus Is very ai^logous to vegetable gum in its 
characters} and as Dr. Bostock has stated, it may be 
obtained by evaporating saliva. , No experiments have 
been made upon its anal]^is; but it is probably similar 
to gum in composition. It is capable of undergoing 
putrefaction, but less rapidly than fibrine. 

Animal fat zad oils have not been accurately analy- 
sed) but there is great reason to suppose that their 
c^mpositton is analogous to that of similar isubstances 
from the vegetable kingdom. 

Albumen has been already referred to, and itsr 
analysis slated in tlie Third Leaure. 



c 246 3 ■: •, 

Urea may be obtained by^the evaporation of bu-^ 
snan urine, till h is of the consistence of a syrup; and 
the action of alcohol on the crystalline substance which 
forms when the evaporated matter cools. In this 
way a solution of urea in alcohol is procured, and tlte 
alcohol may be separated from the urea i&gt;y heae. 
Urea is very solCible in water, and is precipitated 
from water by diluted nitric acid in the form of 
bright pearl-coloured crystals; this property distin- 
guishes it from all other animal substances. 

According to Fourcroy and Vauquelin, 100 parts 
of urea when distilled yield. 

92.027 parts of carbonate of ammonia. 
4.608 carburetted hydrogene gas. 
S.225 of charcoal. 
Urea, particularly when mixed with albumen or 
gelatine, readily undergoes putrefaction. 

Uric acid^ as has been shewn by Dr. Egan^ 
may be obtained from human urine by pouring an 
acid into it; and it often falls down from urine in 
the form of brick-coloured crystals. It consists of 
carbon, hydrogene, oxygene and azote; but their 
proportions have not yet beaa determined. Uric 
acid is one of the animal substances least liable to 
undergo the process of putrefaction. 

According to the different proportions of these 
principles in animal compounds, so are the changes 
they undergo different. When there is much saline 
or earthy matter mixed or combined with them, the 
progress of their decomposition is less rapid than when 
they are principally composed of fibrine, albumen^ 
gelatine^ or urea. 



V ^: I 247 3 . 

The atntnonia givto oflF from animal compbund^ 
in putrefaction may be conceived to be formed at the 
&amp;me of their decomposition by the ccnnbination of hy** 
drogene and azote j except this matter, the othor pro- 
ducts of putre&amp;ction are analogous to those afforded 
hy the fermentation of veg^^ble substances ; and the , 
Soluble substances formed abound in the element!^ 
^wluch are the constituent parts of vegetables, in car- 
bon, hydrogehe, and oxygene. 

Whenever n^ures consist principally of matter 
soluble in water, it is evident that their fermentatioa 
or putrefaction should be prevented as much as pds&lt;* 
sible ; and the only cases in which these processes ca&amp; - 
Jbe useful, are when the manure con^sts principally 
of vegetable or animal fibre. The circumstances ne- 
cessary for the putrefaction of animal substances are 
similar to those required for the fermentation of vege* 
table substances ; *.a temperature above the freezing 
point, the presence of water, and the presence of oxy^ 
gene, at least in the first stage of the process. 

To prevent manures from decomposing, they 
should be preserved dry, defended from the contact 
of air, and kept as cool as possible. 

Salt and alcohol appear to owe their powers of 
preserving animal and vegetable substances to their at« 
traction for water, by which they prevent its decom- 
posing action, and likewise to thehr excluding air. The 
use of ice in preserving animal substances is ovnng to 
its keeping their temperature low. The efficacy of 
M. Appert's method of preserving animal and vegeta- 
ble, substances, an account of which has' been latelf 



L 248 3 ^ ^ 

published, entirely depends upon the exclusion of air. 
This^method is by filling a vessel of tin plate or glass 
with the meat or vegetables ; soldering or cementing 
the top so as to render the vessel air tight ; and then 
keeping it half immersed in a vessel of boiling water 
for a sufficient time to render the meat or vegetables 
proper for food. In this last process it is probable 
that the small quantity of oxygene remaining in the 
vessel is absorbed : for on opening a tinned iron can- 
ister which had been filled with raw beef and e;xposed 
to hot water the day before, I found that the minute 
quantity of elastic fluid which could be procured from 
it, was a n(uxture of carbonic acid gas and azote. 

Where meat or vegetable food is to be preserved 
on a large scale, fpr the use of the navy or army for" 
instance, I am inclined to believe, that by forcibly 
throwing a quantity of carbonic acid, hydrogene, or 
azote into the vessel, by means of a compressing 
pump, similar to that used for making artificial Seltzer 
water, atiy change in the substance would be more 
effectually prevented. No elastic fluid in this case 
Would have room to form by the decomposition di 
the meat ; and the tightness and strength of the ves*» 
sel would be proved by the process. No pi^trefaction 
or fermentation can go on without the generation of 
elastic fluid ; and pressure would probably act with 
as much efficacy as cold in the preservation of animal 
or vegetable food. 

As diflPerent manures contain different propor- 
tions of the elements necessary to vegetation, so they 
require a diflferent treatment to enable them to pro- 



C 249 ] 

xluce their full effects in s^culture* I shall therefore 
describe in detail the properties and nature of the 
'manures in common use, and give some general views 
respecting the best modes of preserving and applying 
them. 

All green succulent plants contain saccharine or 
mucilaginous matter, with woody fibre, and readily 
ferment. They cannot, therefore, if intended for ma- 
nure, be used too soon after their deaths 

When green crops are to be employed for enrich* 
. ing a soil, they should be ploughed in, if it be possi- 
ble, when in flower, or at the time the flower is begin-, 
ing to appear, for it is at this period that they contain 
the largest quantity of easily soluble matter, and, that 
their leaves are most active in forming nutritive mat- 
ter. Green crops, pond weeds, the paring of hedges 
or ditches, or any kind of fresh vegetable matter, re- 
quires no preparation to fit them for manure. The 
decomposition slowly proceeds beneath the soil } the 
soluble matters are gradually dissolved, and the slight 
fermentation that goes on checked by the want of a 
free communication of air, tends to render, the woody 
fibre soluble without occasioning the rapid disdpation 
of elastic matter « 

When old pastures are broken up and made 
arable, not only has the soil been enriched by the 
death and slow decay of the plants which have left 
soluble matters in the soil ; but the leaves and roots 
of the grasses living at the time and occupying so 
large a part of the surface, aflFord sacch;urine, mucila- 
ginous, and extractive matters, which becomeimme- 

k2 



[ 250 3 

diately the food of the crop, and the gradual decom- 
posidon affords a supply for successive years. 

Rape cake^ which is used with great success as a 
manure, contains a large quantity of mucilage, some 
albuminous matter, and a small quantity of oil. This 
manure should be used recent, and kept as dry as pos- 
sible before it is applied. It forms an excellent dres* 
sing for turnip crops } and is most oeconomically ap- 
plied by being thrown into the soil at the same time 
with the seed. Whoever wishes to see this practice 
in its highest degree of perfection, should attend Mr- 
Coke's annual sheep-shearing at Holkham/ 

Malt dust consists chiefly of the infant radicle 
separated from the grain. I have never made any ex« 
periment upon this manure ; but there is great reason 
to suppose it must contain saccharine matter ; and this 
will account for its powerful effects. Like rape cake 
it should be used as dry as possible, and its fermenta- 
tion prevented. 

Linseed cake j&amp; too valuable as a food for cattle 
to be much employed as a manure ; the analysis of 
linseed was referred to in the Third Lecture. The 
water, in ^Yixiiflax and hemp are steeped for the pur- 
pose of obtaining the pure vegetable fibre, has consl- 
dex^ble fertilizing powers. It appears to contain a 
substance analogous to albumen, and likewise much 
vegetable extractive matter. It putrefies very readily. 
A certain degree of fermentation is absolutely neces- 
sary to obtain the flax and hemp in a proper state ^ 
the water to which they have been exposed should 



[ 251 "3 

therefore be used as a manure as soon as the vegeta- 
ble fibre is removed from it. 

Sea weeds ^ consisting of different i^edes of fuci, 
algae, and confervas, are much used as a manure on 
the sea coasts of Britain and Ireland* By digesting 
the common fucus, which is the sea weed usually most 
abundant on the coast, in boiling water, I obtained 
from it one-eighth of a gelatinous substance which 
had characters similar to mucilage. A quantity disp&gt; 
tilled gave nearly four-fifths of its weight of Vrater, 
but no ammonia ; the water had an empyreumatSc and 
slightly spur taste ; the ashes contained sea salt, car- 
bonate of soda, and carbonaceous matter. .The gase« 
ous matter afforded was small. in quantity,: principally 
carbonic acid and gaseous oxide of carbdn, with a lit- 
tle hydro-carbonate. This manure is transient in its 
effects, and does not last for more than a single crop, 
which is easily accounted for from the large quantity 
of water, or the elements of ws^er, it contajns. It de- 
, cays without producing heat when exposed to the at- 
mosphere, and seems as it were to melt down and dis- 
solve away. I have seen a large heap entirely des- 
troyed in less than two years, nothing remaining but 
a little black fibrous matter. 

I suffered some of the firmest part of a fucus to 
remain in a close jar containing atmospheric air for a 
fortnight: in this time it had become very much 
shrivelled ; the sides of the jar, were lined w|[th dew. 
The air examined was found to have lost oxygene^ 
and contained carbonic acid gas. 

Sea weed is sometimes suffered to f^srment be- 
fore it is^used ; but this process seems wholly unne- 



&lt;!essary, for there is no fibrous matter rendered solu- 
ble in the process, and a part of the manure is lost. 

The best formers in the west of England use it 
as fresh as it can be procured ; and the practical 
results of this niode of applying it are exactly confor- 
mable to the theory of its operation. The carbonic 
axrid formed by its incipient fermentation must be part- 
ly dissolved by the teater set free in the same pro- 
cess ; and thus become capable of absorption by the 
, roots of plants. 

The effects of the sea weed as manure must prin- 
cipally depend upon this carbonic acid, and Upon the 
soluble mucilage the weed contains ; and I found that 
some fucus which had fermented so as to have lost 
about half its tveight, afforded less than iV of mucila- 
ginous matter ; from which it may be fairly conclud- 
ed that some of this substance is destroyed in fermen- 
tation* 

Dry straw of wheat, oats, barley, beans and peas, 
and spoiled hay, or any other similar kind of dry ve- 
getable matter is, in all cases, useful manure. In 
general, such substances are made to ferment before 
they are employed, though it may be doubted whether 
the practice should be indiscriminately adopted. 

From 400 grains of dry barley straw I obtained 
eight grains of matter soluble in water, which had a 
brown colour, and tasted like mucilage. From 400 
grains of wheaten straw I obtained five grains of a 
similar substance. 

There can be no doubt that the straw of diffef- 
ent crops immediately ploughed into the ground af- 



r 25d 3 

fords nourishment to plants ; but there is an objec- 
tion to this method of using straw from the difficulty 
of burying long stra\^, and from it^ rendering the 
husbandry foul. 

When straw is made to ferment it becomes a 
more manageable manure ; but there is likewise on 
the whole a great loss of nutritive matter. More 
manure is perhaps supplied for a single crop ; but the 
land is less improved than it would be, supposing the 
whole of the vegetable matter could be finely divided 
and mixed with the soil. 

It is usual to carry straw that can be employed 
for no other purpose to the dunghill, to ferment, and 
decompose ; but it is worth experiment, .whether it 
may not be more oeconomically applied when chopped 
small by a proper machine, and kept dry till it is 
ploughed in for the use of a crop. In this case, 
though it would decompose much more slowly and 
produce less effect at first, yet its influence .would be 
much more lasting. 

Mere woody fibre seems to be the only vegetable 
matter that requires fermentation to render it nutritive 
to plants. Tanners spent bark is a substance of this 
kind. Mr. Young, in his excellent Essay on Ma* 
nures, which gained him the Bedfordian medal of the 
Bath Agricultural Society, states, '* that spent bark 
seemed rather to injure than assist vegetation;'* 
which he attributes to the astringent matter that it con* 
tains. But in fact it is freed from all soluble sub* 
stances, by the operation of water in the tan-pit ; and 
if injurious to vegetation, the effect is probably owing 



t 254 3 

to its agency upon water, or to its mechanical efFectSi 
It is a substance very absorbent and retentive of mois« 
ture, and yet not penetrable by the roots of plants. 

Inert peaty matter is a substance of the same kind. 
It remains for years exposed to water and air without 
undergoing change ; and in this state yields little or 
no nourishment to plants. 

Woody fibre will not ferment unless some sub- 
stances are mixe^ with it which act the same part as 
the mucilage, sugar, and extractive or albuminous 
matters, with which it is usually associated in herbs 
and succulent vegetables. Lord Meadowbank has 
judiciously recommentded a mixture of common form- 
yard dung for the purpose of bringing peats into fer- 
mentation ; any putrescible or fermentable substance 
will answer the end ; and the more a substance heats, 
and the more readily it ferments, the better will it be 
fitted for the purpose. 

Lord Meadowbank states, that one part of dung 
is sufficient to bring three or four parts of peat into a 
state in which it is fitted to be applied to land ; but of 
course the quantity'^must vary according to the nature 
of the dung and of the peat. In cases in which some 
living vegetables are mixed with the peat, the fermen- 
tation will be more readily effected. 
' Tanners spent bark, shavings of wood and saw 
dust, will probably require as much dung to bring 
them into fermentation as the worst kind of peat. 

Woody fibre may be likewise prepared so as to 
become a manure by the action of lime. This subject 
I shall discuss in the next Lecture^ ^s it follows na* 



' [ 2J5 3 

turally another series of facts, relating to the effects 
of lime ^n the soil. 

It is evident from the analysis of woody fibre by 
M. M, Gay Lussac and Thenard, (which shews that it 
consists principally of the elements of water and car- 
bon, the carbon being in larger quantities than in the 
other vegetable compounds) that any process which 
tends to abstract carbonaceous matter from it, must 
bring it nearer in composition to the soluble princi- 
ples } and this is done in fermentation by the absorp- 
tion of oxygene and production of carbonic acid ; and 
a similar effect, it will be shewn, is produced by lime. 

Wood-ashes imperfectly formed, that is wood-ashes 
containing much charcoal, are said to have been used 
with success as a manure. A part of their effects 
may be owing to the slow and gradual consumption 
of the charcoal, which seems capable, under oth^r 
circumstances than those of actual combustion, of ab- 
sorbing oxygene so as to become carbonic acid. 

An April, 1803, I inclosed some well burnt 
charcoal in a tube half filled with pure water, and half 
with common air ; the tube was heripetically sealed* 
I opened the tube under pure water in th^ spring of 
1804, at a time when the atmospheric tempel^ture and 
pressure were nearly the same as at the commence- 
ment of the experiment. Some water rushed in ; and 
on expelling a little air by heat from the tube, and 
analysing it, it was found to contain only seven per 
cent, of oxgene. The water in the tube, when mixed 
with limewater, produced a copious precipitate ; so 



C 256 3 ' 

that carbonic acid had evidently been formed and 
dissolved by the water. 

Manures from animal substances, in general, re- 
quire no chemical preparation to fit them for the soil. 
The great object of the farmer is ta blend them with 
earthy constituents in a proper state of division, and 
to prevent their too rapid decomposition. 

The etitire parts of the muscles of land animals 
are not commonly used as manure, though there are 
many cases in which such an application might be 
easily mad e. Horses, dogs, sheep, deer, and other quad- 
rupeds that have died accidentally, or of disease, after 
their skins are separated, are often suffered to remain 
exposed to the air, or immersed in water till they are 
destroyed by birds or beasts of prey, or entirely de- 
composed ; and in this case most of their organized 
matter is lost for the land in which they lie, and a 
(Considerable portion of it employed in giving off nox- 
ious gasses to the atmosphere. 

By covering dead animals with five or six times 
their bulk of soil, mixed with one part of lime, and 
suffering them to remain for a few months ; their de- 
composition would impregnat'e the soil with soluble 
matters, so as to render it an excellent manure ; and 
by mixing a little fresh quicklime with it at the time of 
its removal, the disagreeable effluvia would be in a 
great measure destr€&gt;yed ; and it might be applied in 
the same way as any other manure to crops. 

Fish forms a powerful manure in whatever state 
it is applied ; but it cannot be ploughed in too fresh, 
though the quantity should be limited. Mr. Young 



C 257 J '' 

i*ecords in experimem. In which hemfigs spread over 
a field and ploughed in for wheat, produced so rank 
a crop, that it was entirely laid before harvest 

The refuse pilchards in Cornwall are used 
throughout the county as a manure, with excellent 
effects. They are usually mixed with sand or soil, 
and sometimes with sea-weed, to prevent them from 
raising too luxuriant a crop. The effects are perceiv- 
ed for several years. 

In the fens of Lincolnshire, Cambridgeshire, and 
Norfolk, the little fish called sticklebacks, are caught 
in the shallow waters in such quantities, that they 
form a great article of manure in the land bordering 
on the fens. 

It is easy to explain the operation of fish as a 
manure. The skin is principally gelatine: which 
from its slight state of cohesion is readily soluble in 
water : fat or oil is always found in fishes, either un- 
der the skin or in some of the viscera j and their fib- 
rous matter contains all the essential elements of vege« 
table substances. 

Amongst oily substances, graves and blubber arc 
employed as manure. They are both most useful when 
nfiixed with soil, so as to expose a large surface to the 
air, the oxygene of which produces soluble matter 
from fhem. Lord Somerville used blubber with great 
success at his farm in Surrey. It was made into a 
heap with soil, and retained its powers of fertiliaing 
for several successive years. 

The carbon and hydrogene abounding in oily 
substances fully account for their effects j and their 

1-2. 



C 25» 3 

durability is easily explained from the gradual manner 
in which they change by the action of air and water. 

Bones are much used as a manure in the neigh- 
bourhood of London* After being broken and boiled 
for grease^ they are sold to the farmer. The more 
, divided they are, the more powerful are their effects. 
The expense of grinding them in a mill would proba^ 
Wy be repaid by the increase of their fertilizing pow- 
' ers ; and in the state of powder they might be used in 
the drill husbandry, and delivered with the seed in the 
same manner as rape cake. 

Bone dust, and bone shavings, the refuse of the 
turning manufacture, may be advantageously employ- 
ed in the same way. 

The t)asis of bone is constituted by earthy salts, 
principaUy phosphate of lime, with some carbonate of 
fime and phosphate of magnesia ; the easily decom* 
posable substances in bone are fat, gelatine, and cartil- 
age, which seems of the same nature as coagulated 
albumen. 

According to the analysis of Fourcroy and Vau^ 
quelin, ox bones are composed 

Of decomposable animal matter 51 
— phosphate of lime - - 37.7 
-** carbonate of lime . - 10 
^-* phosphate of magnesia - 1*^ 

100 

M. Merat Guillot has given the following estx« 
ms^te of the composition of the bones of different 
animals. 



259 



Bone of Calf 
-'— — Hon^ 

— . Sheep 

Elk 

Hog 

—— — ^— Hare 

Pullet 

Pike 

— Carp 

Horses' teeth 

Ivory 

Hartshora 



Phosphate 
of lime. 



S4 

67.5 
70 
90 
$t 
9S 
7t 
«4 
45 

85.5 
64 

if 



Carbonate 
of lime. 



The remaining parts of the 100 must be consi- 
dered as decomposable animal matter* 

Horn is a still more powerful manure than bone, 
as it contains a larger quantity of decomposable ani- 
mal matter. From 500 grains of ox horn Mr. Hatch- 
ett obtained only 1-6 grains of earthy residuum, and 
not quite half of this was phosphate of lime. The 
shaving or turnings of horn form an excellent ma- 
nure, though they are not sufficiently abundant to be 
in common use* The animal matter in them seems 
16 be of the nature of coagulated albumen, and it is &lt; 
slowly rendered soluble by ihe action of water. The 
earthy maltter in horn, and still more that in bones, 
prevents the too rapid decomposition of the animal 
matter, and renders it very durable in its effects. 

Hair^ woollen rags zad feathers are all analogous 
in composition, and principally con^sts of a substance 
sinular to albumen, united to gelatine. This is shewn* 
by the ingenious researches of Mr. Hatchett. The 
theory of their operation is dmilar to that of bone and 
bom shavings. 

The refuse of the different manufactures of skin 
and leather form very useful manures j such as the 



' [ 260 3 

shavings of the currier, farriers' clippings, and the 
offals of the tan^yaxd and of the glue-maker. The 
gelatine contained in every kind of dcin is in a state 
fitted for its gradual solution or decomposition ; and 
when buried, in the soil, it lasts for a C9nsiderable 
time, and constantly affords a supply of nutritive mat* 
ter to the plants in its neighbourhood* 

Blood contains certain quantities of all the princi- 
ples found in other animal substances, and is conse« 
quently a very good manure. It has been already 
stated that it contains fibrine ; it likewise contains al- 
bumen : the red particles in it which have been sup- 
posed by many foreign chemists to be coloured by 
iron in a particular state of combination with oxygene 
wd acid^ matter, Mr. Brande considers as formed of 
a peculiar animal substance, containing very little 
iron. 

The scum taken from the boilers of the sugar 
bakers, smd which is used as manure, principally con- 
dsts of bullock's blood, which has been employed for 
th^ purpose of separating the impurities of common 
brown sugar, by means of the coagulation of its albu^ 
ininous matter by the heat of the boiler. 

The different species of corals^ coralines^ and 
sponges^ must be considered as substances of animal 
origin. From the analysis of Mr^ Hatcbett,it appears 
that all these wbstances contain considerable quanti- 
ties of a matter analogous to coagulated ^uAien ; the 
sponges afford likewise gelatine. 

According to Merat Guillot white coral contate^ 
ei|ual parts of ammal^natter an4 carbonate of lime : 



C 261 3 

red coral 46.5 of animal matter, and 53.S of carbon- 
' ate of lime ; articulated coraline 51 of animal mattefi 
and 49 of carbonate of lime.- 

These substances are, I believe, never used as ma* 
nure in this country, except in cases when they are ac- 
cidentally mixed with sea weed ; but it is probable that 
the coralines might be advantageously employed, as 
they are found in considerable quantity on the rocks^ 
and bottoms of the rocky pools on many parts of our 
coast, where the land gradually declines towards the 
sea ; and they might be detached by hoes, and collect^ 
ed witiiout much trouble. - 

Amongst excrementadons, animal substance^ 
used as manures urine is the one upon which the 
greatest number of chemical experiments have been 
made^ and the nature of which is best understood. 

The urine of the cow contains, according to the 
experiments of Mr. Brande, 

Water - - . - . 65' 
Phosphate of lime ^ • -3 
Muriates of potassa and ammonia « 15 
Sulphate of potasisa ... 6 

Carbonates, and potassa, and amnK&gt;ifia 4 
Urea - - - - w . 4 
The urine of the horse, according to Fourcroy 
and Vauquelin, contains 

Of carbonate of Ume 11 

*— carbonate of soda - - - 9 
-— benzoate of soda - ^ - 24 

— Muriate of j)citassa - ^ ^ o 

— Ur^ - ... • 7 

— Water and mucilage - * 940 



C 262 3 

In addition ta these substances, Mr. Brande found 
in it phosphate of lime. 

The urine of the ass, the camel, the rabbit, and 
domestic fowls have been submitted to different ex- 
periments, and their constitution have been found si- 
milar. In the urine of the rabbit, in addition to most 
of the ingredients above mentioned, Vauquelin detect- 
ed gelatine ; and the same chemist discovered uric 
acid in the urine of domestic fowls. 

Human urine contains a greater variety of con- 
stituents than any other species examined. 

Urea, uric acid, and another acid similar to it in 
nature called rosacic acid, acetic acid, albumen^ gela- 
tine, a resinous matter, and various salts are found 
in it. 

. The human urine Offers in composition accord- 
ing to the state of the body, and the nature of 
the food and drink made use of. In many cases 
of disease there is a much larger quantity of gelatine 
and albumen than usual in the urine ; and in diabetes 
it contains sugar. 

It is probable that the urine of the same animal 
must likewise differ according to the different nature 
of the food, and drink used ;^and'this will account for 
discordancies in some of the analyses that have heed 
published on the subject. 

- Urine is very liable to change and to undergo the 
putrefactive process ; and that of carnivorous animals^, 
more rapidly than that of graminivorous animafs. In 
propolrtion as there is more gelatine and albumen in 
urine, so in proportion doei? it putrify more quickly* 



C 26S 3 

The species of urine that contain most albumen, 
gelatine and urea, are the best as manures ; and all 
urine contains the essential elements of vegetables in a 
state of solution. 

During the putrefaction of urine the greatest 
part of the soluble animal matter that it contains is 
destroyed j it should consequently be used as fresh 
.as possible ; but if not mixed with solid matter, it 
should be diluted with water, as when pure it contains 
too large a quantity of animal matter to form a pro- 
per fluid nourishment for absorption by the roots of 
plants. 

Putrid urine abounds in ammoniacal salts ; and 
though less active than fresh urine, is a very power- 
ful manure. 

According to a recent analysis published by Ber- 
zelius, 1000 parts of urine are composed of 
"Water - - - - - 933 

Urea SO.l 

Uric acid . - - . 1 

Muriate of ammonia, free lactic acid,"^ 
lactate of ammonia and animal J&gt;17.14 
matter . - . - j 

'the remainder diflferent salts, phosphates, sul- 
phates, and muriates. 

Amongst excrementitious solid substances used 
as manures, one of the most powerful is the dung of 
birds that feed on animal food^ particularly the dung of 
sea birds. The guano^ which is used to a great extent 
in South America, and which is the manure that fer- 
tilizes the sterile, plains of Peru, is a production of this 



C 864 3 

kind. It e:^ists abunda&amp;tly^ as we are informed by 
M. Humboldt, on the small islands in the south sea^ 
at Chinche, Ilo, Iza, and Arica. 50 vessels are la- 
den with it annually at Chinche, each of \xduch carries 
-from 1500 to 2000 cubical feet. It is usod a manure 
only in very small quantities ; and particularly for 
crops of maize. I made some experiments on speci- 
mens of guano sent from South America to the Board 
of Agriculture in 1 805, It appeared as a fine brown 
powder ; it blackened by heat, and gave off strong 
ammoniacal fumes ; treated with nitric add it afford* 
ed uric acid. In 1806 M. M. Fourcroy and Vauque- 
Hn published an elaborate analysis of guano. They 
state that it contains a fourth part of its weight of uric 
acid, partly saturated with«^ammonia, and partly with 
pot^ssa ; some phosphoric acid combined with the 
same bases, and likewise with Ume. Small quantities 
of sulphate and muriate of potassa. a little fatty matter, 
and some quartzose sand« 

It is easy to explain its fertilizing properties: 
from its composition it might be supposed to be a very 
powerful nianure. It requires wajer for the solution 
of its soluble matter to enable it to produce its full 
beneficial effect on crops. 

The dung of sea birds has, I believe, never been 
used as a manure in this country ; but it is probable, 
that even the soil of the small islands on our coast 
much frequented by them, would fertilize. Some 
dung of sea birds brought from a rock on the coast of 
Merionethshire, produced a powerful but transient 
effect on grass. It was tried, at my request, by Sir 
Robert Vaughan at Nannau. 



C 265 J 

The rams in &lt;&gt;ur cUtoate must te&amp;d very miich 
to injure this &amp;^&gt;ecies dT muure^ wher^ it is es:posed 
to them, soon after its depomtion } but it may proba* 
bly be foiAid in great perfection in caverns or clefts in 
rocks, hauQl»d by cormorants and gulls. I examined 
some recent cormorant's dung which I found on a 
rock near Gape Lizard in Cornwall. It had not at all 
the appearance of the guano ] was of a greyish white 
cobur ; had a very foetid smell like that of putrid ani- 
mal matter: when acted on by quicklime it gave 
abundance of ammonia ; treated with nitric acid it 
yielded uric add* c . 

^ Night joily it is well kdown, is a very powerful 
manure, and very liable to decompose. It differs in its 
composition ; but always abounds in substances com- 
posed of carbon, hydrogene, a^ote, and oxygene. 
From the analyses of Berzdius^ it appears that a part 
•of it is always soluble in water ; and, in whatever state 
it is used, whether recent or fermented, it su|&gt;pUes 
abundance of food to plants. 

The dkagireeable smell of night sofl may be des- 
troyed by mixing it with quicklime ; aiid if exposed to 
the atmosphere in thin layers brewed over with' quick- . 
Ikne in fine weather, it speedily dries, is easily pulver- 
ised, and in this state may be used in the same manner 
ais rape cake, and delivered into the furrow with the 
seed* 

The Chinese, who have more practical know- 
ledge of the use and application of manures than any 
other people existing, mix their night soil with one- 
third of its we^ht of a fat marie, make it into cakes, 

m2 



C 266 ] 

ahd dry it by exposure to the sun. These cakes, we 
are informed by the Freaich missionaries, have no dis- 
agreeable smell, and form a common article of com* 
merce of the empire. ^ 

The earth, by its absorbent powers, probably 
prevents, to a certain extent, the action of moisture 
upon the dung, and likewise defends it from the ef- 
fects of air. 

After night soil, pigeons* dung come next in or- 
der, as to fertilizing power. I digested 100 grams of 
pigeons', dung in hot water for « some hours, and ob- 
tained from it 23 grains of soluble matter ; which af- 
forded abundance of carbonate of ammonia by distil- 
lation ; and left carbonaceous matter, saline matter 
principally common salt, and carbonate of lime as a 
residuum. Pigeons' dung when moist readily fer- 
ments, and after fermentation contains less soluble 
matter than before: from 100 parts of f^mnented 
pigeons' dung, I obtained only eight parts of soluble 
matter, which gave proportionally less carbonate of 
ammonia in distillation than recent pigeons' dung. 

It is evident that this manure should be applied 
as new as possible ; and when dry, it may be employ- 
ed in the same manner a$ the other manures capable 
of being pulverised. 

The soil in woods where great flocks of wood- 
pigeons roost, is often highly impregnated with thar 
dung, and it cannot be doubted, would form a valuable 
manure. I have found such soil yield ammonia when 
distilled with lime. In the winter likewise it usually 
contain$ abundance of .vegetable matter, the remains 



i: 267 3 

of decayed leaves ; and the duag tends to bring the 
vegetable matter into a state of solution. 

The dung oi domestii^ fmls approaches very near- 
ly in its nature to pigeons' dung. Uric acid hast^en 
found in it. It gives carbcmate of ammonia by distttla* 
tion, and immediately* yields sduble matter to water. 
It is very liable to ferment. 

The dung of fowls is employed in xzommcm with 
that of pigeons l^ tanners to bring on a slight degree 
of putrefaction in skins that are to be used for making 
soft leather j for this purpose the dung is diffused 
through water. In this state it rapidly und^goes pu*- 
trefaction^ and brings on a similar change in the skin* 
The excrements of dogs are employed by the tanner 
with similar effects. In all cases, the contents of the 
grainer^ as the pit is called in which soft skins are pre- 
pared by dung, must form a very useful manure. 

Rabbits* dung hsA never been analysed. It is 
used with great success as a manure by Mr. Fane^ 
who finds it profitable to keep rabbits in such a maii-r 
ner as to preserve their dung. It is laid on as fresh 
as possible, and is foun'S better the less it has fer* 
mented. 

The dung of cMle^ oxen and cowsy has been che- 
mically examined by M. M. Einhof and Thaer. They 
found that it contained matter soluble in water ; and 
that it gave in fermentation nearly the same products 
as vegetable substances, absorbing oxygene and pro* 
ducing carbonic acid gas. 

The recent dung of sbeepy and of deer, afford, 
when long boiled in water, soluble matters, which 



4H}ua} item two t6 three per cent, of their ^^ight* I 
have examined these soluble substances procured by 
solution and eva^poration j they contain a very small 
quantity of matter analogous to animal mucus ; and 
are principally composed of a bitter extract, soluble 
both in water and in alcohot They giv^ ammcmilical 
fiimes by distillation ; and appear to differ very Httl^ 
in composition* 

I watered some blades of grass fbr several suc&lt;^ 
cessive days with a solution of these extracts ; they 
evidently became greener in consequence, and grew 
more vigorously Aan grass in other respects, nnder 
the same circumstances. ^ 

The part of the dung of cattle, sheep, and deer, 
not soluble in water, appears to be mere woody fibre, 
and precisely analt^ous to the residuum of those ve- 
getables that form their food after they have been de* 
fnrtd of all thdr soluble materials* 

The dang of horses gives a brown fluid, which 
when evaporated, yields a bitter extract, which affords 
ammoniacal funjes more copiously than that from the 
dung of oxen. 

If the pure dung of cattle is to be used as manure 
like the other specieis of dung which have been men- 
tioned, there seems no reason why it should be made to 
ferment except in the soil ; or if suffered to ferment, 
it should be only in a very slight degree* The grass 
in die neighbourhood of recently voided dung, is al- 
ways cojirse and daA green ; some persons have at* 
tributed this to a noxious quality in unfermented 
dung } but it seems to be rather the resulit of an excess 
of food furnished to the pjants. 



C 269 3 

The quesdoa of the propar mode of the applica- 
tion of the dung of horses and cattle, however, ,pro* 
perly belongs to the subject of composite manures^ for 
k is usually mixed in the farm-yard with straw, oSal, 
chaff, and various kind of fitter; and itself contains a 
large proportion of fibrous vegetable matter. 

A slight incipient fermentation is undoubtedly of 
use in the dunghill; for by means of it a disposidon is 
brought on in the woody fibre to decay and dissolve^ 
when it is carried to the land, or ploughed into the 
soil; and woody fibre is always in great excess in the 
refuse of the farm* 

Too great a degree of fermentation is, howeyer,' 
very prejudicial to the composite manure in the dung* 
hill; it is better that there should be no fermentation 
at all before the manure is used, than that it should be 
carried too far. This must he obvious from what 
has been already stated in this Lecture. The excess 
of fermentation tends to the destruction and dissipa* 
tion of the most useful part of the manure; and the 
ultimate results of thi^ process are like those of com- 
busdon. 

It is a common pracdceamoogst &amp;rmers, to suf« 
fer the &amp;rm*yard dung to ifarment till the fibrous 
texture of the vegetable matter is endrely broken 
down; and till the manure becomes perfectly cold, 
and so soft as to be easily cut by the spade. 

Indqiendent of the general theoretical views un* 
favourable to thb pracdce founded upon the nature 
and composition of vegetable substances, there are 
many arguments and facts which shew that it is pre* 
judicial to the interests of the farmer. ~ 



During the violent fermentation which is neces- 
sary for reducing farm-yard "manure to the state in 
which it is called short muckj not only a large quantity 
of fluid, but likewise a gaseous matter is lost} so much 
so that the dung is reduced one half, or two-thirds in 
weight; and the principal elastic matter disengaged, is 
carbonic acid with some ammonia; and both tii^se, if 
retained by the moisture in the soil, as I^s been stated 
before, are capable of becoming an useful nourisb- 
ment of plants. 

In October, 1808, 1 filled a large retort capable 
of contaming three pints of water, with some hot fer- 
menting manure, consisting principally of the litter 
and dung of cattle; I adapted a small receiver to the 

• retort, and connected the whole with a mercurial pneu- 
matic apparatus, so as to collect the condensible and 
elastic fluids which might rise from the dung. The 
receiver soon became lined with dew, and drops be- 
gan in a few hours to trickle down, the sides of it. 
Elastic fluid likewise was generated; in three days 35 
cubical inches had been formed, which when analy- 
sed, were found to contain 21 cubical inches of car- 
bonic acid, the remainder was hydroc^bonate mixed 
with some azote, probably no more than existed in 
theyrommon airjn the receiver* The fluid matter 

. collected in the receiver at the same time amounted 
to nearly half an ounce. It had a saline taste, and; a 
disagreeable smell, and contained some acetate and 
carbonate of ammonia. / 

Finding such products given . off from ferment*. 
ing litter, I introduced the beak of inother retort 



C #271 3 

filled with similar dung very hot at the time, into 
the soil amongst the roots of some grass in the bor- 
der of a garden; in less than a week a very distinct ef- 
fect was produced upon the grass; upon the spot 
exposed to the influence of the matter disenga- 
ged in fermentation, it grew with much more lux- 
uriance than the grass in any other part of the gar- 
den. 

Besides thd dissipation of gaseous matter when 
fermentation is pushed to the extreme, there is ano- 
ther disadvantage in the loss of heat^ which, if excited 
in the soil, is useful in promoting the germination of 
the seed, and in assisting the plant in the first stage of 
its growth, when it is most feeble and most liable to 
disease: and the fermentation of manure in the soil 
must be particularly favourable to the wheat crop in 
preserving a genial temperature beneath the surface 
late in autumn, and during winter. 

Again, it is a general principal in chemistry, that 
in all cases of decomposition, substances combine 
much more readily at the moment of their disengage- 
ment, than after they have been perfectly formed.— 
And in fermentation beneath the soil the fluid matter 
produced is applied instantly, even whilst it is warm, 
to the organs of the plant, and consequently is more 
likely to be efficient, than in manure that has gone 
through the process; -and of which all the principles 
have entered into new combinations. 

In the writings of scientific agriculturists, a great 
mass of facts may be found in favour of the applica- 
tion of ^farm-yard dung in a recent state. Mr. Young, 
in the Essay on Manures, which I have already quoted j 



C 272^ 3 

adduces a number of excellent authorities in support 
of the plan. Many vho doubted, have been lately con- 
vinced; and perhaps there is no subject c^ investiga- 
V tion in which there is such a union of theoretical and 
practical evidence. I have myself within the last ten 
years witnessed a number of distinct i»tx&gt;&amp; on the 
subject. I shall content myself with quoting that 
which ought to have, and which I am sure will have, 
the greatest weigMt amongst agriculturists. Within 
the last seven years Mr. Coke has entirely given up 
the system formerly adopted on his farm of applying 
fermented dung; , and he informs me, that his crops 
have been since as good as they ever were, and that 
his manure goes nearly twice as far. 

A great objection agamst slightly fexmented dung 
is, that weeds spring up more luxuriantly where it is 
applied. If there are seeds carried out in the dung 
they certainly will germinate; but it is seldom that thb 
6m be the case to any extent; and if the land is not 
cleansed of weeds, any kind of manure fermented or 
unfermented will occasion their rapid growth. If 
slightly fermented farm-yard dung is used as a top 
dressing for pastures, the long straws and unfermented 
vegetable matter remaining on the surface should be 
removed as soon as the grass begins to rise vigorous* 
ly by raking, and carried back to the dunghill: in this 
case no manure will be lost, and the hudsandry will 
be at once clean and oeconomical. 

In cases when farm-yard dung cannot be immedi- 
ately applied to crops, the destructive fermentation of 
it should be prevented as much as posssible: the prin- 



C 273 1 

ciples on »rhich this miiy be effected have befen alfud* 
ed to. 

The surface should be defended as much as pos- 
sible from the: oxygene of the atmosphere ; a compact 
marie, or a tenacious clay, offers the best protection 
against the air j and before the dung is covered over, 
or as it were, sealed up, it should be dried as much 
as possible. If the dung is found at any time to 
hqat strongly, it should be turned over, and cooled' 
by exposure to air. v 

Watering dunghills is sommtimes recommended 
for checking the progress of fermentarion ; but this 
practice is inconsistent with just chemical views. It 
may cool the dung for a short time ; but moisture, as . 
I have before stated, is a principal agent in all proces- 
ses of decomposition. Dry fibrous matter will never 
ferment. Water is as necessary as air to the process ; 
and to supply it to fermenting dung, is to supply an 
agent which will hasten its decay. 

In all cases when dung is fermenting, there are 
simple tests by which the rapidity of the process, and 
consequently the injury done, may be discovered. 

If a thermometer plungedinto the dung does not 
rise to above 100^ degrees of Fahrenheit, there is litde 
danger of much aeriform matter flying off. If the 
temperature is higher, the dung should be immediate^ 
ly spread abroad. 

When a piece of paper moistened in muriatic 
add held over the steams arising from a dunghill 
gives dense fumes, it is a certain test, that the decom- 

n2 



• C 27* ] 

position is going too far ; for this indicates that vola- 
tile alkali is disengaged. 

When dung is to be preserved for any time, the 
situation in which it is kept is of importance. It 
should, if possible, he defended from, the sun. To 
preserve it under sheds would be of great use j or to 
make the site 9f a dunghill on the north side of a wall. 
The floor on which the dung is heaped, should, if pos- 
sible, be paved with flat stones ; and there should be 
a little inclination from each side towards the centre, 
in which there shoifld be drains connected with a 
small well furnished with a pump, by which any fluid 
matter may be collected for the use of the land. It 
too often happens that a dense mucilaginous and ex- 
tractive fluid is suffered to drain away from the dung- 
hill, so as to be entirely lost to the farm. 

Street and road dung, and the sweepings of houses 
may be all regarded as composite manures, the Con- 
stitution of them is necessarily various, as they are 
derived from a number of .different substances. These 
manures are usually applied in a proper mahner, with- 
out being fermented. 

Sooty which is principally formed from the com*- 
bustion of pit coal or coal, generally contains likewise 
substtances derived from animal matters. This is^ a 
very powerful manure. It affords ammoniacal saks 
by distillation, and yields a brown extract to hot wa- 
ter, of a bitter taste. It likewise contains an erapy- 
reumatic oil. Its great basis is charcoal, in a state ia 
which it is capable of being rendered solu|}le by the 
action of oxygene and water. 



C 275 J 

This manure is well fitted to be used in the dry- 
state, thrown into the ground with the seed, and re- 
quires no preparation. ' 

The doctrines of the proper appUcation of ma* 
nures from organized substances, offers an illustration 
of an important part of the oeconomy of nature, and 
of the happy order in which it is arranged. 

The death and decay of animal substances tend 
to resolve organised forms into chemical constituents ; 
and the pernicious effluvia disengaged in the process 
seem to point out the propriety of burying them in 
the soil, where they are fitted to become the food of 
vegetables. Thefermentation and putrefaction of or- 
ganised substances in the free atmospljere are noxious 
processes ; beneath the surface of the ground they 
are salutary operations. In this case the food of plants 
is prepared where it can be used ; and that which 
would offend the^ senses and injure the health, if ex- 
posed, is converted by gradual processes info forms of 
beauty and of usefulness ; the foetid gas is rendered a 
constituent of the aroma of the flower, ahd what 
might be poison, becomes nourishment to animals 
and to man. 



C 276 



I.ECnjRE VII. 

On Manures of mineral Origin^ or fossile Manures ; 
ibeir Preparation^ and the Manner in which they 

. Act. Of Lime in its (Uffirent States ; Operation of 
Lime as a Manure and a Cement ; different Combine 
ations of Linw. Of Gypsum ; Ideas, respecting its 
Use. Of other Neutro-saline Compounds^ employed as 
Manures. OfAlkaUes and alkaline Salts ; of Com- 
mon Salt. 

THE t^hole tenor of the preceding Lectures 
shews, that a great variety of substances contributes 
to the growth of plants, and supplies the materials of 
their nourishment. The conversion of matter that 
has belonged to living structures into organised 
forms, is a process that can be easily understood j but 
it is more difficult to follow those operations by which 
earthy and saline matters are consolidated in the fibre 
of plants, and by which they are made subservient to 
their fi^nctions. Some enquirers adopting that sublime 
generalization of the ancient philosophers, that matter 
is the same in essence, and that the diflFerent substan- 
ces considered as elements by chemists, are merely 
different arrangements of the same indestructible par- 
ticles, have endeavoured to prove that all the varieties 
of the principles found in plants, may be formeid from 



I 277 3 

the substances in the atmosphere ; and that vegetable 
life i^ a process in which bodies that the analytical phi&gt; 
losopher is unable to change or to form, are constantly 
composed and decomposed. These opinions have not 
been advanced merely as. hypdtheses; attempts hav€ 
beefn made to support them »by experiments. M. 
Schrader aiidMr. Braconnot, from a series of distinct 
investigations, have arrived ,at the same conclusions. 
They ^tate that diflerent seeds sown in fine sand, suU 
phiir, .and metallic oxides, and supplied only with 
atmospherical air and water^ produced healthy plants, 
which by analysis yielded various earthy and saline 
matters, which either were not contained in the seeds, 
tr the material in which they grewj or which were 
contained only in much smaller quantities in the seeds: 
and hence they conclude that they must have been 
formed from air or water, in consequence of the agen« 
cies of the living organs of the plant. 

The researches of these two gentlemen were con- 
ducted with much ingenuity and address; but there 
were circumstances which interfered with their re- 
sults, which they could not have known, as at thp 
time their labours were published they had not been 
investigated. 

I have found that common distilled water 1$ far 
from being free from saline impregnations. In analy^ 
sing it by Voltaic electricity, I procured from it alkal- 
ies and earths; and many of the combinations of me- 
tals with chlorine are extremely volatile substances.— 
When distilled water is supplied in an unlimited man- 
ner to plants, it may furnish to them a number of dif- 



C 278 ] 

ferent substances,, which though in quantities scarcely 
perceptible in the water, may accumulate in the pl^nt, 
which probably perspires only absolutely pure water. 

In 1 801 I made an experiment on the growA of 
oats, suppliedNvith a limited quantity of distilled wa- 
ter in a soil composed of pure carbonate of lime. The 
soil and the water were placed in a ves^l of iron, 
which was included in a large jar, connected with the 
free atmosphere by a tube, so curved as to prevent the 
possibility of any dust, or fluid, or solid matter from 
entering into the jar. My object was to ascer^in 
whether any siliceous earth would be formed in the 
process of vegetation; but the oats grew very feebly^ 
and began to be yellow before any flowers formed: 
the entire plants were burnt, and their ashes compar- 
ed with those from an equal number of grains of oat. 
Less siliceous earth was given by the plants than by 
the grains; but their ashes yielded much, more carbon- 
ate of lime. That there was less siliceous earth I 
attribute to the circumstance of the husk of the oat be- 
ing thrown off in germination; and this is the part 
which most abounds in silica. Healthy green oats ta- 
ken from a growing crop, in a field of which the soil 
was a fine sand, yielded siliceous earth in a much 
greater proportion than an equal weight of the com 
artificially raised. ' 

The general results of this experiment are very 
much opposed to the idea of the composition of the 
earths, by plants, from any of the elements found in 
the atmosphere, or in water; and there are other fects 
contrary to the idea. Jacquin states thvit the ashes of 



. C 279 ] 

Glass Wort (Salsola Soda, J when it grows in inland 
situations^ afford the vegetable alkali; when it grows 
on the sea shore where compounds which afford the 
fossile or marine alkali are more abundant, it yields 
that substance. Du Hamel found, that plants which 
usually grow on the sea shore, made small progress 
when planted in soils containing little common salt. 
The sunflower, when growfaig in lands containing no 
nitre, does not afford that substance; though when 
watered by a solution of nitre, it yields nitre abundant- 
ly. The tables of de Siussure, referred to in the 
Third Lecture, shew t]|pLt the ashes of plants are simi« 
lar in constitution to the soils in which they have 
vegetated. 

t)e Saussure made plants grow in solutions of 
different salts, and he ascertained, that in all cases, 
certain portions^ of the salts were absorbed by the 
plant and found unaltered in their organs. &gt; 

Even animals do not appear to possess the 
power of forming the alkaline and earthy substan- 
ces. Dr. Fordyce found, that when canary birds 
at the time they were laying eggs were deprived of 
access to carbonate of lime, their eggs had soft shells; 
and if* there is. any process for whie^i nature may be 
conceived most likely to supply resources of this kind^ 
it is that connected with the reproduction of the spe- 
cies. 

As the evidence on the subject now stands, it 
seems fair to conclude that the different earths and 
saline substances found in the organs of plants, are 
supplied by the soils in which they grow; and in no 



C 280 3 

cases composed by new arrangements of the elements 
in air dr water. What may be our ultimate view of 
the laws of chemistry, or how far our ideas of element- 
ary principles may be simplified, it is impossible to say. 
We can only reason from facts. We caimot imitate 
the powers of composition belonging to vegetable 
structures; but at least we can understand them: and 
as far as our researches have gone, it appears that in 
vegetation compound forms are uniformly produced 
from simpler ones; and elements in the soil, .the at* , 
mosphere, and the earth absorbed and made parts of 
beautiful diversified structures. 

The views which have been just developed lead 
to correct ideas of the operation of these manures 
which are not necessarily the result of decayed organi- 
zed bodies, and which are not composed of different 
proportions of carbon, hydrogene, oxygene and azote. 
—They must produce their effect, cither by becom- 
ing a constituent part of the plant, or by acting upon 
its more essential fopd^ so as to render it more fitted 
for the purposes of vegetable life. 

The only substances which can with propriety be 
called fossile manures, and which are found unmixed 
with the remains of any organized beings, are certain 
alkaline earths or alkalies, and thar combinations. 

The only alkaline earths which have been hither- 
to applied in this way, are lime and magnesia. Potassa 
^d soda, the two fixed alkalies, are both used in 
certain of then- chemical compounds. I shall state in 
succession such facts as have come to my knowledge 
respecting each of these bodies in their applications to 



C 281 2 

the purposes of agriculture ; but I shall enlarge most 
upon the subject of lime ; and if I should enter into 
some details which may be tedious and minute, I trust, 
my excuse will be found in the iniportance of the en- 
quiry ; and it is one which has been greatly elucidated 
by late discoveries. 

The most common form in which lime is found 
on the surface of the earth, is in a state of combination 
with carbonic acid or fixed air. If a piece of lime- 
stone^ or chalk, be thrown into a fluid acid, there will 
be an effervescence. This is owing to the escape of 
the carbonic acid gas. The lime becomes dissolved 
in the liquor. 

When limestone is strongly heated, the car- 
bonic acid gas is expelled, and then nothing remains 
but the pure alkaline earth ; in this case there is a loss 
of weight; and of if the fire has been very high, it 
approaches to one-half the weight of the stone ; but 
in common cases limestones, if well dried before burn- 
ing, do not lose much more than from 35 to 40 per 
cent., or from seven io eight parts out of 20. 

I mentioned in discussing the agencies of the at- 
mosphere upon vegetables, in the beginning of the Fifth 
Lecture, that ai;: always contains carbonic acid gas, and ' 
that lime is precipitated from water by this substance.^ 
When burnt lime is exposed to the atmosphere, in a 
certain time it becomes mild and is the same substance 
as that precipitated from lime water ; it is combined 
with carbonic acid gas. Quicklime; when first made, 
is caustic and burning to the tongue, renders vegetable 
blues green, and is soluble in water ; but when com- 

o 2 



C 282 3 

bined with carbonic acid it loses all these properties, 
its solubility and its taste : it regains its power of ef- 
fervescing, and becomes the same chemical substance 
as chalk or limestone. 

Very few limestones or chalks consist entirely of 
lime and carbonic acid. The statuary marbles, or 
certain of the rhomboidal spars, are almost the only 
pure species j and the different properties of limestone 
bpth as manures and cements, depend upon the nature 
of the ingredients mixed in the limestone } for the 
true calcareous element, the carbonate of lime, is uni- 
formly the same in nature, properties and effects, and 
consist of one proportion of carbonic acid 41.4, and 
one of lime 55. 

When a limestone does not copiously effervesce 
in acids, and is sulEciently hard to scratch glass, it 
contains silicious and probably aluminous earth. 
When it is deep brown or red, or strqngly coloured 
of any of the shades of brown or yellpw, it contains 
oxide of iron. When it is not suflSlciently hard to 
scratch glass, but effervesces slowly, and makes the ^ 
acid in which it effervesces milky, it contains mag- 
nesia* And when it is black and emits a foetid smell 
if ruW&gt;ed, it contains coally or bituminous matter. 

The analysis of limestones is not a difficult mat- 
ter J and the proportions of their constituent parts 
may be easily ascertained, by the processes described 
in the Lecture on they\nalysis of Soils ; and usually 
with sufficient accuracy for all the purposes of the 
farmer, by the fifth process. 

Before any opinion can be formed of the man- 
ner in which the different ingredients in limestones 



[ 283 3 

modify their properties, it will be necessary to consi- 
der the operation of the pure calcareous element as a 
manure, and as a cement. 

Quicklime in its pure state, whether in powder 
or dissolved in water, is injurious to plants. — ^I have 
in several instances killed grass by watering it with 
lime water. — But lime in its state of combination with 
carbonic acid, as is evident from the analyses given in 
the Fourth Lecture, is a useful ingredient in soils. 
Calcareous earth is found in the ashes of the greater 
number of plants ; and exposed to the air, lime can- 
not long continue caustic, for the reasons that were 
just now assigned j but soon becomes united to car- 
bonic acid. ^1 

When newly burnt lime is exposed to air, it soon 
falls into powder ; in this case it it called slacked 
lime ; and the same effect is immediately produced 
by throwing water upon it, when it heats violently, 
and the water disappears. 

Slacked lime is merely a Combination of lime, 
with about one-third of its weight of water j i. e. 55 
parts of lime absorb 17 parts of water ; and in this 
case it is composed of a definite proportion of lime to 
a definite proportion of water, and is called by che- 
mists hydrate oflme ; and when hydrate of lime be- 
comes carbonate of lime by Jong exposure to air, the 
water is expelled, and the carbonic acid gas takes its 
place. 

When lime, whether freshly burnt or slacked, is 
nuxed with any moist fibrous vegetable matter, there 
is a strong action between the lime and the vegetable 



[ 284 '] 

matter, and they form a kind of compost together, 
of which a part is usually soluble in water. 

By this kind of operation, lime renders matter 
which was before comparatively inert, nutritive j and 
as charcoal and oxygene abound in all vegetable mat- 
ters, it becomes at the same time converted into car- 
bonate of lime. 

Mild lime, powdered limestone, marles or chalks, 
have no action of this kind upon vegetable matter ; 
by their action they prevent the too rapid decomposi- 
tion of substances already dissolved ; but they have no 
tendency to form soluble matters. 

It is obvious from these circumstances, that the 
operation of quicklime, and marie or chalk, depends 
upon principles altogether different— Quicklime in 
being applied to land tends to bring any hard vegeta- 
ble matter that it contains into a state of more rapid 
decomposition and solution, so as to render it a pro- 
per food for plants.-— Chalky and marie, or carbonate 
of lime will only improve the texture of the soil, or 
4ts relation to absorption ; it acts merely as one of its 
earthy ingredients. — Quicklime, when it becomes 
mild, operates in the same manner as chalk ; but in 
the act of becoming mild, it prepares soluble out of 
insoluble matter. 

It is upon this circumstance that the operation of 
lime in the preparation for wheat crops depends ; and 
its efficacy in fertilizing peats, and in bringing into a 
state of cultivation all soils abounding in hard roots, 
or dry fibres, or inert vegetable matter. 

The solution of the question whether quicklime 
ought to be applied to a soil, depends upon the quan. 



/ [ 285 3 

tity.of inert vegetable matter thait it contains. The 
solution of the question whether marie, mild lime, or 
powdered limestone ought to be applied, depends upon 
the quantity of calcareous matter already in the soil. 
All soils are improved by mild lime, and ultimately 
by quicklime which do not effervesce with acids j and 
sands more than clays. 

When a soil deficient in calcareous matter contains 
much soluble vegetable manure, the application of 
quicklime should always be avoided, as it either tends 
to decompose the soluble matters by uniting to their 
carbon and oxygene so as to become mild lime, or it 
combines with the soluble matters, and forms com- 
pounds having less attraction for water than the pure 
vegetable substancq. 

The case is the same with respect to most animal 
manures ; but the operation of the lime is different in dif-i 
ferent cases, and depends upon the nature of the animd 
matter. Lime forms a kind of insoluble soap with oily 
matters^ and then gradually decomposes them by se- 
parating from them oxygene and carbon. It combines 
likewise^ with the animal acids ; and probably assists 
their decomposition by abstracting carbonaceous mat- 
ter from them combined with oxygene j and conse- 
quently it must render them less nutritive. It tends to 
diminish likewise the nutritive powers of albumen from 
the same causeis ; and always destroys to a certain 
extent the efficacy of animal manures, either by com- 
bining with certain of their elements, or by giving to 
them new arrangements. Lime should never be ap- 
plied with animal ^lanures, unless they are too rich. 



^ C 286 ] 

or for the purpose of preventing noxious effluvia, as 
in certain cases mentioned in the last Lecture, It i&amp; 
injurious when mixed with any common dung, and 
tends to render the extractive matter insoluble. 

I made an experiment on this subject : I mixed 
a quantity of the brown soluble extract, which was 
procured from sheeps' dung with five times its weight 
of quicklime. I then moistened them with water; 
the mixture heated very much ; it was suffered to re- 
main for 14 hours, and was then acted on by six or 
seven times its bulk of pure water : the water, after 
being passed through a filter, was evaporated to dry- 
ness ; the solid matter obtained was scarcely coloured, 
and was lime mixed with a little saline matter* 

In those cases in which fermentation is useful to 
produce nutriment from vegetable substances, lime is 
always efficacious. I mixed some moist tanner's spent 
bark with one-fifth of its weight of quicklime, and suf- 
fered them to remain together in a close vessel for 
three months ; the lime had become coloured and was 
effervescent : when water was boiled upon the mix- 
ture it gained a tint of fawn ciolour, and by evapora- 
tion furnished a fawn-coloured powder, which n[iust 
have consisted of lime united to vegetable matter, for 
it burnt when stongly heated and left a residuum of 
mild lime. 

The limestones containing alumina and silica are 
less fitted for the purposes of manure than pure lime- 
stones ; but the lime formed from them has no nox- 
ious quality. Such stones are less efficacious^ metely 
because they furnish a smaller quantity of quicklime. 



C 287 3 

I mentioned bituminous limestones. I'here is 
very seldom any considerable portion of coally matter 
in these stones j never as much as five parts in 100 ; 
but such limestones make very good lime. The car- 
bonaceous matter can do no injury to the land, and 
may, under certain circumstances, become a food of 
the plant, as is evident from what was stated in the 
last Lecture. 

The subject of the application of the magnesiin 
limestone is one of great interest. 

It had been long known to farmers in the neigh- 
bourhood of Doncaster, that lime made from a certain 
limestone applied to the land, often injured the crops 
considerably, as I mentioned in the Introductory Lec- 
ture. Mr. Tennant, in making a series of experi- 
ments upon this peculiar calcareous substance, found 
that it contained magnesia; and on mixing some cal- 
cined magnesia with soil, in which he sowed different 
seeds, he found that they either died^ or vegetated in 
a very imperfect manner^ and the plants were never 
healthy. And with great justice and ingenuity he re- 
ferred the bad effects of the peculiar limestone to the 
magnesian earth it contains. 

In making some enquiries concerning this sub- 
ject, I found that there were cases in which this mag- 
nesian limestone was used with good effect. 

Amongst some specimens of limestone which 
Lord Somerville put into my hands, two marked as 
peculiarly good proved to be magnesian limestones. 
And lime made from the Bf eedon limestone is used in 
Leicestershire, where it is called hot lime ; and I have 



C 288 3 

been informed by farmers in the neighbourhood of the 
quarry, that they employ it advantageously in small 
quantities, seldom more than 25 or 30 bushels to the 
acre. And that they find it ma:y be used with good 
effect in larger quantities upon rich land, 

A minute chemic^ consideration of this question 
will lead to its solution. ^ 

Magnesia has a much weaker attraction for car- 
bonic acid than lime, and will remain in the state of 
caustic or calcined magnesia for many months, though 
exposed to the air. And as long as any caustic lune 
remains, the magnesia cannot be combined with car- 
bonic acid, for lime instantly attracts carbonic acid 
from magnesia. 

When a magnesian limestone is burnt, the mag- 
nesia is deprived of carbonic acid much sooner than 
the lime j and if there is not much vegetable or ani- 
mal matter in the soil to supply by its decomposition 
carbonic acid, the magnesia will remain for a long 
while in the caustic state ; and in this state acts as a 
poison to certain vegetables. And that more magne- 
sian lime may be used upon rich soils, seems to be 
owing to the circumstance, that the d.ecomposirion of 
the manure in them supplies carbonic acid. And 
magnesia in its mild state, i. e. fully combined with 
carbonic acid, seems to be always an useful constituent 
of soils. I have thrown carbonate of magnesia (pro- 
cured by boiling the solution of magnesia in super- 
carbonate of potassa) upon grass, and upon growing 
wheat and barley, so as to render the surface white ; 
but the vegetation was not injured in the slightest de- 



[ 289 ] 

gree. And one of ihe most fertile parts of Cornwall, 
the Lizard, is a district in which the soil contains 
mild magnesian earth. 

The Lizard Downs bear a short and green grass, 
which feeds sheep producing excellent mutton ; and 
the cultivated parts are amongst the be^t corn lands in 
the county. 

That the theory which I have ventured to give of 
the operation of magnesian lime is not unfounded, is 
shewn by an experiment which I made expressly for 
the purpose of determining the true nature of the 
operation of this subst^ce. I took four portions of 
the same soil : with one I mixed fa of its weight of 
caustic magnesia, with another I mixed the same 
quantity of magnesia and a proportion of a fat decom- 
posing peat equal to one-fourth of the weight of the 
soil. One portion of soil remained in its natural 
state : and another was mixed with peat without mag- 
nesia. The mixtures were made in December 1806 ; 
and in April 1807, barley was sown in all of them. 
It grew very well in the pure soil ; but better in the 
soil containiag the magnesia and peat ; and nearly as 
well in the sc^ containing peat alone : but in the soil 
containing the magnesia alone, it rose very feeble, and 
looked yellow and sickly. 

I repeated this experiment in the summer of 1810 
with similar results ; and I found that the magnesia 
in the soil nuxed with peat became strongly effervesr 
cent, whilst the portion in the unmixed soil gave car- 
bonic acid in much smaller quantities. In the one case 
the magnesia had assisted in the formation of a man- 

p2 



[ 290 3 , 

I 

njce^ and had become mild } in the otner case it had 
acted as a poijson. 

It is obvious from what has been said that lime 
from the magnesian liniestone may be applied in larg^ 
quantities to pea*ts; and that where lands have been 
injured by the application of too large a quantity of 
magnesian lime, peat will be a proper and efficient 
remedy. - ' 

I mentioned that magnesian lime stones efferves- 
ced little wl^en plunged into an acid. A simple test 
of magnesia in a limestone is this circumstance, in its 
rendering diluted nitric acid, or acquafortis milky. 

From the analysis of Mr. Tennant, it appears 
that the magnesian limestones contain from 
20.3 to 22.5 magnesia. 
29.5 to 31.7 lime. 
47.2 carbonic acid. 
0.8 clay and oxide of iron. 

Magnesian limestones are usually coloured brown 
or pale yellow, they are found in Somersetshire, Lei- 
cestershire, Derbyshire, Shropshire, Durham, and 
Yorkshire. I have never met with any in other coun- 
ties in England; but they abound in many parts of 
Ireland, particularly near Belfast ' 

The use of lime as a cement is not a proper sub- 
ject for extensive discussion in a course of Lectures on 
the chemistry of agriailture; yet as the theory of the 
operation of lime in this way is not fully stated in any 
elementary book that Lhave perused, I shall say a 
very few words on the applications of this part of che« 
mical knowledge. 



C 291 ] 

There are two modes in lyhidi lime acts as a ce* 
ment; in its combination with water, and in its combi^ 
nation with carbonic acid. 

The hydrate of lime has been already mentioned* 
When quick lime is rapidly made into a paste with 
water, it soon loses its softness, and the water and the 
lime form together a solid coherent mass, which con- 
sists, as has been stated before, of 1 7 parts of water tp 
53 parts of lime. When hydrate of lime vrfiilst it is 
consolidating. is mixed with red oxideof iron, alumina, 
or silica, the mixture becomes harder and more co* 
herent than when lime alone is used; and it appears 
that this is owing to a certain degree of chemical at- 
traction between hydrate of lime and these bodies; and 
they render it less liable to decompose by the action 
of the carbonic acid in the; air, and less soluble in 
water. ^ 

The basis of all cements that are used for 
works which are to be covered wiih water must be 
formed from hydrate of lime; and the lime madefroib 
impure limestones answers this purpose very well. 
Puzzolana is composed principally ot silica, alumina, 
and oxide of iron; and it is used mixed with lime to 
form cements intended to be employed under water^ 
Mr. Smeaton, in the construction of the Eddystone. 
light house, used a cement composed of equal parts by 
weight of slacked lime and puzzolana. Puzzolana is 
a decomposed lava. Tarras, which was formerly ini- 
ported in considerable quantities from Holland, is a 
mere decomposed basalt: two parts of slacked lime and 
one part of tarras fornis the principal part of the mar« 



[ 292 3 

tar used in the great dykes of Holland; Substances 
which will answer all the ends of puzzolana and tar- 
ras are abundant in the British islands. An excellent 
red tarrasmay be procured in any quantities from the 
Giants' Causeway in the north of Ireland: and decom- 
posing basalt is abundant in many parts of Scotland, 
and in the northern districts of England in which coal 
is found. 

Parker's cement, and cements of the same kind 
made at the zlnm works of Lord Dundas and Lord 
Mulgrave are mixtures of calcined ferruginous stones, 
with hydrate of lime. 

The cements which act by conibiiiing with car- 
bonic acid, or the common mortars, are made by mix- 
ing together slacked lime and sand. These mortars, 
at first solidify as hydrates, and are slowly converted 
into carbonate of lime by the action of the carbonic 
acid of the air. Mr. Teiinant, found that a mortar of 
this kind in three years and a quarter had regained 6d 
per cent, of the quantity of carbcmic gas whijch coa- 
stitutes the definite proportion in carbonate of lime. 
The rubbish of mortar from houses owes its power to 
' benefit lands principally to the carbonal^ of lime it 
.ccmtains; and the sand in it; and its state of cohesion 
renders it particularly fitted to imi^ove clayey soils. 

The hardness of the mortar in very old buildings 
depends upon the perfect conversion of all its parts 
. into carbonate of lime. The purest lime^ones are the 
best adapted for making this kind of mortar; the mag- 
nesian limestones make excellent water cements; but 
act with too fittle energy jipon (;iarbonic acid gas to 
make good common morter. 



C 293 ] 

' The Romans^ according to Pliny, made their 
best mortar a year before it was used; so that it was 
partially combined with carbonic acid gas before it 
was employed. 

In burning lime there are some particular pre- 
cautions required for the diflFerent kirids of limestones. 
In general, one btishel of coal is suiBcient to make 
four or five bushels of lime. The magnesian lime* 
stone requires less fuel than the common limestone. 
In all cases in which a limestone containing much alu- 
minous or siliceous earth is burnt, great care should 
be taken to prevent the fire from becoming too intense; 
for such lime easily virtrifies, in consequence of the 
affinity of lime for silica and alumina. And as in some 
|)laces there are no other limestones than such as con- 
tain other earths, it is important to attend to this cir.- 
cumstance. A moderately good lime may be made at 
a low red heat; but it will melt into a glass at a white 
heat* In limekilns for burning such lime, there 
should be always a damper. 

In general, when limestones are not magnesian 
their purity will be indicated by their loss of weight 
in burning; the more they lose the larger is the quan- 
tity of calcareous matter they contain. The magne- 
sian limestones contain more carbonic acid than the 
common limestones; and I have found all of them lose 
more than half their weight by calcination. 

Besides being used in the forms of lime and carbon- 
ate of lime, calcareous matter is appHed for the pur^ 
poses of agriculture in other combinations. One of ' 
these bodies is gypsum or sulphate of lime. This sub- 



C 294 ] 

stance consists of sulphuric acid (the same body that 
exists combined with water in oil of vitriol) and Ume; 
and when dry it is composed of 55 parts of lime and 75 
parts of sulphuric acid. Common gypsum or selenite, 
such as that found at Shotover hill near Oxford, con- 
tains besides sulphuric acid and lime, a considerable 
quantity of water ; and its compo^tion may be thus 
expressed : 

Sulphuric acid one proportion 75 

Lime one proportion - "55 

Water two proportions - - 34 

The nature of gypsum is easily demonstrated ; , 

if oil of vitriol be added to quicklime there is a violent 

heat produced ; when the mixture is ignited, water is 

given off, and gypsum alone is the result, if the acid 

has been used in sufficient quantity ; and gypsunr 

mixed with quicklime, if the quantity has been defi- 

cient.^ Gypsum free from water is sometimes found 

in nature, when it is called anhydrous selenite. It is 

distinguished from common gypsum by giving off no 

water whien heated* 

When gypsum free from water, or deprived of 
water by heat, is made into a paste with water, it ra- 
pidly sets by combining with that fluid. Plaister of 
Paris is powdered dry gypsum; and its property as a 
cement, and in its use in making casts depends upon 
its solidifying a certain quantity of water, and making 
with it a coherent mass. Gypsum is soluble iii about 
500 times its weight of cold water, and is more solu^ 
ble in hot water ; so that when water has been boiled 
in contact with gypsum, crystals of this substance are 



C ^95 3 

deposited as the water cools. Gypsum is easily dis- 
&gt;/ tinguished when dissolved by its properties of afford^ 
ing precipitates to solutions of oxalates ^d of barytic 
saks. 

Great difference of opinion has prevailed amongst 
agriculturists with respect to the uses of gypsum. It 
has been advantageously used in Kent, and various 
testimonies in favour of its efficacy have been laid be* 
fore the Board of Agriculture by Mr. Smith. In 
America it is employed with signal success ; but in 
most counties of England it has failed, though tried 
in various ways, and upcm diiferent crops. 

Very discordant notions have been formed as to 
the mode of operation of gypsum. It has been sup* 
posed by some persons to act by its power of attract- 
ing moisture from the air ; but this agency must be 
comparatively insignificant. When combined with wa» 
ter it retains that fluid too powerfully to yield it to the 
roots of the plant, smd its adhesive attraction for mois- 
ture is inconsiderable ; the small quantity in which it 
is used likewise is a circumst^ce hostile to this idea. 

It has been said that gypsum assists the putrefac- 
tion of animal substances, and the decomposition of 
manure. 1 have tried some experiments on this subject 
which are contradictory to the notion. I mixed. some 
minced veal with about i^ part of its weight of gyp- 
sum^^nd exposed some veal without gypsum under 
the same circumstances : there was no diflference in 
the time in which they began to putrefy ; and the pro- 
cess seemed to me most rapid in the casein which there 
was no gypsum present. I made other similar mix^ 



[ 296 3 

tares, employiog in some cases larger, and in some 
cases smaller quantities of gypsum; and I used 
pigeons' dung in one instance instead of flesh, and 
with precisely similar results* It certainly in no case 
increased the rapidity of putrefaction. 

Though it is not generally known^ yet a series of 
experiments has been carried on for a great length of 
time in this country upon the operation of gypsum as 
a manure. The Berkshire and the Wiltehire peat- 
ashes contain a considerable portion of this substance. 
In the Newbury peat-ashes I have found from one 
fourth to one-third of gypsum ; and a larger quamity 
in some peat&gt;ashes from the neighbourhood of Stock- 
bridge : the other constituents of these ashed are cal- 
careous, aluminous, and siliceous earth, with variable 
quantities of sulphate of pc^s^sa, a little common salt, 
and sometimes oxide of iron. The red ashes contain 
most of this last substance. 

These peat-ashes are used as a top dressing for 
cultivated grasses, particularly sainfoin and cloven 
In examining the ashes of sainfoin, clover, and rye 
grass, I found that they afforded considerable quanti-* 
ties of gypsum ; and this substance, probably, is inti^ 
mately combined as a necessary part of their wbody 
fibre. If this be allowed, it is easy to explain the rea- 
son, why it cerates in such small quantities ; for the 
whole of a clover crop, or sainfoin crop, on aft acre, 
according to my estimatic«i, would afford by incinera- 
tion only three or four bushels of gypsum. In exam- 
ining the soil in a field near Newbury, which was ta- 
ken from below a foot-path near the gate, where gyp- 



C 29r .] 

sum could not have been artificially furnished, I could 
not detect any of this substance in it; and at the very 
'time I collected the soil, the pear-ashes were applied 
to the clover in the field. The reason why gypsum is 
not generally efficacious is probably because most 
cultivated soils contain it in sufficient quantities for the 
use of the grasses. In the common course of cultiva- 
tion, gypsum is furnished m the manure; for it is con- 
tained in stafele dung, and in the dung of all cattle fed ' 
on grass; and it is not taken up in corn crops, or crops 
of peas and beans, and in very small quantities in 
turnip crops; but whefe lands are exclusively devoted 
to pasturage and hsq^, it will be continually consumed. 
I have examined, four diflFerent soils cultivated by a 
series of common courses of croggi, for gypsum. One 
was alight sand from Norfolk; another a clay bearing 
good wheat from Middlesex; the third a sand from 
Sussex; the fourth a clay from Essex. I found gyp- 
sum in all of them; and in the Middlesex soil it amount- 
ed nearly to one per cent. Lord Dundas informs me, 
that having tried gypsum without any benefit on two 
of his estates in Yorksnire, he was induced to have 
the soil ei^ajjfined for gypsum according to the pro- 
cess described in the Fourth Lecture, and this sub* 
stance was found in both the soils. 

Should these statements be confirmed by future 
enquirers, a practical inference of some value may be 
derived from them. It is possible that lands whichu^ 
have ceased to bear good crops of clover, or artifidW 
grasses, may be restored by being manured with gyp-* 
sum. I have mentioned that this sui;t3tance is found 

22 



C 298 3 

in Oxfordshire; it is likewise abundant in many other 
parts of England; in Gloucestershire, Somersetshire, 
Derbyshire, Yorkshire, &amp;c. and requires only pulveri- 
sation for its preparation. 

Some very interesting docummts upon the use of 
, sulphate of iron or green vitriol, which is a salt pro- 
duced from peat in Bedfordshire, have been laid be- 
fore the Board by Dr* Pearson; and I have witnessed 
the fertilizing effects of a ferruginous water used for 
irrigating a grass meadow made by the Duke of Man- 
Chester, at Priestley Bog near Woburn, an account of 
the produce of which has been -{Published by the Board 
of Agriculture. I have no doubt that the peat salt 
and the vitriolic water acted chiefly by producing gyp^ 
sum. 

Thg soils on which both are efficacious are cal- 
careous; and sulphate of iron is deconiposed by the 
carbonate of lime in such soils. The sulphate of iron 
consists of sulphuric acid and oxidi of iron, and is an 

^acid and a very soluble salt; when absolution of it is 
mixed with carbonate of lime, the sulphuric acid quits 
the oxide of iron to unite to the lime, and the com- 
pounds produced are insipid and comparatively inso- 
luble. 

I collected some of the deposition jfrom the fer- 
ruginous water on the soil in Priestley meadow. I 
found it consisted of gypsum, carbonate of iron, and 

^insoluble sulphate of iron. The principal grasses in 
Priestley meadow are, meadow fox-tail, cook's-foot, 
meadow fescue, florin, and sweet scented vernal grass. 
I have examined the ashes of three of the grasses. 



C 299 3 

meadow fox-tail, cook*s-foot, and fiorin. They con- 
tained a considerable proportion of gypsum. 

Vitriolic impregnations in soils where there is no 
calcareous matter, as in a soil from Lincolnshire, to 
which I referred in the Fourth Lecture, are injurious} 
but it is probably in consequence of their supplying an 
excess of ferruginous matter to the sap. Oxide of 
iron in small quantities forms an useful part of soils; 
and, as is evident from the details in the Third Lec« 
ture, it is found in the ashes of plants; and probably, 
is hurtful only in its acid combinations. 

I have just mentioned cenain peats, the ashes of 
which afford gypsum; but it must not be inferred from 
this that all peats agree with them. I have examined 
various peat, ashes from Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and 
the northern and western parts of England, which 
contained no quantity that could be useful; and these 
ashes abounded in siliceous, aluminous earths and 
oxide of iron. 

Lord Charievilie found in some peat-ashes from 
Ireland sulphate of potassa; i. e. the sulphuric add 
combined with potassa. 

Vitriolic matter is usually formed in peats; and if 
the soil or substratum is calcareous, the ultimate re- 
sult is the production of gypsum. In general, when a 
recent peat-ash enuts a strong smell resembling that 
of rotten eggs when acted upon by vinegar, it will fur- 
nish gypsum. 

Phosphate of lime is a combination of phosphoric 
acid and lime, one proportion of each. It is a com- 
pound insoluble in pure water, but soluble in water 



t 300 3 

containing any acid mattei*. It forms the greatestt 
part of calcined bones. It exists in most excremen- 
titious substances, and is found both in the straw and 
grain of wheat, barley^ oats and rye, and hkewise in 
beans, peas, and tares. It exists in some places in 
these islands native; but only in very small quantities. 
Phosphate of lime is generally conveyed to the land in 
the composition of other manure; and it is probably 
necessary to corn crops and other white crops. 

Bone ashes ground to powder will probably be 
found useful on arable lands containing much vegeta- 
ble matter; and may perhaps enable soft peats to pro- 
duce wheat; but the powdered bone in an uncalcined 
state is much to be preferred in all cases when it can 
be procured. 

Th^ Saline compounds of magnesia will require 
very little discussion as to their uses as manures.— 
The most important relations of this subject to agri- 
culture have been considered in the formey part of 
this Lecture, when the application of the magnesian 
limestone was examined. In combination with sul- 
phuric acid magnesia forms a soluble salt. This sub- 
stance, it is stated by some enquirers, has beeen found 
of use as a manure; but.it is not found in nature in suf- 
ficient abundance, nor is it capable of being made ar- 
tificially sufEcientiy cheap to be of useful application in 
the common course of husbandry. 

Wood ashes consist principally of the vegetable 
alkali united to carbonic acid; and as this alkali is 
found in almost all plants, it is not difficult to con- 
ceive that it may form to essential part of their or* 



[301 3 

gans. The general tendency of the alkalies is to ^ve 
solubility to vegetable matters ; and in this way they 
jnay render carbonaceous and other substances capa- 
ble of being taken up by the tubes in the radicle 
fibres of plants. The vegetable alkali likewise has a 
strong attraction for water, and even in small quanti- 
ties may tend to give a due degree of moisture to the 
soil, or to other manures ; though this operation from 
the small quantities used, or existing in the soil, can 
be only of a secondary kind. 

The mineral alkali or soda^ is found in the ashes 
of sea- weed, and may be procured by certain chemical 
agencies from common jalt. Common salt consists of 
the metal named sodium, combined with chlorine; 
and pure soda consists of the same metal united to 
oxygene. When water is present which can afford 
oxygene to the sodium, soda may be obtained in se- 
veral modes from salt. 

The same reasoning will apply to the operation 
of the pure mineral alkali, or the carbonated alkali^ as 
to that of the vegetable alkali ; and when common salt 
acts as a manure, it is probably by entering into the 
composition of the plant in the same manner as gyp- 
sum, phosphate of lime, and the alkalies. Sir John 
Pringle has stated, that salt in small quantities assists 
the decomposition of animal and vegetable matter. 
This circumstance may render it useful in certain 
soils. Common salt likewise is offensive to insects.— &lt;" 
That in small quantities it is sometimes a useful man- 
ure, I believe it fully proved ; and it is probable that 
Us efBcacy depends upon many combined causes. 



C 302 3 

Some persons have argued against the employ* 
ment of salt ; because when used in large quantities^ 
it either does no good, or renders the ground sterile ; 
but this is a very unfair mode of reasoning. That salt 
in large quantities rendered land barren, was known 
long before any records of agricultural science exist- 
ed. We read in the Scriptures, that Abimelech took 
thecity ofShechem, "and beat down the city, and 
sowed it with salt ;'? that the soil might be for ever un- 
fruitful. Virgil reprobates a salt soil ; and Pliny, 
though he recommends giving salt to cattle, yet af- 
firms, that when strewed over land it renders it bar- 
ren. But these ar.e not arguments against a proper 
application of it. Refuse salt in Cornwall, which, how- 
ever, likewise contains some of the oil and exuviae of 
fish, has long been known as an admirable manure. 
And the Cheshire farmers contend for the benefit of 
th€ peculiar produce of their country. 

It is not unlikely that the same causes influence 
the effects of salt, as those which act in modifying the 
operation of gypsum. Most lands in this Island, par- 
ticularly those near the sea, probably contain a suffix 
cient quantity of salt for all the purposes of vegetation ; 
and in such cases the supply of it to the soil will not 
only be useless, but may be injurious. In great 
storms the spray of the sea has been carried more 
than 50 miles from the shore; so that from this 
source salt must be often supplied to the soil. I have 
found salt in all the sandstone rocks that I have ex- 
imiined, and it must exist in the soil derived from 
these rocks. It is a constituent likewise of almost 
every kind of animal and vegetable manure. 



C SOS 3 

Besides these compounds of the alkaline earths 
and alkalies, many others have b^^en recommended 
for the purposes of increasing vegetation ; such are 
nitre, or the nitrous acid combined with potassa* Sir 
Kenelm Digby states, that he made barley grow very 
luxuriantly by watering it with a very weak solution 
of nitre ; but he is too speculative a writer to awaken 
confidence in his results. This substance consists of 
one proportion of azote, six of oxygene, and one of 
potassium ; and it is not unlikely that it may furnish 
azote to form albumen or gluten in those plants that 
contain them ; but the nitrous salts are too valuable 
for other purposes to be used as manures. 

Dr. Home states, that sulphate ofpotassa, which 
as I just now mentioned, is found in the ashes of some 
peats, is a useful manure. But Mr. Naismith* ques- 
tions his results; and quotes experiments hostile 
to his opinion, and, as he conceives, unfavourable to 
the efficacy of any species of saline manure. 

Much of the discordance of the evidence relating 
to the efficacy of saline substances depends upon the 
circumstance of their having been used in diffierent 
proportions, and in general in quantities much too 
large. 

I made a number of experiments in May and 
June, 1807, on the effects of different saline substan- 
stances on barley and on grass growing in the same 
garden, the soil of which was a light sand, of which 
100 parts were composed of 60 parts of sHic&amp;i 

* Elements of Agricultape&gt; p. 7t. 



C S04 3 

ous sand, and 24 parts finely divided matter, consist- 
ing of 7 parts carbonate of lime, 12 parts alumina 
and silica, less than one part saline matter, principally 
common salt, with a trace of gypsum and sulphate of 
magnesia: the remaining 16 parts were vegetable 
matter. 

The solutions of the saline substances were used 
twice a week, in the quantity of two ounces, on spots 
of grass and corn, sufficiently remote from each other 
to prevent any interference of results. The substan- 
ces tried were super-carbonate^ sulphate^ acetate, ni* 
irate, and muriate of potassa ; sulphate of soda, sul- 
phate, nitrate, muriate, and carbonate of ammonia. I 
found that in all cases when the quantity of the salt 
equalled ^^ part of the weight of the water, the effects 
were injurious ; but least so in the instances of the 
carbonate, sulphate, and muriate of ammonia. When 
the quantities of the salts were i^ part of the solution 
the effects were different. The plants watered with 
the solutions of the sulphates grew just in the same 
manner as similar plants watered with rain water. 
Those acted on by the solution of nitre, acetate, and 
super-carbonate of potassa, and muriate of ammonia 
grew rather better. Those treated with the solution 
of carbonate of ammonia grew most luxuriantly of all. 
This last result is what might be expected, for car. 
bonate of ammonia consists of carbon, hydrogene, 
azote, and oxygene. There was, however, another 
result which I had not anticipated ; the plants water- 
ed with solution of nitrate of ammonia did not grow 
better than those watered with rain water* The sola- 



C SOS 2 

tion reddened litmus paper; and probably the free acid 
exerted a prejudicial effect, and interfered with the re- 
sults 

Soot doubtless owes a part of its efficacy to the 
ammohiacal salts it contains The liquor produced by 
the distillation of coal contains carbonate and acetate 
of ammonia, and is said to be a very good manure. 

In 1 808^ I found the growth of wheat in a field at 
Roehampton assisted by a very weak solution of ace- 
tate of ammonia. 

Soapers' waste has been recommeiided as a man* 
ure, and it has been supposed that its efficacy depend- 
ed upon the different saline matters it contains; but 
their quantity is very minute indeed, and its principal 
in^edients are mild lime and quicklime. In the soap- 
ers* waste from the best manufactories, there is scarce- 
ly a trace of alkali. Lime moistened with sea water 
affords more of this substance, and is said to have 
been used in some cases with more benefit than com- 
mon lime. 

It is unnecessay to discuss to any greater extent 
the effects of saline substances on vegetation; except 
the ammoniacal compounds, or the compounds con^ 
taining nitric, acetic, and carbonic acid; none of them 
can afford by their decomposition any of the common 
principles of vegetation, carbon, hydrogene, and ox)^ 
gene. 

The alkaline sulphates and the earthy muriates 

are so seldom foimd in plants, or are found in such 

minute quantities, that it can never be an object 

» to apply them to the soil. It was stilted in the begin- 

a 2 



C 306 ] 

ning of this Lecture, that the earthy and alkaline sub- 
stances seem never to be formed in vegetation; and 
there is every reason likewise to believe, that they are 
never decomposed; for after being absorbed they are 
found in their ashes. 

The metallic bases of them cannot exist in con- 
tact with aqueous fluids; and these metallic bases^ 
like other metals, have not as yet been resolved into 
any other forms of matter by artificial processes; they 
combine readily with other elements; but they remain 
undestructible, and can be traced undiminished in 
quantity, through their diversified combinations. 



307 



LECTURE Vm. 

On the Improvement of Lands by Burning; chemical 
Principles of this Operation* On Irrigation and its 
effects. On Fallowing; its Disadvantages and 
Uses. On the convertiblt Husbandry founded on 
regular Rotations of different Crops. On Pasture; 
Views connected with its Application* On various 
Agricultural Object) connected with Chemisfry. 
Conclusion. , 

The improvement of sterile lands by burning 
was known to the Romans. It is mentioned by Yir* 
gil in die first, book of the Georgics: " Saepe etiam 
steriles incendere profuit agros." It is a practice still 
much io use in many parts of these Islands; the theory 
of its operation has occasioned much discussion; both 
amongst scientific men and farmers. It rests entirely 
upon chemical doctrines; and I trust I shall be able to 
offer you satisfactory elucidations on the subject. 

The basis of all ccmimon soils, as I stated in the 
Fourth Lecture, are mixtures of the primitive earths 
and oxide of iron; and these earths have a certain de« 
gree of attraction for each othen To regard this at- 
traction in its proper point of view, it is only necessary 
to consider the composition pf any common siliceous 



C 808 3 

Stone. Feldspar, for inetance, contains siliceouS) al- 
uminous, calcareous eanhs, fixed alkali, and oxide of 
iron, which exist in one compound, in consequence of 
their chemical attractions for each other. Let this 
&amp;tone be ground into impalpable powder, it then be« 
comes a substance like clay: if the powder be heated 
very strongly it fuses, and on cooling forms a coher- 
ent mass similar to the original stone; the parts $epar« 
ated by mechanical division adhere again in conse- 
quence of chemical attraction. If the powder is heat- 
ed less strongly the particles only superficially com* 
bine with each other, and form a gritty mass, which, 
when broken in to pieces, has the characters of sand. 

If the power of the powdered feldspar to absorb 
water from the atmosphere before, and a^er the ap- 
plication of the heat, be compared, it is found much 
less in the last case. 

The same effect takes place when the powder of 
otiher siliceous or aluminous stones is made the sub- 
ject of experiment. 

I found that two equal portions of basalt ground 
into impalpable powder, of which one had been strong- 
ly ignited, and the other exposed only to a temperature 
equal to that of boiling water, gained very different 
weights in the same time when exposed to air. In 
four hours the otie had gained only two grains, whilst 
the other had gained seven grains. 

When clay or tenacious soils are burnt, the effect 
is of the same kind; they are brought nearer to a state 
analogous tp that of sands. 



L 809 3 

In the manufacture of bricks the general princfple 
Is well illustrated ; if a piece of dry brick earth be ap- 
plied to the tongue it will adhere to it very strongly, 
in Consequence of its power to absorb water j but af- 
ter it has been burnt there will be scarcely a sensible 
adhesion* 

The process of burning renders the soH less com- 
pact, less tenacious and retentive of moisture f and 
wh^n properly applied, may convert a matter that was 
stiff, damp, and in consequence cold, into one powi* 
dery, dry, and warm ^ and much more [Proper as a 
bed for vegetable life# 

The great objection made by speculative chemists 
to paring and burning, is, that it destroys vegetable 
and animal matter, or the manure in'tbe soil ; but in 
cases in which the texture of its earthy ingredients is 
permanently iniproved, th^re is more than a compen- 
sation for this temporary disadvantage* And in some 
soils where there is an excess of inert vegetable mat- 
ter, the destruction of it must be beneficial ; and the 
carbonaceous matter remaining in the ashes may be 
more useful to the crop than the vegetable fibre, from 
which it was produced. 

I have examined by a chemical analysis three 
spedmens of ashes from different lands that had un- 
dergone paring and burning* The first was a quanti- 
ty sent to the Board by Mr* Boys of Bellhanger, in 
Kent, whose treatise on paring and burning has been 
piiblished* They were from a chalk soil, and 200 
grains contained 

80 Carbonate of lime. 
11 Gypsum. 



9 Charcoal. 
15 Oxide of iron. 
3 Saline matter* 
Sulphate of potash. 
Muriate of magnesia^ with a minute 
quantity of vegetable alkali. 
The remainder alumina and ^ca. 

Mr. Boys estimates that 2660 bushels are the 
common produce of an acre of ground^ which, accor» 
ding to his calculation would give 1729QO lbs* con- 
taining 

Carbonate of lime 69 1 60 lbs. 
Gypsum - 9509.5 

Oxide of iron 12967.^ 

Saline matter 259S.5 

Charcoal 7780.5 

In this instance there was undoubtedly a very 
considerable quantity of matter capable of being ac- 
tive as manure produced in the q&gt;eration of burnings 
The charcoal was very finely divided j and exposed 
on a large surface on the field, must have been gradu-^ 
ally converted into carbonic acid. And gypsum and 
oxide of iron, as I mentioned in the lasti&lt;ecture, seen^ 
to produce the very best effects when applied to lands 
containing an excess of carbonate of lime. 

' The second spedmen was from a soil near Cole- 
4&gt;rton, in Leicestershire, containing only four per cent, 
of carbonate of lime, ^nd consisting of three*£3urths 
light siliceous sand, and about one-fourth clay. This 
had been turf before burnmg, and 100 parts of the 
ashes gave 



C 3n ] 

6 parts charcoal. 

3 Muriate of soda and sulphate of potash, 

with a trace of vegetable alkali. 
9 Oxide of iron. 
And the remainder the earths. 
In this instance, as in the other, finely divided 
charcoal was found j the solubility of which would be 
increased by the presence of the alkali. 

The third instance was, that of a stiflF clay, from 
Mount's Bay Cornwall. This land had been brought 
into cultivation from a heath by burning about ten 
years before ; Ijui having been neglected, furze was 
springing up in different parts of it, which gave rise 
to the second paring and burning. 100 |&gt;arts of the 
ashes contained 

8 parts of charcoal. 

2 of saline matter, principally common salt, 
with a little vegetable alkali. 

7 Oxide of iron* 

2 Carbonate of lime. 
Remainder alumina and silica. 

Here the quantity of charcoal was greater than in 
the other instances. The salt, I suspect, was owing 
to the vicinity of the sea, it being but two miles offi 
In this land there was certainly an excess of dead. ve^^ 
getable fibre, as well as unprofitable living vegetable 
matter j and I have since heard, that a great improve- 
ment took place» 

Many obscure causes have been referred to for 
the purpose of explaining the effects of paring and 
bunung j and I believe they may be referred entirely 



C S»2 ] 

to the diminution of the coherence and tenacity of 
cUys, and to the destruction of inert^ and useless ve- 
getable matter, and its conversion into a manure. 

Dr. Darwin, in his Fhytologia, has supposed, 
that clay during torrelaction, may absorb some nutri- 
tive principles from the atmosphere that afterwards 
may be supplied to plants ; but the earths are pure 
metallic oxides, saturated with oxygene ; and the ten- 
dency of burning is to expel any other volatile princi- 
ples that th^y may contain in combination. If the 
oxide of iron in soils is not saturated with oxygene, 
torrefaction tends to produce its further union with 
this principle ; and hence in burning, the colour of 
clays changes to red. The oxide of iron containing^ 
its AiU proportion of oxygene has less attraction for 
acids than the other oxide, and is consequently lass 
likely to be dissolved by any fluid acids in the soil ; 
and it appears in this state to act in the same manner 
as th€ earths, A very ingenious author, whom I 
quoted at the end of the last Lecture, supposes that the 
oxide of iron when combined with carbonic acid is 
poisonous to plants ; and that oije use of torrefaction 
is to expel the carbonic acid from it j but the carbon* 
ate pf iron is not soluble in water, and is a very inert 
isubstance ; and I have raised a luxuriant crop of cres- 
ses in a soil composed of one-fifth carbonate of iron, 
and four.fifths carbonate of lime. Carbonate of iron 
abounds in some of the most fertile soils in Englsmd^ 
particularly the red hop soil. And there is no theo- 
retical ground for supposing, that csurbonic acid, which 
is an essential food of plants, should in any of its com- 



binations be poisonous to theiti; and it is known that 
lime and magnesia are both noxious td vegetation, 
unless combined with this principle. 

All soils that contain too much dead vegetable 
fibre, and which consequently lose frond one third to 
one-half of their weight by incineration, and all such 
as contain their earthy constituents in an impalpable 
stzte of division, i. e« the stiff clays and marles, are im- 
proved by burning; but in coarse sands, or rich soils 
containing a just mixture of the earths; and in all ca» 
ses in which the texture is already sufficiently loose, 
or the organizable matter sufficiently soluble, the pro- 
cess of torrefaction cannot be useful. 

All poor*siliceous sands must be injured by it; 
and here practice is found to accord with the theory. 
Mr. Young, in his Essay on Manures, states, " that 
he found burning injure sand;" and the operation is 
never performed by good agriculturists upon siliceous * 
sandy soils, after they have oncie been brought into 
cultivation. 

An intelligent farmer in Mount's Bay told me, 
that he had pared and burned a small field several 
years ago, which he had not been able to bring again 
into good condition. I examined the spot^ the grass was 
very poor and scanty, and the soil an arid aliceous 
sand. ' ■ 

Irrigation or Watering knd^ is a practice, which 
at first view, appears the reverse of torrefaction; and 
Ml general, in nature, the operation of water is to bring 
earthy substances into an extreme state of division 
But in the artificial watering of meadows, the benefi- 

S2 



cial effects depend upon many differait caiises» some 
chemical, spme mechanical. 

Water is absolutely essential to vegetation; and 
i^ben land has been covered by: water in the winter, 
dr in theb^ianing of spring, the moisture that has 
penetrated deep into the soil, and even the sub$oil^ 
becomes a source of nourishment to the roots of the 
plant in the summer, and prevents those bad effects 
that often happen in lands in their natural state, from 
a long continuance of dry weather, 

V When the water used in irrigation has flowed 
over a calcareous country, it is generally found im- 
pregnated with carbonate of lime; and in this state it 
tenda, in many instances, to ameliorate the soiL 

Common river water also generally contains a 
certain portion of organizable matter, which is much 
greater after rains, than at other times; and which ex- 
ists in the largest quantity when the strewn rises in a 
cultivated country. 

Even in cases when the water used fiw flooding 
is pure, and free from animal or vegetable substances, 
it acts by causing the more equable diffusion of nutri* 
tive matter existing in the land; and in ^ery cold sea*? 
sons it preserves the tender roots and leaves of the 
grass from being affected by frost 

Water is of greater specific gravity at 42® Fah- 
renheit, than at 32'*, the freezing point; and hence in 
a meadow irrigated in winter, the wate^f immediately 
in contact with the grass is rarely below 40^, a degree 
^f temperature not at ail prejudicial to the living or- 
gans of plants. 



C 315 3 

' In ISO!*, in the month of March, I examined^ 
the temperature in a water meadow near Hungerford&gt; 
in Berkshire^ by a va7 delicate thermometer. The 
temperature of the air at seven in the morning was 
29% The water was frozen above the grass. The 
temperature of the soil below the water In which the 
ifoots of the grass were fixed^ was 43^. 

In general those waters which breed the best fish 
are the best iitted for watering meadows^ but most of 
the benefits of irrigation may be derived from any kind 
of water. It is, however, a general principle, that wa- 
ters containing ferruginous impregnations, though 
possessed of fertilizing effects, when applied to a caU 
careous soil, are injurious on soils that do not ^ffi^- 
vesce with adds; and that calcareous waters which are 
known by the earthy deposit they afford when boiled, 
are of most use on siliceous soils, or other soils con- 
taining no remarkable quantity of carbonate of lime* 

The most important |)rocesses for improving 
land, are those which have been already discussed, 
and that are founded upon the circ^umstance of remo- 
ving certain constituents from the soil, or adding 
others or changing their nature; but there is an opera- 
don of very ancient practice still much employed, in 
iriach the soil is exposed to the air and submitted to 
processes which are purely mechanicals namely, 

The benefits arising from fallows have been much 
over-raited. A summer fallow, oi^ a clean fallow, 
kiay be somedmes necessary in lands overgrown with 
Weeds, particularly if they are sands which cannot be 



C 316. ] ^ . 

pared and burnt with advsisitage; but it is certainly uo* 
profitable as part of a general system in husbandry. 

It has been supposed by some writers, that cer« 
tain principles necessary to fertility are derived from 
the atmosphere, which are exhausted by a succession 
of crops, and that these are again supplied during the 
repose of the land, and the exposure of the pulverised 
soil to the influence of the air; but this in truth is not 
the casjc* The earths commonly found in soils can-* 
l^ot be combined with more oxygenej none of them 
unite to azote; and such of them as are capable of at&lt;- 
tracting carbonic acid, are always saturated with it in 
those soils on which the practice of fallowing is adopt- 
ed. The vague ancient opinion of the use of nitre, 
and of nitrous salts in vegetation, seems to have been 
one of the principal speculative reasons for the de- 
fence of summer fallows. Nitrous salts are produced - 
during the exposure of soils containing vegetable and 
animal remains, and in greatest abundance in hot^wea-^ 
therj but it is probably by the combmation ot azote 
from these remains with* oxygene in the atmosphere 
that the acid is formed; and at the expence of an ele- 
ment| which otherwise would have formed ammonia; 
the compounds of which, as is evidait from what was 
stated in the last Lecture, are much more efficacious 
than the nitrous compounds, in assisting vegetation. 

When weeds are buried in the soil, by their gra- 
dual decomposition they furnish a certain quantity of 
soluble matter; but it may be doubted whether there, 
is as much useful manure in the land at the end of a' 
clean fallow, as at the time the vegetables clothix^ thor 



surface w^re first ploughed in. Carbonic acid gas 
is formed during the whole time by the action of the 
vegetable matter upon the oxygene of the air, and the 
greater part of it is lost to the soil in which it Was 
formed, and dissipated iti the atmosphere. 

The action of the sun upon the surface of the 
soil tends to disengage the gaseous and the volatile 
iuid matters that it contains ; and heat increases the 
rapidity of fermentation : and in the summer fallow, 
nourishment is rapidly produced, at a time when no 
vegetables are present capable of absorbing it. 

Land when it is not employed in preparing food' 
for animals, should be applied* to the purpose of the 
preparation of manure for plants ; and this is effected 
by means of green crops, in consequence of the ab- 
sorption of carbonaceous matter in the carbonic acid 
of the atmosphere. In a summer's fallow a period is 
always lost in which vegetables may be raised, either 
as food for animals, or as nourishment for the next- 
crop ; and the texture of the soil is not so much im« 
proved by its (exposure as in winter, when the expan- 
sive powers of ice, the gradual dissolution of snows, 
znd the alternations from wet to dry, tend to pulverize 
k, and to mix its different parts together. 

In the drill husbandry the land is preserved 
clean by the extirpation of the weeds by hand, and by 
raising the crops in rows, which renders the destruc-. 
tion of the weeds much more easy. Manure is sup- 
plied either by the green crops themselves, or from 
the dung of the cattle fed upon them ; and the plants 
having large systems of leaves, are made to alternate 
with those bearing grain. 



I 31« 3 

It is a great advantage in the convertible system 
of cultivation^ that the Mrhole of the manure is em- 
ployed ; and that those parts of it which are not fitted 
fcr one crop, remain as nourishment for another. 
Thus, in Mr. Coke's course of crops, the turnip is the 
first in the order of succession ; and this crop is man- 
ured with recent dung, which immediately affords su&amp; 
fident soluble matter for its nourishment ; and the heat 
jHToduced in fermentation assists the germination of 
the seed and the growth of the plant. After turnips, 
barley with grass seeds is sown ; smd the land having 
been little exhausted by the turnip crop, affords the 
soluble parts of the decompo^i^ manure to the grain. 
The grasses, rye grass, and clover remain, which de- 
rive a small part only of their organised matter from 
die soil, and probably consume the gypsum in the 
manure which would be useless to other crops : these 
plants likewise by their large systems of leaves, absorb 
a considerable quantity of nourishment from the atmos- 
phere i and when ploughed in at the end of two years, 
the decay of their roots and leaves affords manure for 
the wheat crop ; and at tliis period of the course, the 
woody fibre of the fertn-yard manure which contains 
the phosphate of lime and the other difficultly soluble 
parts, is broken down : and as soon as the most ex- 
hausting crop is taken, recent manure is agam ap- 
plied. 

Mr. Gregg, whose very enlightened system of 
cultivation has been publfeted by the Board of Agri- 
culture, and who has .the merit of first adopting a plan 
rimiUr to Mr. Coke's upon strong clays, suffers the 



C »i9 3 

ground after barley to remain at rest for two years in 
grast } $ows peas and beans on the lays ; ploughs iii 
the pea or bean stubble for wheat ; and in some in^ 
stances, follows his wheat crops by a course of winter 
tares and winter barley, which is eat oflPin the spring, 
before the land is sowed for tumips. 

Peas and beans, in all instances^ seem well adapts 
ed to prepare the ground for wheat; and in some 
rich lands, as in the alluvial soil of the Parret, xnerx^ 
tipned in the Fourth Lecture, and at the foot of the 
South Downs in Sussex, they are raised in alternate 
crops for years together. Peas and beans contain, afi 
appears^ from the analyses in the Third Lecture, a 
small quantity of a matter analogous to albumen ; bm 
it seems that the, a;sote which forms a constituent part 
of this nmtter^ is derive^ from the atmosphere* The 
dry bean leaf, when burnt, yields a smell approaching 
to that of decoi^posing animal matter; and in its de* 
c?y in the soil, may furnish principles capable of bei' 
coming a part of the gluten in wheat. 

Though the general composition of plants is very 
analogous^ yet the specific difference in the products 
of many of them, and the facts stated in the last Lec- 
ture, prove that they must derive different teaterialis 
from the soil ; and though the vegetables having th^ 
smallest systems of leaves will propGirtionably most 
exhaust the soil of common nutritive matter, yet par* 
ticular vegetables wh^n th^ produce is carried off, 
will' require peculiar principles to be supplied to the 
land in which they grow^ Strawberries and potatoes 
at frrst prodiice luxuriantly in virgin mould recently 



C 820 3 

tyrned up from pasture ; but in a few years they de* 
generate, and require a fresh soil ; and the organiza^ 
tion of these plants is such, as to be constantly pro- 
ducing the nugration of their layers : thus the straw- 
. berry by its long shoots is constantly endeavouring to 
occupy a new soil ; and the fibrous radicles of the 
potatoe produce bulbs at a considerable distance from 
the parent plant. Lands in a course of years often 
•cease to afford good cultivated grasses ; they become 
(as it is popularly said) tired of them ; and one of the 
probable reasons for this was stated in the last Lec« 
ture. 

The most remarkable instances of the powers of 
' vegetables to exhaust the soil of certain principles ne- 
cessary to their growth is found in certain funguses. 
'Mushrooms are said never to rise in two successive 
seasons on the same spot ; and the production of the 
phaenomena called fairy rings has been ascribed by 
Dr WoUaston to the power of the peculiar fungus 
which forms it to exhaust the soil of the nutriment 
necessary for the growth of the species. The conse- 
quence is, that the ring annually extends ; for no 
seeds will grow where their parents grew before them ; 
and the interior part of the circle has been exhausted 
by preceding crops ; but where the fungus has died, 
nourishnij^t is supplied for grass, which usually rises 
within the circle, coarse, and of a dark green colour. 

When cattle are fed upon land not benefitted by 
their manure, the effect is always an exhaustion of the 
soil } this is particularly the case where carrying 
horses are kept on estates ; they consume the pasture 



c m 1 

ikiriHgth^ night, and: 4rop the gr^^test p^ofth^ 
manure during their labour in the day-dme. 

The exportation of grain from a country^ unless 
some s^ticlea capable of becoming manure ate intro- 
4tu:ed ia camp@nsatipn^ must ultimately tend to ex- 
haust the. ^oU« Some of the spots npw desart samds in 
t^pithem Ainc^ 9fid Asia Mtnoi:, were anciently fer* 
:tile. Sicily was the granary of Italy : and the quan- 
^ty 0f com cai'ried off from ii by the Romans^ is pro* 
l:&gt;ably a dmi cau^eofks present sterility. In this I9* 
land^ our comtnerdal system at present has the effect 
&lt;^ affording substances, which in their use and decom- 
fositiont must enrich the land* Com, sugar, tallow, 
^1, ^kins, fmrst wiD^» si|}c, cotton, &amp;c. are impo^rt^, 
md fish are supplied from the sea. Amongst our 
Aumesous exports woollen, and li^en, and leath^ 
|pods« are almost the only substances which coijit^in 
any mitritive materials derived froQi the soil* 

In all courses of crops it is necessary th^ every 
part of the soil should l^e made as useful as possible 
$0 the different plants ; but the depth of the furrow 
m ploughing must depend upon the nature of the soil, 
and of the subsoiU In rich clayey soils the fur;row 
can scarcely be too deep ; and in sand^. Unless ]the 
subsoil cbmaiixs some principles noxious to vegetable^, 
.die same practice should be adopted* When the roots 
surf deep they are less liaUe.to be injure49 either by 
excess of rain, or draught ; the layers shoot fbrjrh 
their radicles into every part of the. soil j. and the 
space from which the nourishm^t is derived is more 



considerable, than when the saed is superficially isser- 
tecT in the soil. 

There has been much difference of opinion vfidk 
respect to permanent pasture ; but the advantages or 
disadvantages can only be reasoned upon according to 
the circumstances of situation and climate* Under 
the circumstances of irrigation, lands, are extremely 
productive with comparatively little labour; and in 
olimates where great quantities of rain falls, thenatur* 
al irrigation' produces the same effects as ar^ciaL 
When hay is in great demand, as sometimes happens 
in the ndghbourhood of the metropolis, where man- 
ure can be easily procured, the application of it to pas- 
ture is repaid for by the in&lt;;^ase of crop ; but top- 
dressing grass land with animal or vegetable manui^ 
cannot be recommended as a general system* « Dn 
Coventry very justly d&gt;serves&gt; that th^re is a greats 
waste of the manure in this case, tl^m when it is 
ploughed into the soil for seed crops. The loss by 
exposure to the air, and the sunshine, ofier reasons in 
Stddition to those that have been already quoted in the 
Sixth Lecture, for the application of manure even ift 
this case, in a state of incipient, ^and not complex 
fermentation. 

Very little att^Mion has been paid to the nature 
of the grasses .best adapted for permanent pasture. 
The chief, circumstance which gives value to a grass, 
is the quantity of nutritive matter that the whole crop 
will afford ; but the time and duration of its produce 
are likewise points of great importatice ; and a grass 
that supplies green nutriment throughomt the whole of 



idle year, may be more valuable thsoi a grass which 
yields its produce only in summer, though the whole 
quantity of food suf^ed by it should be much' less. 

The grasses that propagate themselves by layers, 
the different species of Agrostis, supply pasture 
throughout the year; and, as it has been mentioned 
on a former occasion, the concrete ^p stored up in 
their joints, renders than a good food even in winter* 
I saw four square yards of fioria grass cut in the end 
of January, this year, in a meadow exclusively appro* 
priated to cultivjation of florin, by the Counjtess of 
Hardwicke, the soil of which is a damp stiff clay. 
They afforded 28 pounds of fodder ; of which 1000 
parts afforded, 64 parts of nutritive inatter, consistixig 
nearly of one^-sixth of sugar, and five-sixths of muciU 
age, with a litde extractive matter. In another expe- 
riment, four square yards gave 27 pounds of grass. 
The quality of this grass is inferior to that of the fio. 
rin referred to in the Table, in the latter part of the 
Third Lecture, which was cultivated by Sir Jos^h 
Banks in Middlesex, in a inuch richer soil^ and cut ia 
December. 

The fiorin grass, to be in perfection, requires a 
moist climate or a wet soil ; and it grows luxuriantly 
in cold clays un&amp;ted for other grasses. In light sands 
and in dry situations its produce is much inferior as 
to quantity and quality. 

Th^ common grasses, properly so called, that 
afford most nutritive matter in early spring, are the 
vernal meadow grass, and meadow foxtail grass ; but 
their product at the time of flowering and ripening 



[ S24 3 

the seed, are inferior to that df a great number of 
other grass&amp;s^ their latter math is, however, abun^ 
dant 

Tall fescue grads stands highest, according to 
the experiments of the Duke of Bedford, of any grass, 
properly so called, as to the quantity of nutritive mat*- 
ter aflforded by the whole crop when cut at the time of 
flowering j and meadSw cat*s*tail grass aflbrds most 
food when cut at the time the seed is ripe ; the high- 
est latter math produce of the grasses examined in the 
Buke of Bedford's experiments is from the sea mea- 
dow grass. 

Nature has provided in all permanent pastures a 
mixture of various grasses, the produce of which dif- 
fers at different seasons. Where pastures are to be 
made ardficially such a mixture ought to be imitated \ 
and, perhaps, pastures superior to the natural ones 
may be made by selecting due proportions of those 
species of grasses fitted for the soil, which afford res- 
pectively the greatest quantities of spring, summer, 
latter math, and winter produce ; a reference to the 
details in the Appendix will shew^, that such a plan of 
cultivation is very practicable. 

In all lands, whether arable or pasture, weeds of 
ever description should be rooted out before the seed 
is ripe ; and if they are suffered to remain in hedge 
rows, they should be cut when in flower, or before^ 
and ipade into heaps for manure ; in this case they 
will furnish more nutritive matter in their decomposi- 
tion ; and their increase by the dispersion of seeds ^H 
be prevented. The farmer, who suffers weeds to re- 



£ 325 3 

main till their ripe deeds are slied, and 3t:attar€d by 
the winds, is not only hostile to fab own interests, but 
is likewise an enemy to the public: a few thistles will 
fiilook a whde farm; and by the light down wh^ch is 
attached to their suteds; they may be destribiued over 
a whole country. Nature has provided such ample 
resources for the contanimnce of eventhe meanest ve^ 
getable tribes, that it is very difficult to ensure the de- 
struction of such as are hostile to the agriculturist, 
even with every precaution. Seeds excluded from 
the air, will remain for years inactive in the soil,* and 
yet germinate under &amp;vourable circumstances; SEndtbe 
iJifFerent plants, the seeds of which, like those of the 
thistle and dandelion, ar^ furnished with beards or 
wings, may be brought from an immence distance. 
The Heahane 6£*Canada has only lately been found in 
Europe^ and Linnseus supposes that it has been trans- 
ported from Anaerica^ by the very light downy plumes 
with which the seed is provided. 
. ^ In feeding cattle with green food there are many 
advantages in soilings or supplying them with food, 
where their manure is preserved, out of the fieldj the 



* The sppearaace of wtfiM ia placet .vh«re tlieir parent pUnts are not fbond 
jnay be eaailf accounted for from tluacircanwta&amp;ce, and other circumstancef. Many 
seeda are carried from island to island hy currents to tbe«ea« and are defended hj 
their hard coats fcon the immediate action of the water. West Jtndian seeds (Of 
this descrii^tion) are often foaad on onr coasts^ and readily germinate; their len|; 
voyage having been barely sufficient to afibid the dbtyledon its dne proportion ef 
ilunstttre. - Other seeds are carried indigested, in the stomach of birds, and snpplt- 
ed with food at the moment of their dqposition. The light seeds of the mosses 
and lichens, probably float in erery part of the atmosphere, andabooiid on the 
surf;^e of the sea. 



I 396 2 

plants are less injured when cut, than whto torn dr 
jagged with the teeth of the cattle^ and no food is 
wasted by being trodden down. They are likewise 
obliged to feed without making selection; and in c&lt;m- 
sequence the whole food is consumed: the attachment, 
or dislike to a particular kind of food exhibited by ani- 
mals, offers no proof of its nutritive powers. Cattle 
at first, refuse linseed cake, one of the most notritiye 
substances on which they can be fed.*' 



^Wt&gt;r At following obfefvationt on the seleetion of dUTerent ^jt of cdm- 
VIOB food bj sheep and eattle, X am obliged t'o Mr. George Sinclair, 

« Lolium p§reun§,rft gratt. Sheep, eat this grass when it is in the early ' 
stage of its growtlt^ in preference to mogt others; bat after the seed approaches to- 
wards perfection, they leaVe it for almost any other kind. A field in the Park of 
Wobnm wms laid down in two ef aal parts, one part with rye grass and white elo* 
▼er, and the orher part with cock's-foot and red dorer: from tbe spring till mid* 
rammer the sheep kept idmost constantly on the rye gns^ bat after that time 
they left it, and adhered with e^ual constancy to the cock*s4bot daring the re«&gt; 
&gt; nainder of the season. 

Dactylii i»merata, cock's*foot. Oxen, horses, and sheep, eat this grass readi- 
ly. The oxen continoe to eat the straws and flowers, from the time of flowering, 
ittl the time of perfecting the seed; this was exemplified in a striking manner in 
the field before alluded to. The oxen generally kept to the cock'felToot and red 
clover, and the sheep to the rye-grass and white clover. In the experiments pob- 
lished in the Amcenitates Academic^, by the pupils of LinnCus, it is asserted, 
that this grass is rejected by oxen; the abore fact, however, is in contradiction 
of it. 

Ahp»eurus pratensis, meadow fox-tail. Sheep and horses seam to have a 
greater relish fof this grass than oxen. It delights in a soil of intermediate quality 
as to moisture and dryness, and is very prodactire. In the water-meadow at 
Priestley, it constitatet a considerable part of the prodace of that excellent mea. 
dOw. It there keeps invariably possession of the top of the ridges, extending 
generally about six feet from each side of the water coarse; the space below that 
to where the ridge ends, b stocked with cock's-foot, and the rongh stalked me»* 
dow grass, Fettuea pratensht Fistuca duriuKula, Atrtith tttttniftra, Agroitis paU 
uttrit, and sweet-scented vernal grass, with a small admixture of some other 

Phitum pratentty meadow eats-tail. This grass is eaten without reserve, by 
etten, sheep, and horses. Dr. Polteney tayt; that it it disliked by sheep; but In 



When feod artificially coni|&gt;osedisto begtveato 
cattle, it should be brought as nearly as possible to the 
state of natural food. Thus, when supr is given to 



pastures wbere it abounds, it does not appear to be rejected by these animals; but 
eaten in common irith such others as arc growing with it. Hares are remarkably 
ibndof it. The Phieum nodosum, Phitum alpinuu, PoaftrtHU, and Poa efmpressa, 
were left untouched, although they were closely adjoining to it. It soems to at- 
t^ the greatest perfection in a rich deep lo^m. 

Agrotth ttoloniftta, fiorin. In the experiments detailed in the Amanifates 
Academicz, it is said, that horses, sheep, and oxen, eat this grass readily. On the 
Duke of Bedford's farm at Maulden, fiorin hay was placed in the raeks before . 
horses in small distinct quantities; alternately with eommon hay; but no decide^ 
preference for ^ther, was manifested by the horses in tUs trial. But Aatcowa 
and horses "prefer it to hay, when in a green state, seema folly proved by Dr»- 
Richardson in his several publications op Fiorin; and of Us productive powers in 
Xngland (which has been doubted by some,) there are satisfactory proofs. Lady' 
Bardwicke has given an account of a trial of this grnss; wherein S4 milch cows* 
and one young horse, besides a nombei; of pigs, were kept^ a fortnight on the pro- 
dace of one acre. 

Poa trMtJh, rough-stalked ineadow. Oxen, horses, and sheep, eat thik, 
grass with avidity. Hares also eat it; but they give a decided i^reference t» 
the sffloothed'Stalked meadow grass, to which it- is, in many respects, nearly 
allied. 

Ptfa^rafMsn, smooth-stalked meadow grass. Oxen and horsf^, are observed 
to eat this grass in common with others; but sheep rather prefer the hard fescue, 
and sheeps' fescue which affect a 'similar soil. This species exhausts the soil in a 
greater degree, than almost any other species of grass; the roots being numerous, 
and powerfully creeping; become in two or three yesxs completely matted toge- ' 
ther; the prodace diminishes as this takes place. It grows eommon in some 
meadows, dry banks, and even on walks. 

Cynoourus crUtatus, crested dog's.tail grass. The South Down sheep, aftcl 
deer, appear lo be remarkably fond of this grass: in some parts of Wobum Park 
dkis grass iBrmM the principal part of the herbage on which these animals chiefly 
browse; while another part of the Park; that contains the Agrostis capillaris^ 
Ap-oni* pumiih, Fe^tuca ovina, Fostuca durinsciUa, and Ftstuca cambrica,U seldom 
touched by them; but the Welch breed of sheep • almost constantly browse lipo« 
these, and neglect the Cynoturuo criitunu, Laiium pertnme, awl Poa trivialis, 

AgrottU vuliaris (capiliarii Linn .9, fine bent; common bent. This i%a Tory 
common grass on all poor dry sandy soils. It is not palatable to cattle, as they 
never eat it readily, if any other ^inds be within their reach. The Welch sheep, 
however, prefer it, as I before observed; and it is singular, th-it those sheep 
befog bred in the park, when some of the best grasiet aro afoally within thdc 



c 



938 



them^ some dry fibrous matter should ht mixed with 
it such as chopped straw, or dry withered grass^ in or- 
der that the functions of the stomach and bowels pnay 



reach, «hoBld ttHI prefer th^Me grMie* whickjatnnUf grew oo the Welch movii- 
tuint: it •e«n» to arfoe thtt tach a prefiwfft'U li t]^ cAftt of fOM^ od^ caB»c&gt; 
than that of habiu 

Fsstuem &lt;nina, theefM* fcficae. All kiads of eattla cellsh thu grass; bat it ap^ 
pears from the trial that has been ma4e wtdtkon dayey soils, that k coatinnes 
but a short time in possession of such, betnf soqa OTer|K»wered by the mmra lAaorl. 
ant kuids. On dry shallow soils that are iacapable of prodoeing the largfa: sorta 
thitshonld foraa theinrincifal ci«|&gt;, or rather the whot^for ft it teidooi ^r ^Ter» in 
its natural sf ate, foood intimately mixed wtch others; bat by itself. 

ftttit^ durpiKvia»}aa^ feacoc grasM. This is oartainly one of the best of the 
dwarf sora of grasses. It is g^ateColto all kinds of catrle; horses are very fond of 
ft; they chopped it dose to the roots, and neglected the Ftstuca ovina, and F^ttuem 
fubf^t Mfhich wen eontigaous toit« It Is present ia most good meadows and 
pastares, 

Fettuea pratetuU, nseadow fescoe. This grass seldom absent from rich mea- 
dows and pastures; it is observed to be highly grateful to oxen, sheep* and hones, 
particularly the former. It appears to grow most laaoriantly, when combined 
with the hard fescae,.and Pea triviality 

, ^ Aveiu 9liaiort tall Oat grass. This it a very pr(^tetiTe grass, frequent ia 
meadows and pastures, but is disliked by pattle, particularly by horses; this* per- 
fectly, agrees with the small portion of nutritive which matter it afibrdi. It 
seems to thrive best on a strong tenacioos clay« 

Awnajlav9$eeni% yeBow oat-grass» This grass seems pactial to dry soils, and 
meadows, and appears to be eaten by sheep and oxen, equally with the meadow 
iMirley, created dog't^ail, and «weet&lt;«ceated vernal grasses, which oatorally grow 
in company with it. It nearly doubles the quantity of its .produce by theappUr 
cation of calcareous manure. 

MtlcMlamaHu, meadow soft graft. This is. a vory-eommoa grais, jwd grows 
OA all toils, from the richest to the poorest. It affords an ahuodaaee of seedL 
which it light, aad easily dispersed by the wind. It appear* to be generally dlslL. 
ked by all sorts of cattln. The prodace Is not so great as ^ a view of it in lielde 
would indicate; but being loft almost ootiicly ootonched by cattle, it appears aa 
tkemoat prodoctive parrof the herbage. The hay which is made of it, from the 
number of downy hairt which cover the sorface of the leavet»ti toft and apoog}^ 
and disliked by cattle in general. 

Anth&amp;Manthum fidratutn, sweet-scented vernal grass. Hortet, oxen, and theep^ 
eat this grass; though in pastures where it is combined with the meadow fox- 
tail, and white clover, coc|L*s-foot, rouglustalfced meadow, it is left untoached. 
from which it wonld seem nnpalatable to cattle. Mr. Grant^of Leiii^on^ laid 



be perfomed in a natural manner. The principle 4s the 
same is thdt of the practice alluded to in the Third 
Lecture, of giving chopped straw with barley. . 

In washing sheep, the use of water containing 
tarbpnate of lime should be avoided; for this substance 
decomposes the yolk of the wool, which is aa animal 
soap, the natural defence of the wool; and wool often 
washed in calcareous water, becomes rough and moi'e 
brittle. The finest wool, such as that of the Spanish 
and Saxon sheep, is most abundant in yolk. M. Van- 
quelin has analysed several different species of yolk, 
and has found the principal part of all of them a soap, 
with a basis of potassa, (i. e. a compound of oily mat- 
ter and potassa), with a little oily matter in excess.— 
He has found in them likewise, a notable quantity of 
acetate of potassa, and minute quantities of carbonate 
of potassa and muriate of potass^ and a peculiar odor, 
ous animal matter. 

M. Vanquelin states, that he found some speci- 
mens of wool lose as much as 45 per cent, in being 
deprived of their yolk; and the smallest loss in his 
experiments was 35 per cent. 

The yolk is most useful to the wool on the baick 
of the sheep^ in cold and wet seasons; probably tlie 



down one li^lf » lield of a contiderable Extent with this graysj combined with 
white clover. The other half of the field with fox-tail and red clover. The aheep 
would not touch the sweet.tcented vernal, but kept constantly upon the fox-tail 
The writer of this, saw the field when the grasses were in the highest state 
of perfection: and hardly any thing could be more satisfactory. Bqnal qoaati* 
ties of the seeds of white clover, were sown with eadi of the grasses, bat fitnn 
the dwarf natnre of the sweet-scented vernal gnu, the clover mixed with it 
ktA attained to greater taxuriaoce, than that mixed with the'meadow fox-tail. 

u2 



- ( 380 ) 

application of a little soap of potassa, mth excess of 
grease to the sheefp brought from warmer climates in 
our winter, that is, increasing their yolk artificiallfg 
might be useful in cases where the fineness of the 
wool is of great importance. A mixture of this kind 
is more conformable to nature, than that ingeniouslf 
adopted by Mr« Bakewellj but at the time his labours 
commenced^ the chemical nature of the yolk was un- 
known* 



. ( 331 ) 



I have now exhausted all the subjects of discos- 
slbn, which my experience or information have beeii 
able to supply on the connection of chemistry with 
agriculture. 

I venture to hope, that some of the views brought 
forward, may contribute to the improvement of the 
most important and useful of the arts. 

1 trust that the enquiry will be pursued by 
others; and that in proportion as chemical philosophy 
advances towards perfection, it will afford new aids to 
agriculture. 

There are sufficient motives connected with both 
pleasure and profit, to encourage ingenius men to pur&gt; 
sure this new path of investigation. Science cannot 
long be despised by any persons as the mere ^ecuhi- 
tion of theorists; but must soon be considered by all 
ranks of men in its true point of view, as the refine-^ 
ment of common sense, guided by experience^ gradu^ 
ally substituting toxoid and rational principles, for 
vague popular prejudices. 

The soil offers inexhaustible resources, which 
when properly appreciated and employed, must in- 
crease our wealth, our population, and our physical 
strength. 

We possess advantages in the use of machinery, 
and the division of l9d&gt;our, belonging to no other na- 
tioiK And the same energy of character, the saune ez« 



( S32 ) 

tent of resources which have always distinguished the 
people of the British Islands, and made them excel in 
arms, commerce, letters, and philosophy, apply Jwdth 
the happiest effect to the improvement of the cultiva- 
tion of the earth. Nothing is impossible to labour, 
aided by ingenuity. The true objects of the agricul- 
turist are likewise those of the patriot. Men value 
most what they haye gained with effort; a just confi- 
dence in their own powers results from success; they 
love their country better, because they have seen it im- 
proved by their own talents and industry; and they 
identify with their interests, the existence of Aose in- 
stitutions which have afforded them security, inde- 
pendence, and the multiplied enjoyments of civilized 
Ufe. 



APPENDIX. 



AN 
ACCOUNT OF THE RESULTS 

OF 

EXPERIMENTS ON THE PBODUCE 

AND 

NTJTIUTIVE QUALITIES 

OP 

DIFFERENT GRASSES, AND OTVER PLANTS, 

USED AS THE FOOD OF ANIMALS. 

JOHN, DUKE OF BEDFORD. 



BOOKS qUOTEO IN THS FOlLOWIVa YAOES, 

Curt Lond»— &lt;-Flota Londinensis. By William CurdSi 2 vols. 

London 1798, fol. 
Fh Daii.-^Flora Danicai or Icones Plantanim sponte nascen- 

tium in Regnis Daniae et NorvegiSy editae a 

Ge ^der. Hafniae 1761, fol. 
£pgl. BoU--English Bontapy, by J. £• Sipitbi M. D ; the 

Figures by J. Sowerby. London 1790, 8?o. 
W. B.»— Botahical Arrangements* By Dr. Withering. Loa* 

don 1801, 4 voL 
Httds.— Httdsoni Flora Anglica, 1778, vol. ii. 
Host. G. A.^«-Nic. Thomae Host Icones et Descriptiones 

Graminum Austriacorum, vol. i.*— ill. Vindo* 

boaaei, iaoi| fol. , 
Hort. Kew.— Hortus Kewenab. By AV. J. AitoOi vol* i. Lon- 
don 1810; 



Iniroduciion by the Editor. 

Of the 215 proper grasses which are capable of 
being cultivated in this climate two. only have been 
employed to any extent for making artificial pastures, 
rye grass and cock's foot grass ; and their application 
for this purpose seems to have been rather the result 
of accident, than of any proofs of their superiority 
over other grasses. 

A knowledge of the comparative merits and 
Value of all the diflferent species and varieties of grasses 
cannot foil to be of the highest importance in practical 
agriculture. The hope of obtaining this knowledge 
was the motive that induced the Duke of Bedford to 
institute this s^ri^s of experiments. 

Spots of ground, each containipg four square 
feet, in the garden at Wobum Abbey, were enclosed 
by boards in such a manner that there was no lateral 
communication between the earth included by the 
boards, and that of the garden. The soil' was re- 
moved in these inclosures, and new soils supplied ; 
or mixture of soils were made in them, to furnish as 
far as possible to the different grasses those soils which 
seem most favourable to their growth ; a few varieties 
being adopted for the purpose of ascertaining the 
effect of different soils on the same plant* 

The grasses were either planted or sown, and 
their produce cut and collected and dried, at the pro- 
per seasons, in summer and autumn, by Mr, Sinclaiir^ 



c ir- ] 

his Grace's gardener. For the purpose of determin- 
ing as far as possible the nutritive powers of the 
different species, equal weights of the dry grasses or 
vegetable substances were acted upon by hot water 
till all their soluble parts were dissolved ; the solution 
was then evaporated to dryness by a gentle heat in a 
proper stove, and the matter obtained ciarefuUy weigh- 
ed. This part of the process was likewise conducted 
with much address and intelligence by Mr. Sinclair^ 
by whom all the following details and calculations are 
furnished. 

The dry extracts supposed to contain ^e nutri- 
tive matter of the grasses, were sent tome for chemi- 
cal examination. The composition of some of them 
is stated in the last table of Chap. III. I shall offer a few 
chemical observations on others at the end of this 
Appendix* It will be found from the general conclu- 
sions, that the mode of determining the nutritive 
power of the grasses, by the quantity of matter they 
contain soluble in water, is sufficiently accurate for all 
the purposes of agricultural investigation* 



'[ 



Details of EKperiments on Grasses. By Geouge Sin- 
CLAIR9 Gardener to bis Grace the Duke 6f Bed- 
F0RD9 ^^ Corresponding Member of the Horticultural 
Society of Edinburgh. 



L Anthoxanthum odoratum. Engl. Bot. 647**-— Curt. 
Lond. 
Sweet-scented venial grass. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from the space 
of an acre equal to ,000091827364 of a brown 
S. sandy loam with manure, is 

oz. OP lbs. per acre 
Grass 11 oz. 8 dr.* The produce per acre 125235 — 7^Ct 3 
80 ^, of|prass weigh when dry 21 1-2 dr.-^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 49.17-10 3^^^^ 0-2103 8 
The weight lost by the produce of one acre Xn drying . 5723 10 
i54 dr- of grass afford of nutritive matter 1 dr. &gt; 
The produce of the space, ditto 2. 3 5-10&gt; ^^^^ ^ "" ^^ * ^^ 

At the time the seed is ripe the produce is , 

Grass^ 9 oz. The produce per acre - 98010 — 6125 10 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 24 dr. 7 

Thep«Kl»ceofthespwe. ditto 43. I-ISP^^^ « - ^^"^ " &lt;&gt; 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying — 4287 15 t^ 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 3. t dr. *&gt; 

The produce of the spice ditto 7. 1 1-4&gt; ^^^'' ^^ — 311 1 1 

The weight of nutritive matter which is lost by taking-^ 
the crop at the time the grassia in flower, exceed. C 188 12 4^ 

ing half of its value J 

The proportional value which the grass at the 
time of flowering bears to that at the time the seed is 
ripe, is as 4 to IS. 



* The weight is ftrqirdapoise ; lbs. poimds« o«. ooncet, ^, diachnis. T}i« 
weights not namtd are, qoarters of drachms, and fracdoM of quarters of drachois \ 
that 7. 1 14 mei^ 7 dracfami 1 yuurter of a drachm and 1-4 of a qakrter. 



VI. APPENDIX. 

The latter^cnath pf oditce is oz. orib0.perAcr« 

Grass, 10 oz/ Ths produce per acre 108900 — ^806 4 

64dr.orgras8aflrordofnutntivcmatter,2. Iclr. 3828 8 — 239 4 8 

The proportional value which the grass of the 
latter-math btrars to that, at the time the seed is ripe, 
is nearly as 9 to IS. 

The smallness of the produce of this grass ren- 
ders it improper for the purpose of hay; but its early 
growth, and the superior quantity of nutritive matter 
which the latter-math affords, compared with the 
quantity affoi^ded by the grass at the time of flowering, 
causes it to rank high as a pasture grass, on such soils 
as are well fitted for its growth; such are peat-bogs, 
and lands that are deep and moist, 

IL Holcus odoratus. Host. G« A. Growing in woods. 

Sweet scented soft grass. Nat of Germany. Flo. 

Ger.— H' Boreaiis* Growing in moist meadows. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a rich 

sandy loam is 

oz. or lbs. per sere 
Grass, 14 oz. The produce per Acre 152460 — 9528 12 

SO dr. of grass weigh when dry 20. 3 dr. "i 

The produce of Uie space, ditto 57 1 3^ 5 ^^^'^ ^* "" ^^^ ^^ ^^ 
The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 7087 2 

64 dr. of grass alTord of nutritive matter 4. 1 dr. -&gt; 
The produce of the space, ditto 14 3 1-23 ^^^^ ^^ "" ^^^ ^^ ^ 

At the time the seed is ripe the produce is 

Grass, 40 oz. The produce per acre 435600 ' — 27255 

64 dr. of grass weigh when dry 28 dr.-&gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto 224 dr.j ^^^460 - 9528 12 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 17696 4 

64 dr.. of grass afford of nutritive matter 5. 1 dr. -j 

The produce of the space, ditto 52- 2dr.3 ^^^^^ ^^ "" ^^^^ ^ ^^ 

The weight of nutritive matter which is bst by taking the 
crop at the time the p-ass Is in flower, being more than 
half of its value ]500 ^ \q 



APPENDIX. vxi. 

The proporfidnal value vtUch the grass at the 
time of flowering bears to that atjthe time the seed is 
ripe, is as 17"to 21. 

The proctuce of latter-math is oz. or lbs. per acre 

Grass, 25 oz. The produce per acre 272250 ' — 17015 10 

64dr.of grass afford of nutritive matter 4.1 dr. 1807^ 1— 1129 15 I 

The grass- of the latter^math crop, and of the 
crop at the time of flowering, taking the whole quantity, 
and their relative proportions of nutritive matter, are 
In value nearly as 6 to 10: the value of the grass at 
the time the seed is^ripe, exceeds that of the latter-math, 
m proportion as' 21 fo 17* 

Though this is one of the earliest of the flower- 
ing grasses, it is tender, and the ptoduce in the spring 
is inconsiderable. If, however, the quantity of nutri- 
tive matter which it aflfords^ be compared with that of 
any of those spedeis which flower nearly at the same 
time, it will be foui^d greatly superior. It sends forth 
but a small number of flower stalks, which are of a 
slender structure compared ||phe size of the leaves* 
This will account in a great measure for the equal 
quantities of nutritive matter afforded by the grass at 
the time of flowering, and the latter-math* 

HI* Cynosurus caruleus. Engl. Bot. 1613. Host* 
G. A* 2* t. 98* Blue moor-grass. Nat. of 
Britain* Sesleria csrulea* 

At the time the seed is ripe the produce from ^ 
light sandy soil is 

oz. or lbs. per acre 

Qrasi. 10 02. The produce per acre 108900 -* 6806 4 3 

Gi dr. of grftM afford of nutriUye matter 3 Q dr. 6380 13 — 398 12 13 



vixi. APPENDIX. 

The produce of this grass is greater ilian its ap* 
pearance would denote; the leaves seldom attain to 
more than four or five inches in length, and the flower 
stiJks seldom arise to more% Its growth is not rapid 
after being cropped, nor does it seem to withstand 
the effects' of frost, which if it happen to be severe 
and early in the spring, checks it so much as to pre- 
vent it 'from flowering for that season; otherwise the 
quantity of nutritive matter which the grass aflfords 
(for the straws are very inconsiderable,) would rank 
it as a valuable grass for permanent pasture. 

IV, Alopecurus pratensis. Cmt. i.ond. Alo. myosur- 
oides. Meadow foxtail-grass* Nat. of Britain* 
EngL.Bot. 848. 
At the time of flowerings the. produce from a 

clayey loam is oa. or ibt. pwacro 

Grass, 30 oz. « The produce per acre 336700 t- 20418 12 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 24 dr. J ^ ^^ 

The produce ofthe space, ditto 336 dr. 5 ^^^^ ^^ «125 10 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre ki drying ^ 14293 '2 

64 dr. of grass- afford of nutritii|MUitter 1 2 dr. &gt; 

The produce of the space, ditt^ 11 1 dr. J '^'^ ^"^ ^ ^ ^ 

The produce from a sandy loam i$ 

Grass, 12 02. 8 dr. The produce per acre 136125 — SSOT 13 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 24dr.) 

The produce of the space, ditto 60 dr. J ^^^ ^ "" ^^^^ ^ ^ 

64 dr .of grass afford of nutritive matter 1 dr. ^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 3 01-2 5 ^*^ ^"^ ^^ ^^ ^ 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce from 
the clayey loam is - 

Grass, 19 oz. The produce per acre 206910 0—1293114 

80 dr. of grass Weigh when dry 36 dr. &gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto 13631^5^^^^ ^— 5ai? 9 %. 
The weight lost by the produce of one acre m drying nil 8 14 

64 dr. of grass afibrd of nutritive matter 1 I dr. J ^ 

The produce of the fptce. ditto 9. 975 V ^^ 4— 461 



APPENDIX. IX. 

The weight of nutritive matter which is lost by leaving the 
crop till tlie seed be ripe, being one twenty-fifth part of 
iU value 17 8 11 

The proportional value ^hich the grass at the 
time of flowering, bears^to that at the time the seed is 
ripe, is as 6 to 9, 

The latter-math produce, from the clayey loam is 

oz. or lbs. per acre 
Grass, 12 02. The produce per acre 130680 — 8167 8 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2 dr. ^ 
The pr duce of the space, ditto 6 dr. 5 ^^ ^^ "" ^^^ ^ ^^ 

The proportional value which the whole of the 
latter^math crop bears to that at the time the seed is 
ripe, is as 5 to 9, and to that at the time flowering, 
proportionably as 13 to 24. 

The above statement clearly shews that there is 
nearly three-fourths of produce greater from a clayey 
loam than from a sandy soil, and the grass from the lat- 
ter is comparatively of less value, in proportion as 4 
to 6. Th^ straws produced by the sandy soil are defi- 
cient in number and in every respect less than those 
from the clayey loam; which will account for the un- 
equal quantities of nutritive matter afforded by them; 
but the proportional value in which the grass of the 
latter-math exceeds that of the crop at the time of 
flowering, is as 4 to 3; a difference which appears 
extraordinary, when the quantity of flower-stalks 
which are in the grass at the time of flowering is 
considered. In the Antboxanthum odoratum the pro- 
portional difference between the grass of these crops 
is still greater, nearly as 4 to 9; in the Poa fratensis 
they are equal; but in all the latter flowering grasses 
experimented upon, the flowering straws of which 

b 



X. A**ENb!X, 

resemble thosi oiF the Ahpecurus pratensis or Jntbox- 
ambtm odoratumf the greater proportional value is 
always oa the c6ntrary foond in the grass bf the 
flowering crop. Whatever the ckuse may be^ it is 
evident that the loss sustained by taking the crops of 
diese grasses at the time of flowering is considenble. 
V. Al9picurus alpinus. EngL Bot 1126. 
Alpine fos*tail grass. Nat. of Scotland. 

At the time of flowerii^ the produce from a sandy 
loam with a small portion of manure, is 

02. or Um. per icrc 

QnasiSos. Tie produce ))er ttit Sfl20 -&lt;- 5445 S 

^dr.ofgraisveighwliendry 16 dr. 'j ^^ , 

The produce of the ipicc ditto 34 2-16 5 ^^^ O -• 1452 

Tbe wmght lost by i&amp;e produce of oite fectt In dryini^ 59^3 5 
64 dr/ofgfMS afford of nutritive mitter 1 dr.^ . 

the produce of the spKJC, ditto Sdr.j ^^^ 4— 85 1 4 

VL Poa alpincu Engl. Bot. 1003. Flo« Dsn. 107^ 

Alpine meadow grass. Nat. of Scotland. 
At Aetiine of flowerings tiie [irbduce froma Ugfat 
cai^y Ibam^is 

GrttBrSoz. The produce pte acre Sri20 0-^544^ O 

64 dr.of gmt tffoid of &amp;atritiye matter 1. 2 dr. 3041 14 — m 9 14 

VH. A^t^M ptAestem. Engl. Bot. 1640. Host. 6. 
A. 2,t%4rQ. Do^Miyoatgmss* Nat. of firi^afl. 

At the time of dowering) ^e piroduce from a 
iidi sandy sool, is 

OnM.23oz. The produce per acre 250470 — 15654 6 

The weightlost by the produce of oneacre in dryiog 9783 15 12 

64dr.orfip!toafbrdofiiutritiveiif|tterl.2dr.^^^ «a 1a ^ 

The p«odwoofth6«tiice, ditto 83^X65*^ S-Wi* 



At the time thesee4 is ripe» (he prQ4^ceis 

oz. or lbs. per acre * 

Grass. 10 oz. The produce per acre 108900 — 6806 4 

SO dr. of grass weigh vhen dry 16 dr.'&gt; 

The prodqceofthe space, ditto Z2^.&gt;^^'^^ 0-1361 4 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in dryin|^ — 5445 
64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2 dr«^ 

The produce of the space ditto 5dr.5 ^^ ' "* 912 U 

The weight of nutritive matter ^iduoh is lost by leaving the crop till the 

seed be ripe, bein|2^ more thnn half of its value • 154 6 3 

The proportional value which the grass, at the 
time of flowering, bears to that at the time the seed is 
ripe, is as 6 to 8» 

The produce of latter-math i^ 

Grass, 10 oz The produce p«&gt;T acre 108900 — 6806 4 

64dr.of{prass afford of nutritive matter 2 dr. 3403 2— 212 11 

The propordonai value which the grass at the 
^me of flowering bears to that of the latter-math, is as 
6 to 8. The grass of the seed-crop, and that of the 
htter-math, are of equal value. 

The downy h^s which cpver the surface of the 
leaves of thi^ gra^s, whep ^prpwing on poor light soils^ 
almost entirely disappear wh^ it is cultivated on 9 
richer soil. It possesses several good qualities which re^ 
con|men4 it to particular notice} it is hardy, early, and 
more [^pductive thap many others which affect woi^ 
l^r^il^andsituatioiis. Its growth after being cropped 
|s tolerably lipids although it does not attain to a great 
length If left grpwiu^f lil(e the Fm pratemU it sends 
fprth flower stalks but opce m a season, and it appears 
w^ll c;al(:ul9te4 for permafient pasture pn ^ch light 
spils. 



APPENDIX. 



— ^11 



VIII. Poa pratensis. Curt Lond. Engl. Bot. 1073. 
Smooth stalked meadow grass. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a mix- 
ture of bog-earth and clay, is oz. or Ibs. per acre 
Graw,15oz. The produce per Mere 163350 0—10209 6 
80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 22.2 dr.^ ^^^^^ 3 — 2371 6 3 
The produce of the space, ditto 67.2 dr. 5 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 7337 15 13 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1.3 dr.") ^^ 2 — 279 2 9 
The produce of tfee space, ditto 6.2 1-16 5 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Grass, 12. 8 o%. The produce per acre 136125 Q — 8507 13 

80 dr. ofgrass weigh when dry 32 dr. 7 ^^^ 0-3403 2 
The produce of the space, do 80 dr.3 

The weightiest by the produce of one acre in drying 5104 11 

64 dr. ofgrass afford of nutritive matter ^ -2 dr. 7 ^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 4.2 3-165^^^ 6 — 199 6 

The weight of nutritive matter which is lost 1l&gt;y leaving the 
crop till the seed be ripe, being nearly one fourth of its 
value - ' ..... 79 12 9 

The produce of latter-math is 

Grass, 6 oz. The produce per acre 65340 — 4083 12 

64 df . of Grass afford of nutritive matter 1.3 dr. 1786 10 — 111 10 

The proportional value in which the grass of the 
latter-math exceeds that of the flowering crop, is as 
6 to 7. The grass of the seed crop and that of the 
latter-math are of equal value. 

This grass is therefore of least value at the time 
the seed is ripe : a loss of more than one fourth of the 
value of the whole crop is sustained if it is not cut till 
that period: the straws are then dry, and the root 
leaves in a sickly decaying state; those of the latter- 
math, on the contrary, are luxuriant and healthy. 
This species sends forth flower-stjilks but once in a 
season, and these being the most valuable part of the 
plant for the purpose of hay j it will from this circum- 



APPENDIX. xiiu 

Stance, and the superior value of the grass of the latter- 
math, compared to that of the seed crop, appear well 
adapted for permanent pasture. 

IX. Poa carUllea.'T'Vzx. Poa pratensis. , Engl. Bot. 

1O04. Poa subcaerulea. Short blueish meadow 
grass. Nat. of Britain. H. Kew. 1 — 155. Poar 
humilis. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a soil 
of the like nature as the preceding, is 

oz. OP lbs. per acre 

Grass, 11 02. The produce per acre 119790 — 7486 14 
64dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2 dr.^ ' 

The produce of the space, ditto 5. 2 dr. J ^^^^ ^ — 233 15 
80 dr. of grass weigb when dry 24 dr. *&gt; 

The produceiofthe space, ditto 52.3 3463 ^^^^^ ^ "" ^^^ ^ ® 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre In drying 5240 13 

If the produce of this variety be compared with 
that of the preceding one, it will be found less ; nor 
does it seem to possess any superior excellence. The 
superior nutritive power does not make up for the 
deficiency of produce by 80 lbs. of nutritive matter 
per acre. 

X, Festuca hordiformis. Poa hordiformis. H. Canti 
Barley -like fescue grass. Nat. of Hungary. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a sandy 
soil, with manure, is 

Grass, 20 oz. The produce per acre 217800 — 13612 8 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 24 dr. &gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto 96 dr. 5 ^^^ ^ "" ^^ ^^ ^ 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 9528 12 

64 dr. of grass a0erd of nutritive matter 2. 1 dr. "&gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto IMdr.i '^^ 0-478 9. 

This is rather an early grass, though later than 
any of the preceding species; its foliage is very fine. 



9iv. APPENDIX. 

xeseipblmgtbe F.dmu$culaj to which it seenip nearly 
allied, diffisnpg only iQ thf length pf the aiims, 9n4 the 
gJUtvcous colour of the whole plant. The considera- 
ble produce it af ord^. apd the nutritive powers it ap^ 
peiars to possess, joined to it$ early growth, are quali- 
ties which strongly recommend it to further trial. 
.XI. Poa trivialis. Curt. Lond. Engl^Bot. 1072. 

Host. G. A* 2. t. 6?. Roughish meadow grass. 

Nat. of Britain. 
At the time of powering, the produce from a light 
brown loam, with manure, is oz. or ibs. per acre 

Grass, 11 oz. %h% produce per acre 119790 — 7487 14 

SO dr. of grass weigh when dry 24dr. &gt; ' 

The liroduce of the spwe, ditto 54 3-165 ^^^^ -^ 2346 1 

The weight lost by the prdduce of one acre in diying 5240 13 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2 dr.&gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto S. 2 M ^^^ ^ "^ ^^ ^^ '^ 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Grass. 11.8 oz. The produce p«« aore 125235 •&lt;- 7827 3 

80 dr. of grass weigh when diy 3(5 dr. 7 

The produce ofthe space, ditto 823 3.165 56355 12 -« 3S22 312 

The weight lost hy the produce of one acre in drymg 4304 15 4 

64 dr. of grass afibrd of nutritive matter 2.3 dr. &gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto 7.33^-$^'^^ ^-^ 236 S Z 

The weight of nutritive matter which is lost by taking the 
crop at the time of flowcrl|ip, exceeding cm^ fourth of ita 
value - - . . - - ... 102 5 12 

The prepertiiMial valu^ In ^iriiieh the grass of die 
seed crop exceeds that at the time of flowering is as S 
to 11- 

The produce of lattqr-math is 

Orasf, 7oz. The produpe per acre , 76350 -^47641 $ 

64 ^. of grass afford of nutritive matftsr d dr. 3373 4 -^ 223 5 4 

The proportional value by which the grass of the 
latter»math ^ceeds that of the flowmng crop, is as 8 
Co island that dF the seed crop as 11 to 19. 



.: .T^ 



* APPEJiDl*. '^^- «f. 

• • - , ' 

Here thiaQ is a s&amp;dsfa^toiry phK^ «f die superior. 
¥alue of the cn)(&gt; at the time the seed is ripe^ and of 
the consequent loss sustained by takii!^ it when ilk 
flower; the produce 6f each erop bdng nettrly equal. 
Th^ dAdeacj of hay in th^ flowering trop^ ih propor^ 
tioh to that of die ^eed trbp, k Very striking. Its 
dupmor pt^uee, the highly ftutiitf Ve powers which 
Ae grass seetus tt&gt; possess, iahd the s^scm in whiift 
h arrives at pa^tibta, are nterit^ Which disdnguish it 
as one of die most valuable bfdio^ grasses, which 
aSeit nuHst rich soils, and ^dtered situattons; but oA 
dry exposed iatuadons it is altogether mcdnaderable ; 
k yearly diminishes, imd uhiftiately dies off, not un«&gt; 
fre^tt^dyin the space of four or five years. 

"tlL Festuca ^uca. Curtis. 

Glaucous fescue grass. Nat of Britain. 
At the time die seed is ripe the produce from a 

brown loam is . oz. or Ibs. per acre 

Grass, 14 oz. The produce per acre 152460 -* 9528 12 
SOdr. of grass weigh when dry 32dr. -&gt; 

TbeprodttceofUttqMce,ditto S9 2M6 5 ^^ 0-3811 8 

The weif^t lost by the produce of one acre in drying 5717 4 6 
64 dr. of grass afford of iiutrltive matter 1.2 dr. ^ 

The produce ofthe space, ditto 5.1 dr. P*^^ 4- 223 5 4 

At the time of flowering the produce is 

6rass,14oz. Tbeprndw^epericie 1S2460 — 9528 12 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 32dr. \ ^^,^,^ ^ ^11 « a 

Thepioduceofthespac^dttto 8922^5^^ o-.4»u 8 o 

The weigfatlostby the produce of one acre in drying 5717 4 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive mitter 3 dr. &gt; aia in 6 

The produce ofthespm, ditto 10.2dr.V 9—446 10 9 

The weight of nutrittve mattiBr wiucU is lost 1^ leanriiig 4h^ 
crop till the seed be ripe^ being half of the vahie of the 
crop - 22355 



XVI. . APPENDIX. 

The proportional value by which the grass at th^ 
time of flowering exceeds that at the time the seed is 
ripe, is as 6 to 12. 

The proportional difference in the value of the 
flowering and seed crops of this grass is directly the 
reverse of that of the preceding species, and affords 
another strong proof of the value of the straws in 
grass which is intended for hay. The straws at the 
time of flowering are of a very succulent nature; but 
from that period till the seed be perfected, they gradu- 
ally become dry and wiry. Nor does the root leaves 
sensibly increase in number or in size, but a total 
suspension of increase appears in every part of the 
plant, the roots and seed vessels excepted. The straws 
of the Foa trivialis are, on the contrary, at the time 
of flowering, weak and tender; but as they advance 
towards the period of ripening the seed, they become 
firm and succulent; after that period, however, they 
rapidly dry up and appear little better than a mere dead 
substance. 

XIIl. Fesfuca glabra. Wither. B. 2. P. 154. 
Smooth fescue grass. Nat. of Scotland. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a clayey 
loam, with manure, is oz. or ibs. per acre 

Grass, 21 oz. The produce per acre 228690 — 14293 

' ^0 dr. of grass w^u when dry 32 dr. 



The produ ce of the space, ditto 134. 1 2-16 2-5 J ^^^^^ ^ "" ^^'^ ^ ^ 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 8576 14 
64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2 dr. &gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto 10.2 dr. J ^^^ ^'^ ^ 

At the time the seed is ripe the produce is 

Grass, 14 oz. The produce per acre 152460 — 9528 12 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry * 32 dr. "&gt; ' 

The produce of the space, ditto 89.2 2-5 J ^^^ — 3811 8 



APPENDIX. xvix 

I*- 

oz. or lbs. per acre 
The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 5717 4 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1. 1 dr. 7 ' 

The produce oflhe space, ditto 4.12-165*^^ 0—186 1 

The weight of nutritive matter which is lost by leaving the 

crop till the seed be ripe exceeding half of its value 260 9 

The proportional value which the grass at the 
time the seed is ripe, bears to that of the crop at the 
time of flowering, is as 5 to 8. 
The produce of latter-math is 

Grass, 9 oz. The produce per acrt-. 98010 0— 6125 IQ 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2 gr. -^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 1.01-2 dr.j '^^ ^^ — 47 13 

The proportional value which the grass of the 
latter-math bears to that of the crop at die time of 
{lowering, is as 2 to 8, and to that of the crop, at the 
time the seed is ripe, is as 2 to 5« 

The general appearance of this grass is very simi* 
lar to that of the Festuca duriuscula: it is, however, 
specifically dSflferent, and inferior in many respects, 
which will be manifest on comparing their several pro- 
duce with each other; but if it be compared with some 
others, now under general cultivation, the result is 
much in its favour, the soil wjijch it affects bemg duly 
attended to. The jintboxantbum odoratum being taken 
as an example, it appears, that 

Festuea glabra^ affords of nutritive matter 

From the crop at the time of flowering 446.&gt; lbs. per acre 

At the time the seed is ripe, ditto 186.3 ^32. 

Antboxanthum odoratum^ 

At the time of flowering, ditto 122. -&gt; 

At the time the seed is r^j^ ditto 311.3 
The weight of nutritive matter, which is afforded by the pro- 
djuce of one acre of the Fe9tuca glabra exceeding that of the 
Anth/ixQnjffmn udorattm, in proportion nearly as 6 to 9 199. 

C 



I dr. 7 

Jdr N *®^ 12 — 3557 11 



»vm APPENDIX- 

XIV. Fettuea rubra. Wither. B. 2. !^. 1 53. 
Purple fescue grass. Nat. of Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a light 

sandy soil, is oz. or Ibs. per acre 

Crass, 15 oz. Tbe produce per acre 163350 0—10269 6 

80 dr. of grass weigh wlien dry 34 dr. \ 

Tbe produce of the space ditto 102 &lt; 

Tbe weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 6651 11 

64 dr. ofgrass afford of nutritive matter 1.2 dr. &gt; 9«o a a 

The produce of the space, ditto 22 2-16 dr. J ^^^ 8 — 2o9 4 8 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

CHrass,16oz. The produce per acre 174240 0— lOtSO Q 

iOdr. of grass weigh when dry 36 dr. &gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto 115 346 dr. J "^^^ ^"^ *^^ ^ ^ 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 5989 8 

64 dr. of g^rass afford of nutritive matter 2 dr. &gt; 

The produce oftbe space, ditto 8dr.&gt; ^'^^^ ^"^ ^^ ^ P 

The we^;ht of nutritive mattor which is lost by taking the 
crop when the grass is in flower, being nearly one third 
part of its value - • 101 8 

The proportional value which the grass, at the 
time of flowering, bears to that at the time the seed is 
ripe, is as 6 to 8« 

This species is smaller in every respect than the 
preceding. The leaves are seldom more than from 
three to four inches in length ; it affects a ^oil similar 
to that favourable to the growth of the Festuca ovina^ 
for which it would be a profitable substitute, as will 
clearly appear on a comparison of their produce widi 
each other. 

The produce of latter-math is 

Grass, 5 oz. The produce per acre 54450 — 3403 2 

64dr. of grasslftfford of nutritive matter 1.2 dr. 1276 2— 79 12 



APPENDIX. xik 

The propordcmal value which the grass of the 
lattier-math bears to that at the time the seed i&amp; ripe is 
as 6 to 8, and is of equal value with the grass at the 
time of flowering. 

XV. Festuca avina. Engl. Bot. 585. Wither. B. 2. 
P. 152. Sheep's fescue grass. Nat. of Britain. 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Grass, Sol. The produce p^r acre 87120 — 54i5 

64 dr. of gi ass afford of nuthtiTe maUer 1 .% dr. \ 

The pr..duce of the apace, ditto 3 dr, J 2031 14 — 127 9 

The produce of latter-math is 

Gras8y5oz. The produce per acre 54450 — 3403 2 

^ dr. of frraaa afibrd of nutritive matter 1. 1 dr. 1063 7 *- 66 7 7 

The dry weight of this.species was not ascertained^ 
because the smalhiess of the produce renders it entire** 
ly unfit for hay. If the nutritive powers of this species 
be compared with those^ of the preceeding, the in* 
feriority will appear thus: 

Feituta ovina, (as above) affords of nutritive matter 1.2 j 
Ditto ditto 

I'e9tuca rubra ditto ditto 2 

ditto ditto ditto 1.2J 

The comparative degree of nourishment which 
the grass of the Festuca rubra affords, exceeds therft- 
^ore that afforded by the F. ovina^ in proportion as 1 1 
to 14. 

From the trial that is here detailed, it does not seem 
to possess Ae nutridve powers generally ascribed to itj 
it has the advantage of a fine foliage, and may, there- 
fore, very probably be better adapted to the masticat- 
ing organs of sheep, than the larger grasses, whose 
nutridve powers are shewn to be greater: hence on 
rituatioos where it naturally grows, and as pasture fpr 



1.2&gt; 

i.ii 2.3 



XX APPENDIX. 

sheep, it may be inferior to few others. It possetees 
natural characters very distinct from F. rubra. 

XVI. Briza media. Engl. Bot. 340. Host. G. A. 
2. t. 29. Common quaking-grass. Nat. of 
Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a rich ' 

brown loam, is oz. or Ibs. per acre 

GriM, 14 oz. The produoe per acre 152460 — 95^ 12 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 26 dr. "f 

The produce of the space, ditto ' 72. 3 1-16 5 ^^^^ ® " ^^^ ^ ^ 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 6431 14 8 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2.3 dr. *) 

The produce of the space ditto 95 2-163 ^^^^ 0—409 7 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Grass, 14 oz. The produce per acre 152460 — 9528 12 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 28 dr. "&gt; 

The produce of the apace, ditto 78.13-5 3 ^^^^ — 3335 1 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying — 6183 11 

64dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 3.1 dr. 7 ^ ^ , ^ ^ 

*^?742 1— 483 14 1 



er 3.1 dr. 7 
11.11.23^ 



The produce of the space, ditto 

The weight of nutritive matter which is lost by taking the 

crop at the time of flowering, being nearly one-fourth . 

partofiUvalue 109 1 

The proportional value which the grass at the 
time of floweiing, bears to that at the time the seed is 
ripe, is as 11 to IS. 

The latter-math produce is 

Grass, 12 oz. The produce per acre 130680 — 8167 8 

64 dr. of Grass afford of nutritive matter 2 dr. 4083 12 — 255 3 12 

The proportional value in which the grass at the 
time of flowering, exceeds that of the latter-math 
is as 8 to 11; and the latter-math stands to that at the 
ume the seed is ripe in proportion ^^i 8 to 13. 

\ ' The merits of this grass seem to demand notice ; 
}t% nutritive powers are considerable, and its produce 



in respect of early produce of leaves, are the fm 
fertilise Dactylh gbmerata^ Phteum prMense^ Alopecurus 
pratensisj Avena eliahr, and Bhmus littoreus^ all 
grasses of a coarser kind. 
XXII. Avena eliator. Curtis 191. Engl. Bot. 818. 

Holcus avenateus. Tall oat-grass* Nat. of 

Britain. 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

oz. or Ibg. per acre 
Grass, 24 02. The proc^uee ^r acre 361360 — 16335 

SO dr. of grass Wdigh when dry 28 dr. ^ i * i^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 134.13^ i 91475 14—5717 3 14 

The weight lost by the produce of oist acre in drjHng 10617 12 2 

64 dp. of grass afford of tmtfitite matter 1 dr.7 

The produce of the spjice, ditto 6 dr.5 ^^ ^^ "" ^^^ ^ ^^ 

The produce of latter-math is 

Grass, 20 oz. The produce per acre 217800 — 13612 8 

64 dr. of Grass afford of Butfitrvenmtterl.ldt. 4253 14— 265 13 14 

The weight Of ntttritive matter, whioh Is aflfotdedbyUie 
crop of the latter-math, exceeding that afforded by the 
grass of the seed crop in proportion n6ari^ as 26 to 25 10 9 2 

This grass sends forth flower straws during the 
whole season; thelatter*math contains nearly an equal 
number with the flowering crop. It is subject to the^ 
rust, but the disease does not make its appearance till 
aft^ the period of flowering; it affects the whole plant, 
and at the time the seed is ripe the leaves and straws 
Sffe withered and dry. This accounts for the superior 
value of the latter-math over the seed crop, and points 
iout the propriety of taking the crop when the grass is 
in flower. 

d 



XXVI APPENDIX. 

XXIII. Poa eliaton Curtis, 50. 

Tall meadow grass. Nat. of Scotland. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a rich 

clayey loam is oz. or lbs. per acre 

Graw« 18 oz. The produce per acre 196020 -&gt;- 12251 4 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 28 dr. 



The produce of the space, ditto 100. 3 2-10 5 ^^^^^ ^ *^^ ^^ ^ 

64 df . of grass afford of nutritive matter 3.2 dr.") #:/» i « n 

The produce of the space, ditto 15. 3 5 *"^^^ **^ — ooir id u 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 3617 15 .3 

The botanical characters of this grass are almost 
the same as those of the Avena eliator^ differing in the 
want of the awns only. It has the essential character 
of the Hold (Florets male, and hermaphrodite. Calyx 
husks two-valved with two florets) and since the 
jivena eliator is now referred to that genus this may 
with certainty be considered a variety of it. 
XXIV. Festuca duriuscula. Engl. Bot. 470. W. B. 
2. P. 153. Hard fescue grass. Nat* of 
Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a light 
sandy loam is 

Grass, 27 oz. The produce per acre 294030 — 18376 14 

80 dr. ofgrass weigh when dry 36 dr. 7- g gg g q 

The produce of the space, ditto 194.13-53 **^^*^" ^ ^^^^ ^^ " 
The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 10106 4 8 

64dr.of grass afford of nutritive matter 3.2 dr. "&gt; i/vu i^f i&lt;i 

The produce of the space, ditto 23.21-23 ^^^ 12-1004 15 13 

At the time the seed is ripe the produce is 

Grass, 28 oz. The produce per acre 304920 — 19075 8 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 36 dr. ^ o*v« tA rt 

The produce ofthe space, ditto 201.2 2-55^^^^^^ - 8d75 14 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in dr3riiig 10481 10 

64 dr. of grasfrfifford of nutritive matter 1.2 dr. ^ 
The produce oftbe space, ditto V 10.2 dr. &gt; '^^^ 9—446 10 



APPENDIX. xxvn 

oz. or lbs. per acre 
The weight of nutritive matter whiph is lost by leaving the 
crop till the seed be ripe exceeding one half of its value - 558 5 3 

The proportional value which the grass at tjie 
time the se^ is ripe, bears to that at the time of flower- 
ing, is as 6 to 14, nearly* 

The produce of latter-math is 

&lt;3ras8«15oz. The produce per acre 163350 — 10209 6 

€4i dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1. 1 dr. 3190 4 — 199 6 4 

ITie proportional value which the grass of the 
latter-math bears- to that at the time of powering, is as 
5 to 14, and to that at the time the seed is ripe, 5 to 6. 

The above ps^dqulars will confirm the favouraUei 
opinion which was given of this, grass when i^^eaking* 
of the Fesiuca bordiformisj and .F. glabra. Its produce 
in the spring is not very great, but of the finest ^uali- 
ty^ and at the time of flowering is considerable. If it 
be compared with those affecting similar soils such as 
Poa pratensis^ fesiuca ovinay Ssfr. either considered as 
a grass for hay, or permanent pasture, it will be found 
of greater value. 

XXV. Bromus erectus. EngL Bet. 471. Host. G. A. 
Upright perennial brome grass. Nat. of Bri- 
tain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a rich 
s^ndy i^oil is 

Grass, 19 oz. Theproduce per acre 206910 0—1293114 

SO dr. ofgrasa weigh when dry 36 dr. •% qqiao fi - iSftlQ s a 

The produce of Uie apace, do 136.3 1-55 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 7112 S 8 

64 dr. of grass aiford of nutritive matter 2.3 dr. ^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 13. 1-4 S ^^ ^^ "" ^^^ ^^ ^^ 



XXVI. J^ium ^usum. Curt. Lon.]^iigL Bot. 1106* 
Cqmmon millet grass. Nat. of BritaiQ, 
^t tl^ tiipe of ^we^;in^9 the prpdvce from a light 

S^ndy 9oil 19 ^^' or V^ per «cre 

Grass, 11 oz. 8 dr. The produce per »cre 196020 — 12251 4 0. 

eO dr. ofgms weigh when dry ^^ *' I 75057 lo - 4747 5 12 

The produce of the space. «tU&gt; 111. 2 2-6 &gt; ^^^^^ ^^ *^^ ^ *-* 
64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1. 3 dr. &gt; qoa 1 c i^ 

!rbc produce of the space, ditto 7. 5 2-4 J ^^^ ^*"" ^^ ^^ ^' 

This species in its natural state seems confined to 
woods as itfi^ place of giro^vth; bu€ the trial thai^ is here 
mentioned, coi^^^na the opinion tiiat it will^gpow and 
thrive in open easposed situadons. If&gt; is remarkable 
finr ihe Kghtaesfi of the produce, in proportiian to its 
bulk. ]^ produces foKage ear^ m, iHe spring m cour 
siderablf abundaxskcei bun its nutrilive powers appear 
oompjuatively Iktle. 

XXVII-. Festuca pratensis. Engh Bot. 1592. C. LonA 
Meadow fescue grass. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce fronx a bog 
soil» with coal ashes for manure, is 

Grass, 20 oz. The produce per acre 217S0O 0— -13612 S o' 

80,dr. ofgras^iMeigh w«ieiv.4ry 38 dr.*) 1^-5 i«. n 

The produce of the space, ditto 152.dr.5 ^"^^^ 8 — ©405 ly u 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying ...7145 9 
64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 4.2 dr. \ 

The produce ofthcspt^c ditto 225dr.3^^^^* 1 — 957 2 1 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce ii?. 

Grass, 28 oz. The produce per acre 304920 — 19057 8 

8ad&amp;D£gnuw^ weigh, when dry 32dr.&gt; 

The produce of the space dittp. 179.0 44 J ^^^^^ 0-7623 
The Weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 11434 8 

€4 dr« of-gmas afford^of nutritive matter 1.2 dr. 
Tlie produce of the space, ditto 10.2 c 

The weight of nutritive matter which is lost by leaving the 
crop tifl the seed be lipe, exceeding ome half of Ita vidue 510 7 



^^p|7146 9— 446 10 9 



APPENDIX. xxnr 



I 



The value of the grass at the time the seed is 
ripe^ is to that c^ the grass at the time of floweringY 
as 6 to 18. 

/ The Iqss which is sustained by leaving tl\e crop 
of this grass till the seed be ripe is very great. That 
it loses more of its weight in drying at this stage of 
growth, than at the time of flowering, perfectly agrees 
with the deficiency of nutritive matter in the seed crop, 
in proportion to that in the flowering crop: the straws 
being succulent in the former, they constitute the 
greatest part of the weight; but in the latter they are 
comparatively withered and dry, consequently the. 
leaves constitute the greatest part of the weight. It 
may be observed here, that there is a great difference^ 
tietween straws or leaves that have been dried after 
they were cut in a succulent state, and those which 
are dried (if I may so e^prees it) by nature whfler 
growing. The former retain all their nutritive powers; 
buj the latter, if completely dry, very little, if any. 

XXVIII. LoUum perenne. Engl. Bot. 315. Fip: 
Dan. 747* Perennial rye-grass^ Nat, of 
Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a rich 
tarown loam, is 

oz. or lbs. per acre 
CiBUMt 11 OZ. S dr. The produce per acre 125235 — 7S27 3 

80 dr« of nass weieh when dry • 34 dr. ? 

* - ' ^ ^53156 13-3322 4 IS 



.^ 



The produce of the space, ditto 7S 4-10 1 

The weight lost by the pi^uce of on^ acre in drying 4494 14 S 

64 di&gt; of grass afford of nutritive matter 2.2dr.7 •n«^tt t« 

The produce of the space, ditto 7.0 3-43 ^^* ^^^ ^^ ^* ^*^ 

At the time die seed is ripe, the produce is 
Gnus, 32 oa. The produce per acre 239580 — 14973 12 • 



xxit APPENDIX. 

oz. or lbs. per«cre 

80dr.ofrra8gweiffhwhcndi7 24 dr. "&gt; 0-4492 2 

The produce Qfthe space, ditto 105.23-53 ^*^* " 44i« ^ u 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 10481 Id 
64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive ma^r 2.3 dr. 1 

The produce of the space, ditto 15.0 2-163^^^^ 7— 643 6 7 
The weight of nutritive matter which is lost by taking the 

crop at the time of flowering, nearly one half its value 33T 8 8 

The proportional value which the grass at the 
time of flowerings bears to that at the time the seed is 
ripe, is as 10 to 11. 

The produce of latter-math is 

Grass, 5 pz. The produce per acre 54450 — 3403 2 

64 dr. of grass afibrd of nutritive matter 1 dr. 850 12 — 53 2 12 

The proportional value which the grass of the 
latter-math bears to that at the time of flowering, is as 
4 to 10, and to that at the time the seed is ripe, as 4 
to IK 

XXIX. Paa maritima. EngU Bot. 1140. 
Sea meadow grass. Nat. of Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a light 
brown loam is 

Grass, 18 oa. The produce per acre 196020 — 12251 4 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 32 dr. f 

* ^78408 0— 4900 



t2 dr. &gt; 
5.1.5 V 



The produce of the space, ditto 115. 
The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 7350 4 

64 dr. of grass afibrd of nutritive matter 4. 2 dr. ^ ^ 

Ihe produce of tlie space, ditto 20. 1 dr. S ^^'^^ ^ "" ^^ ^ 

The produce of latter-math is - 

Grass, 18 oz. The produce per acre 196020 — 122514 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter, Idr. 3062 13 — 191 6 31 

The proportional value which the grass of the 
latter math, bears to that at the time of flowering, is 
a^4tol8f 



APPENDIX. XXXI 

XXX, Cynosurus crisiatus. Engl. Bot. 316. Host. 
G. A. 2. t. 96. Crested dog's-tail grass» 

At the time of flowering, the produce from the 
browa loam, with manure, is 02. or lbs. per acre 

Grass, 9 02. The produce per acre 98010 — 6125 10 Q 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 24dr.l -. ^ 

The produce of th. .pace, ditto 43 ) 29403 0-1837 110 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in dr)dng 4287 15 
64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 4.1 dr. ^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 9.21-165^^°^ 7—406 12 7 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Grass 18 oz. The produce per acre 196020 /— 12251 4 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 32 dr. 7 

The produce of the space, ditto 115.0 8-10 •&gt; '^^^^ - 4^00 

The weight lost by tlie produce of one acre in drying 7350 12 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2.2 dr. -^ 

The produce ofthe space, ditto 11.1 dr.j ^^'^ — 478 9 

The weight of nutritive matter which is lost by taking the 
crop at the time of flowering, exceeding one sixth of its 
value '- . 71 12 9 

XXXI. Avena pratensis Engl. Bot. 1204. FL Dan. 
1083. Meadow oat-grass. Nat. of Britain. 

, At the time of flowering, the produce from a rich 
sandy loami is 

Grass, 10 02. The produce per acre 108900 — 6806 4 

80 dr. of g^ass weigh when dry 22 dr.'^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 44dr.y ^^^^ 8 — 187111 8 

The weight lost by the produce of one apre in drying 4934 8 8 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2. 1 dr. "J 

Th^ produce of the space, ditto 5. 21.23^^^^ ^"^ ■ * ^ 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Grass, 14 oz. The produce per acre 152460 — 952S 12 

80 dr. of gi^ass weigh when dry 24 dr,"^ 

The produce of the space ditto 6?.0 4-5 j ^^"^ ^ ^ ^^^^ ^^ ^ 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 6670 2 

64 dr. of grass afTord of nuti'itlve matter 1 dr. 



The produce of the space, dittn 3 3 ^ ^^^^ ^ "" ^^^ ^* 



xxxii APPENDIX. 

oz« or lbs. per acre 
The weig^ht of nutritive matter which is lost by leaving the 

crop till Uie seed be ripe, ezceediftg one third part of ita 

. v^alue - - - .,- - --I. 9060 

The proportional value which the crops, at the 
time the seed is ripe, bear to that at the time of flower- 
ing, is as 4 to 9. 

XXXIII. Bromus multiflorus. Engl. Bot. 1884. Host. 
G. A. 1. t. 11. Many flowering brome- 
grass. Nat. of Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a clayey 
loam, is 

Grass. 33 oz. The produce per acre 359370 — 22460 10 

80 dr. of grass weigh wh&lt;en dry 44 dr. &gt; 

The produce of the space ditto 290.0 2-53 ^^^^ 8-^12353 S 8 

The weight toii by the produce of one acre in drying 10107 4 8 

^ dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 5 dr.-^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 41. 1 dr.3 ^^^^ ^ "" ^^^ ^^ ^^ 

This species is annual, and no valuable proper- 
ties have as yet heta discovered in the seed. It is 
only noticed on account of its being frequently found 
in poor grass lands, and sometimes in meadows. It 
appears from the above particulars to possess nutritive 
powers equal to some of the best perennial kinds, if 
taken when in flower; but if left till the seed be ripe 
(which, from its early growth, is frequently the case), 
the crop is comparatively of no value, the leaves and 
straws bemg then completely dry. 



APPENDIX. xxxni 

XXXIII. Festuca loliacea. Curt. Lpnd. Engl. Bot. 
1821. Spiked fescue grass« Nat of Bri- 
tain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a brown 

rich loam,' is oz. or lbs. per acre 

Gr»88,34oz. The produce per acre 261360 — 16335 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry SSdr.^ ^.,«.^ ^ ^^^^ ^ ^ 

The produce of the^«=e. do 168 drj "4345 0- 7146 9 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 9188 7 
64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 3 dr. &gt; 

The produce ofthe space, ditto ISdr.K^^Sl 4—765 11 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Griuis, 16oz. The produce per acre 174240 — 10890 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 33 dr. ) 

The produce of the space, ditto 1053-5 dr. V*®^^ ^"" ^^ ^ ^ 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 6397 14 

64 dr. of gfrass afibrd of nutritive matter 3. 1 dr. V 

The produce ofthe space, ditto 13 dr. 5 ^^^ 2 — 553 2 

The latter-math produce is 

Cvrass, 5 oz. The produce per acre 54450 *- 3403 2 
64dr.ofgrass afford of nutritive matter, 1.1 dr. 1063 7— 66 7 7 
The weight of nutritive naatter which is lost by leaving the 
crop till the seed be ripe, exceeding one fourth part of ita 
value 212 11 

The proportional value which the grass, at the 
time of flowering, bears to that at the time the seed is 
ripe, is as 12 to 13; and the value of the latter-math 
stands in proportion to that of the crop at the time of 
flowering, as 5 to 12, and to that of the crop taken at 
the time the seed is ripe, as 5 to 13* 

This species of fescue greatly resembles the rye 
grass, in habit and place of growth; it has excellencies 
^which make it ^eatly superior to that grass, for the 
purposes of either hay or permanent pasture. This 
fipedcs seems to improve in produce in proportion of 

e 



xxxiv APPENDIX. 

its age, which is directly the reverse of the Lolium 
perenne. 

XXXIV. Poa crisiaia. Host. G. A. 2. t. 75. — ^Aira 
Gristata. Engl. Bot. 648. Crested meadow 
grass. Nat; of Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a sandy 

loam, is oz. or lbs. per acre 

Grass, 16 02. The produce per acre 174240 — 10890 

80 dr. ofgrass weigh when dry 36 dr.-j n iLonn R o 

The produce ofthe space ditto 115 3.165 ^*^ — 4Jyw is u 

The weiglit lost by the produce of one acre in drying 5989 8 
64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2 dr. ^ 

The produce of the space, ditto Sdr.J ^^^45 — 340 5 

The produce of this species, and the nutritive 
matter that it affords, are equal to those of the Festuca 
wina at the time the seed is ripe; they equally delight 
in dry soils. The greater bulk ofgrass in proportion 
to the weight, with the comparative coarseness of the 
foliage, render the Poa cristata inferior to the Festuca 
Qvina. 

XXXV. Festuca myurus. Engl. Bot. 1412. Host* 
G. A. 2. t. 93. Wall fescue grass. Nat. 
of Britain. . 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a light 
sandy soil is 

Grass, 14 oz. The produce per acre 152460 — 9528 12 

80 dr. ofgrass weigh when dry 24 dr.7 _ 

The produce ofthe space, ditto 67 2-103 ^^^ ^ - ^858 10 O 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre inlying 6670 2 

64dr.ofgrassaffordof nutritive matter 1.2 dr. "J 

The produce ofthe space, ditto 5.1dr.5^^^^ 4— 223 5 4 

This species is strictly annual ; it is likewise sub- 
ject to the rust; and the above being it?i whole pro- 
duce for one year, it ranks as a very inferior grass. 



APPENDIX. XXXV 

XXXVL Airo flexuosa. Engl. Bot. 1519. Host. G. 
A. 2. t. 43. Waved mountain hair-grass. 
Nat. of Britain* 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a heath 

SOU) IS 02, Q]. [bs. per acre 

Grass, 12 oz. The produce per acre 130680 0— 816r 8 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 31 dr.*) 

The produce of the spate, ditto 74 2^3 ^°^^^ - 3164 U 6 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 5002 9 8 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1. 2 dr. -^ 

The produce ofthe space, ditto 4.2dr.$ 306213—191 6 13 

XXXVn. Hordeum bulbosum. Hort Kew. 1. P. 179. 
Bulbous barley grass. Nat. of Italy and 
the Levant. Introduced 1770, by Mons* 
Richard. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a 
clayey loam with manure, is 

Grass, 35 oz. The produce per acre 381150 0«— 23821 

SO dr. ofgrass weigh when dry ^3dr.^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 23ldr.i ^^^^^ ^"^ ^^^^ ^ ^ 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre In drying 13994 7 10 
64 dr. of grass aflK&gt;rd of nutritive matter 3.2 dr. ' 
The produce of the space, ditto 30.2 2-4 J 

XXXVIII. Festuca calamaria. Engl. Bot. 1(X)5. 

Reed-like fescue grass. Nat. of Britain* 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a clayey 
loam is 

Grass, 80 oz. The produce per acre 871200 0—54450 . 



^^20844 2—1302 12 2 



80 dr. of gprass weigh when dry 28 dr. 1 

The produce of th. .pace, ditto 448 dr. J 304920 0-1&lt;&gt;057 8 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre ip drying 33392 8 

64 dr. ofgrass afford of DUtritiTe matter 4.2 dr. 7 

The produce of the »p»ce. ditto 90dr.5"?** 4-3828 S 4 



XXXVI APPENDIX. 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

oz, or lbs. per acre 
Grass, 75 oz. The produce per acre 816750 — 51046 14 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 19 dr. 7 

Theprodnceofthc.p.ce.ditto 383dr.5 '^^^'^ 2-1212310 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 38923 4 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 3 dr. 

lu / r*u ^%* &lt;/; t S 38285 2 — 2392 13 2 

The produce of the space, ditto 56. 1 J 

The weight of nutritive matter which is lost by leaving the 

crop till the seed be ripe, being nearly one third part of 

its value 1435 11 2 

The propordonal value which the grass at the 
dme the seed is ripe^ bears to that at the time of flower- 
ing, is as 12 to 18. 

This grass, as has already been remarked, pro- 
duces a fine early foliage in the spring. The produce 
is very great, and its nutritive powers are considerable. 
It appears from the above particulars, to be best adapt- 
ed for hay. A very singular disease attacks, and 
sometimes nearly destroys the seed of this grass; the 
cause of this disease seems to be unknown; it is de- 
nominated Clavus by some; it appears by the seed 
swelling to three times its usual size in length and 
thickness, and the want of the carcle. Dr. Willdenow 
describes two distinct species of it; 1st, the shnpfe 
clavus, which is mealy and of a dark colour, without 
any smell or taste; 2nd, the malignant clavus, which 
is violet blue, or blackish, and internally too has a 
blueish colour, a foetid smell, and a ^arp pungent 
taste. Brea^ made from grain affected with this last 
species, is of a blueish colour; when eaten produce* 
cramps and giddmess. 



APPENDIX. xxxvii 

XXXIX. Bromus Utioreus. Host. G. A. P. 7. t. 8* 
Sea-side brome grass* Nat. of Germany, 
grows on the banks of the Danube and 
other rivers. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a clayey 

loam IS oz. or lbs. per acre 

Grass, 61 oz. The produce per acre 664290 — 41518 2 

SOdr. of prass weigh when dry 41 dr. 7 

The produce ofthesp.ce. ditto 500 2.105^*°^ *°-2»278 OW 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 20540 1 6 

64dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1.2 dr.-^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 22.31-25^^^^'' 4—973 1 4 

At the time the seed is ripe the produce is 

Grass, 56 oz. The produce per acre 609840 — 38115 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 32 dr.-&gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto 358 1^5 243936 — 15246 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying ^869 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 3.2 dr.&gt; 

The produce ofthespaoe. ditto 196 l^^^^ 0—2084 6 10 

The weight of nutritive matter wjhich is lost by taking the 
crop at the time of flowering, exceeding one half of its 
v*lue 1X11 5 ^ 

The proportional value which the grass at the 
time of flowering, bears to that at the time the seed is 
ripe, is as 6 to 14. 

This spedes gready resembles the preceding in 
habit and manner of growth; but is inferior to it in 
value, which is evident frcan the deficiency of its pro- 
duce, and of the nutritive nwitter afforded by it, Tha 
whole plant is likewise coarser and of greater bulk in 
proportioa to its weight The seed is affected with 
the same disease which destroys that of the former 
species. 



lexxYiii; APPENDIX. 

XL. Festuca eliafor. Engl. Bot. 1593. Host. G. A. 
2. t. 79. Tall fescue grass. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce &amp;om a black 

rich loam, is oz. or Ibs. per acre 

Grass. 7$ ui. The produce per acre 816750 — 51046 U 
80 dr. of grass weigh irbm dry 28 dr.-i 

The produce of the space, ditto 420dr.5 ^^^'^ 8-17866 6 8 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 33180 7 8- 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 5 dr. &gt; 

^63808 9—3988 9 



i 



The produce of the space, ditto 93. 3 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Grass, 75 oz. The produce per acre 816750 — 51046 4 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 28 dr.^ itjwa fi o 

The produce of ihespacc ditto 420 dr.5 ^^^^ ^ "" ^^^ ^ " 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 33180 7 8 
64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 3 dr,7 

The produce of the space, ditto 56.1 538285 2 — 2392 13 2 

The weight of nutritive matter which is lost by leaving the 
crop till the seed be ripe, exceeding one third part of its 
value 1595 3 7 

The proportional value which the grass at the 
time the seed is ripe, bears to that at the time of flower- 
ing, is as 12 to 20. 

The produce of latter-math is 

Grass, 23 oz. The produce per acre 250470 — 15654 6 

64 dr. of Grass afford ofnutritive matter 4 dr. 15654 6— 978 6 6 

The proportional value which the grass of the 
latter-math bears to that of the crop, is as 16 to 20; 
and to that at the time the seed is ripe, as 12 to 1^ 
inverse. 

This species of fescue is closely allied to the Fes* 
iuca pratensis^ from which it differs in little, except 
that it is larger in every respect. The produce is near- 
ly three times that of the F. pratensU^ and the nutritive 



AEPENDIX. XXXIX 

powers of the grass are superior in direct proportion, 
as€to8. 

XLI. Nairdus stricta. Engl. Bot. 290. Host. G. A. 
2. t. 4. Upright mat-grass. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

oz. or lbs. per acre 
Grass, 9 oz. The pn)duce per acre 98010 «— 6125 10 

80 dr. of grass weirh when dry 33 dr. ') 

^39204 0—2450 4 



2-5 V 



The produce of the space, ditto 57 2 2-i 

4*he weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 3675 6 

64 dr. of grass aiford of nutritive matter 2.1 dr. 1 

The produce of the space, ditto 5.0 1-5 3 ^^^ ^" "" ^ 

^Ln. Triticumj Sp. 
Wheat-grass. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a rich 
sandy loam, is 

Grass, 18 oz. The produce per acre 196020 0—12251 4 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 32 dr. &gt; 

The produce ofthespacc, ditto 115 1^ 5 ^^^^ — 4900 8 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 7350 12 

. 64 dr. of g^ass afford of nutritive matter 2.2 dr. &gt; 

Theproduceofthe space, ditto 11.1 dr. V^^ 0—478 9 

XLUI. Festucafluitans. Curt. Lond. Engl. Bot. 1520. 
Poa fluitans. Floating fescue grass. Nat. of 
Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a strong 
tenacious clay, is 

Grass, 20 oz. The produce per acre 217800 — 13612 8 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 24 dr. 1 

The pwduceof the .pace, ditto 96dr.| «*340 0-4083 12 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 9528 12 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1.3 dr. ^ 

Theproduceofthe space, ditto 8.3 dr. i^^*^ 0—372 3 7 

Hie above produce was taken from grass that 
Iwtd occupied the ground for four years, during which 



xl APPENDIX. 

time it liad increased every year; it therefore appears 
contrary to what some have supposed to be capable of 
being cultivated in perennial pastures. 

XLIV. Hoktu lanatus. Curt. Lond. Fl. Dan. 1181. 
Meadow soft grass. Yorkshure grass. Nat. 
of Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a strong 

clayey loam, is oz. or lbs. per »cre 

Grass, 28 oz. The produce per acre 304920 0—19057 8 

80 dr. ofgrass weigh when dry 26 dr. 



n^i ^ A f*K A'.. ,^w«««v 106585 M — 6661 9U 

The produce of the space, ditto 157. 2 2-5 i 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 12395 14 ^ 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 4 dr. ^ 

The produce of t,he space, ditto 28 dr. 5 ^^^ 8—1191 1 8 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Crass, 28 oz. The produce per acre 304920 0—19057 8 

80 dr. ofgrass weigh when dry 16 dr."&gt; 

The produceofthe space, ditto 89.2 2-5 5 ^^^ 0-3811 8 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 15246 

64 dr. ofgrass afford of nutritive matter 2.3 dr. } oio i.a n 

The produce of the space, ditto 19. 1 dr. 5 *^^^^ ^ "" 
The weight of nutritive matter which is lost by leaving the 
crop till the seed be ripe exceeding one third part of its 
value - - -. 372 3 8 

The proportional value which the grass at the 
time the seed is ripe, bears to that at the time of flower- 
ing, is as 11 to 12. 

XLV. Festuca dumetorum. Flo. Dan. 700. 

Pubescent fescue grass. Nat. of Bcitain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a black 
sandy loam, is 

Grass, 16 oz. • The produce per acre 174240 — 10890 

80 dr. ofgrass weigh when dry 40 dr. ' 

The produce of the spacre^ ditto 128 ( 



, {.87130 0— 5445 
J dr. J 



h 125779 s-^ra&amp;i 5 s 



APPENDIX. xh 

i 

oz. or lbs, perac'fi 
The weigiit lout by the produce of one acre in drying 5445 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1 dr. &gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto . 4dr.i 2722 8— 170 2 8 

XLVL Poa fertilis. Host. G. A. 

Fertile meaJow grass. Nat. of Germany. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a clayey 
loam, is 

Grass, 22 oz. The produce per acre 239580 0— 14973 12 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 42 dr. 

The produce of the space, ditto 184 4-5 dr. 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 7111 8 8 

64 di*. of grass afford of nutritive matter 4.2 dr. &gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto 24.3 5 ^^^^ ^ "" ^^^^ ^^ ^ 

If the nutritive powers and produce of this species, 
be compared with any other of the family, or such as 
resemble it in habit and the soil which it aflfects, a 
superiority will be found, which ranks this as one of 
the most valuable grasses; next to the Poa angustifoUa^ 
it produces the greatest abundance of early foliage, of 
the best quality, which fully compensates for the com- 
parative lateness of flowerings 

XLVIL Arundo colorata. Hort. Kew. I. P. 174. 
Engl. Bot. 462, Phalaris arundinacea* 
Striped-leaved reed grass. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a black 

sandy loam, is 

drass, 40 02. The produce per acre 435600 •— 27225 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 36 dr. "p 

The pro'4uccofthe space, ditto 28Sdr.5 '^^''^O 0-12251 4 6 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 4 dr. ^ 

The produce of the spacfe, ditto '40dr.^ ^^^^ — 1701 9 

The strong nutritive powers which this grass 
possesses recommend it to the notice of o^upiers of 

f ' '^ 

-»■ 



V • ■'■■■■'■ 



/ xla APPENDIX. 

Strong chyey laadSy which cannot be drained ItB 
produce is great, and the foliage will not be denomina* 
ted coarse, if compared with those which aflford a pro- 
duce equal in quantity^ 

XLVIIL TrifoUum pratense. W. Bot^ S- P. 187. 
Broad-leaved cultivated clover* Nat. of 
Britain. 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce from a 
rick clayey loam, is - oi. ot lb». per Act« 

Graia, r2 03:. Tlie prt&gt;duce per acte 7840SQ 0*49005 

, 00 dr. of grass weigh when dry SO dr.&gt; 
The produce of the «p.ce, ditto 288 dr. i ^^^^ - 13251 

Tlie weight Loat by the produce of one ot^re in dryui|p 3675 4 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2.3 &gt; ^ 

The produce oithe space. ditto 45 dr. 5^^^ 2—1914 4 2 

If the weight which is lost by the prodlice of this 
species of clover^ in dryings be compared with that of 
many of the natural grasses, its inferior value for the 
purpose of hay^ compared to its value for green food, 
or pasture^ will appear; for it is certain that the dlfli' 
culty of making good hay increases in proportion with 
the quantity of superfluous moisture which the grass 
may contain* Its value for green food, or pasture, 
may further be seen by comparing its nutritive powers^ 
with those manifested by other plants generally esteem- 
ed best for this purpose. ,j : 

TriftiUim pratefue (as above) affords of fiutritlva mattef %2dt* 
XUX. Trifalium repmta (white clover) from anequ^ quintity 

of grass 2&gt;0dr 

hf Dttto, variety^ with brown leftvcs^ ditto 2^ dr&lt; 

The grass of the T. pratmse^ therefore, exceeds in 
value that of the T* repmr^ by a proportionj as 8 to lOj 




APPENDIX. 

but it is of e^iial proportional ^ 
variety. 

LI. Burnet (Poterlum sangiiisorba) alTord* &lt; 
m. Bwdat orientalUf (a newly introduced ] 

The proportional value of t 
the T. prateme^ and the browE 
repens^ are equal: they exceed the 

The comparative produce oi 
tioned species, per acre, has not 
Lin. TrifoUum macrorbizunu 

Long-rooted clover. Nat. 

At the time the seed is ripe, th&lt; 
clayey loam, is 

Grass, 144 oz. The produce ftt acre 1 i 
80 dr. of grass weigh when diy 34 dr. 
The produce of the space* ditto 9/9 1-5 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre ic 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2.3 *! 
The produce of the space&gt; ditto 99 di 

^ The root of this species of &lt;: 
penetrates to a great depth in th 
tonsequence little affected by thi! 
dry weather* It requires good s 
soil* The produce, when compa 
that are allied to it in habit, ar: 
proves greatly supoior. The fc 
some of which refer to results sta 
pages, will make tl^s manifest: 

Tri/oUumpraiense *) Produces per acp 

V Ditto, 
Broad leaved clover J Affordi. ditto of r 

jMedieoge Mftva. ^ Produces per acre 

Lucem. From a soil &gt; Ditto, 
ofthelikenatttre J Affords of nutriti^ 



slw APPENDIX. 

ffe^sarum onobrffchU. ") ^oduces per acre. Grass 8848 

I Ditto, Hay 3539 

Saintfoin. J Affords of nutritive matter 314 

The weight of nutritive matter afforded by the produce of tlie T. 
fnaerorfttzum, exceeding tliat of the T.pratens^ in proportion, 
nearly as 7to 15 . . - . - f - . . 229/ 

The proportional value of the grass of T. proteme 
to that of r. macrorhizum, is 10 to 11* 

The weight of nutritive matter afforded bf the T, macrorhiium, 
exceeding that of the Medicare sativa, in proportion nearly as 
13 to 33 2552 

The proportional value of the grass is as 11 to 6. 

The weight of nutritive matter which i s afforded by the produce of 
the 7*. maerorhizumf exceeding that of the Bedtfsarum onobrycfds 
in proportion nearly as 5 to 67 - - - , - - - -3897 

The proportional value of the grass, like that of 
the T. pratense^ is as 1 1 to 10. 

The produce of each of the above mentioned 
species, was taken from a similar soil, and in th^ same 
situation the conclusions must thereforebe considered 
positive, with respect to such soils only* It is evi^e^ 
that more than twice the quantity of nutritive matter; 
is afforded by the produce of one acre of the T. ma- 
crorhizum^ than from the produce of an equal space 
covered by the T. pratense. Its short duration in the 
soil (for if sown early in the autumn, on a rich light 
soil, it is only an annual plant) rtnders it fit only for 
green-food or hay; this in some jneasure lessens its 
value, when compared with the T. fratense. It pos- 
sesses the essential property of affording abundance of 
good seed; and if the ground be kept clear of weeds, 
it sows itself, vegetates, and grows rapidly, without 
covering-in, or any operation whatever. For four 



APPENDIX. xlv 

years it has propagated itself in this manner, on the 
space of ground which it now occupies, and from which 
this statement of its comparative value is mac^e. The 
produce of lucern in grass, comes nearer to this spe- 
cies in quantity, but is greatly deficient in nutritive 
matter, as much as 13 to S3. The long continuance 
of lucam in the soil is therefore the only merit which 
it possesses above the two last mentioned species; and 
when that is the object of the cultivator, it will of ne- 
cessity have the preference. 

The value of the grass of saintfoin is equal to 
that of the T* prateme; and proportionally less than 
that of the Trifglium tnacrorhizum, as 10 to 11. The 
quantity of grass is very small, and on soils of the na- 
ture above described, it is doubtless inferior. How- 
ever, from the superior value of the grass, on dry hilly 
situations or chalky soils, it may in such situations 
possibly be thpir superior in every respect. 
LIV. Medicago Sativa. Wither. B. 3. P. 643. 
Lucern. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time the seed is ripe, the produce from a rich 

clayey loam, is oz. or Ibs.peracre 

Grass, 104 oz. The produce per acre 1132560 •— 70785 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 32 dr. 7 * 

The produce of the sp,ce. ditto 665.2 2-5 5453024 0-283U 0- 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 42471 

64 dr, of grass afford of nutritive matter 1.2 dr. ^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 39 dr. J '^^^^ ^-76$9 6 

LV. Hedysarum onobrychis. 'Wither. 3. P. 628. ' 
Saintfoin. Nat. of Britain* 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produced from a rich 
clayey loairig is 

Crass, 13 oz. The "produce per acre 141570 — 88481 2 



&gt;n&gt; , 



ilvi APPENDIX. 

02. or Ibf. per acre 
80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 32 dr. ^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 83 Wdr. \ *^* 0—3539 4 

The weight lost by the prodace ^ one acre in dryinif 5308 14 

64 dr. of grass alTbrd of nutritive matter 2.2 dr. 'J 

The produce of the space, ditto 8.0 1-2 j ^^^ 1 — 345 10 1 

LVL Ibrdeum pratense. Engl. 3ot. 409, Host. G. 

A. 1. 1. S3. Meadow barley&lt;»gras&amp; Nat. of 

Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a 
brown loam, with manure, is 

Grass, 12 oz. The produce per acre 130680 — 8167 8 

80 dr. ofgiass weigh when dry 32dr,&gt; ^^ 0-..3267 

The produce oClhespace, ditto 67.1dr.5 ^^^^ O — J2t)7 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 4900 8 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 3^ dr. &gt; 

The produce^of the space, ditto 11.1 di&gt;3 ^^^^ ° "" ^^^^ ^ 

I. VII. Poa compressa. Engl. Bdt. 365. 

Flat-stalked meadow grass. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the prod^xce from a gravelly 
soil, with manure, is 

Gras8&gt;5oz. The produce per acre 54450 «— 3403 2 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 34 dr.) 
, The produce of the space, dHto 34 drJ ^^^* 4—1446 5 4 

'4 

The weight lost by the prpduce of one acre In diying 1956 12 12 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 5 dr.") 

The produce of the space, ditto 6. 1 5 *^^ 14— 265 13 14 

The specific characters of this species are much 
the, same a3 those of the Poa fertiHsj differing in the 
compressed figure of the straws, and creeping root 
only. If the produce wa^ of magnitude, it would be 
one of the most valuable grasses; for iiproduce^ foliage 
early in the spring, and poteesses strong nutritive 
powers. 



APPENDIX. xlvii 

LVnL Poa aquatica. Curt. Lond. EngL Bot. 1315. 
Reed meadow grass. Nat. of Britain. 

At ^e time of flowering, the produce from a strong 

tenadoUS clay, is oz. or Ibs. per acre 

Grass. 186 oz. The produce per acre 2025540 —126596 4 
8Ddr. of grass weigh when dry. 48dr.l 

The produce of the space, ditto l/SSls 246 J ^^^^^^^ ^ ^^^^^ ^ ^ 

The weight lost by the produce of ooe acre ID drying 50638 8 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2.2 dr. ^ 

The produce ofthc space, ditto Udldr.J ^^^^^^ —4945 2 10 

LIX. Aira aquatka. Curt. Lond. EngL Bot* 1557- 
Water hair grass* Nat. of Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from water, is 

Grass, 16 0z. The produce per acre 174240 0^10890 

80 dr. df grass weigh when dry 24dr.'&gt; ^^ ^ ^^^^ ^ ^ 

Theprod!^ftheVce.ditto . 7&lt;d^.l6} 52272 0-326? 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 7623 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter .2. 1 dr.-j ^^ 
- The produce of the space, ditto 9 dr. j «125 10 - 382 13 10 

LX. Bromus crisiaius. Triticum cristatum, H. G* 
.|L. 2. t. 24. Secale prostratum. Jacquin. Nat. 
of Germany. 

At the tiaie of flowering, the produce from a clayey 
16am, is ^ 

Grass, 13 02, The produce per acre . 141570 a ^^848 

80 dr. of^rass weigh when dry ^^ ^''"l cfigos - 3539 4 

The proauceofthespa^e, ditto • . 83,ldr.i ^^^^ 0-3539 4 Q 

The weight lost by the prbduce of one acre in drying ^ 5308 14 Q . 
64dr.ofgras8afrordofnutritiveinatter 2.2dr.^ 1.^345 10 

' The produce of the space, ditto 8.02-165 T 



xlviii 

LXI. Elym 

175 

Nat 
At the 

loam, wit 

GrasSy 34 o 
80 dr. of ff I 
The produ 
The weigl 

64 dr. off 
The proc' 

LXIL 

At 

slrof 

Grass 

80 dc 
.The 

the 

64&lt; 
Th. 

l: 



APPENDIX. xlin 

LXIV. Avena fiaveuem. Curt. Lend. EilgL Bot. 
952. Yellow oat-grass. Nat^ of Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a clayey 

foam, IS oa, or lbs. per .cie 

Gr^ss, 12 oz. The produce per acre 130680 — 816? 8 

80d.„fgr»s. weigh wh^ndry 28&lt;lr.7 ^^^g „ -- 2858 10 
I he produce of the space, ditto 67. 1 J 

Tlie weight lost by the.produce of one acre in drying *5308 14 

64 dr. of griiss afford of nut^-ilive matter 33 dr. 1 

The produce of ihe space, d&gt;tto ll.ldr.J *^^^^ — 478 9 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Crass, 18 oz. The produce per acre 196020 — 12251 4 

450 d;-. of grass weig^h when dry 32 dr.-^ 

Tl^ produce of tlie space, ditto 115.0 4-55 '^^^ ^"" *^®^ ® ^ 

IMie weiglit lost by tbe produce of oae acre in frying 7350 12 9 

64 dr of gra»&amp; afford of nutritive matter 2 1 dr 1 

The produce of tl»e space, .litto 10. 1- J ^'^^ ^ "* 430 U 5 

The weiglit of nutritive in«tter whic)i is lost if ihecrop be 
left tiil the seed be ripe, ezGeedi';gone-tentK part of i. 9 
value . - . - - . ... . 47 13 U 

The proportional value which the grass at the 
time the seed is ripe, bears to that at the time of flower-r 
ing, is as 9 to 15. 

The produce of latter-math is 

Grass, 6 oz. The produce per acre 65340 0—4083 12 

64 dr. ot Grass affovd of nutritive matter 1.; dr. 1276 2 --• 79 12 9 

The proportional value which the grass of the 
latter-math, bears to that at the time of flowering, is 
as 5 to 15; and to that at the time the seed is ripe, as 
5 to 9. 

This species is pretty generally cultivated in many 
parts of this kingdom; and it appears from the above 
details to be a valuable grass, though inferior to many 
others. 

' % 



K 



ft APPENDIX. 



atV^ Bromus sterilis. Engl. Bot. 

\ rw^^ ^* ^^* Barren Bromc 
} i^ritsdn. 



h%V^ t(romui sterilis. EngL Bot. 1030. Hoat. G. 

Brome grass. Nat. of 



At the time of flowering, the produce from a sandy 

5011 IS • ' , oi. or lb?, p . acre. 

Grass, 44 or. The produce per acre 479160 — 29947 8 

80 dr. of gra^s weigh when dry 45 dr.'j 

TlieprodujceW the space, ditt, 396ar.i ^^^'^'^ 8-16845 7 S 

The weight Jost by the produce of one acre in drying^ 13102 8 

64df. of gfass afford of nutritive matter Sdr.") 

The pp^duce of the space, ditto 55 dr.3 ''^^^ ^"" ^^^^ ^ ^ 

64^r. of the flowers afford of nutritive matter 2.2 dr. 
The nutritive powers of the straws and leaves are, 
therefore, more than twice as great as those of the 
powers. This species, being strictly annual, is of 
comparatively little value. The above particulars 
shew that it has very considerable nutritive powers, 
more than its name would imply, if taken at the. time 
of flowerings but if left till the «eed be ripe, it is like 
all other annuals comparatively of no value. 
LXVL Hokus mollis. Curt. Lond. Wither. B. 2. P. 
134. Creeping soft grass. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a sandy 
soil, is 

Grass, 50 oz. The produce per acre 544500 — 34C31 4 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 32 dr. *) 

The produce of th*.pace. ditto 320dr, j ^irSOO 0-13612 8 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 20418 12 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 4.2 dr. ^ 

The produce of the sp.ce, ditto 56. 1 dr.j ^^^85 2- 2392 13 2 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Grass, 31 oz; The produce per acre 337590 — 21099 6 t) 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 32 dr. 7 

The produce ofthe space, da 19f.l 3^&gt; ^^^^^^ 0-^8439 12 



s 

4f 



APPENDIX. . «Z U 

.02. or iff; per acre 
Tlie weiglit lost by the produce of one acre in drjring 1%6S9 10 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 3.2 dr. -^ 
The produce of Uw space, ditto 27.0 2^5 ^^^^ 15—11^3 13 1$ 

The weiglit of nutritive matter which is lost by leaving the 
crop till the seed be ripe, being nearly one ha»f'o^yL 
value - • . r 1238 15 3 

64 dr. of the roots sfTord of nutritive matter 5.2 dr. 

The proportional value which the grass at the 
time the seed is ripe, b^ars to that at the time of flower* 
ing^isas 14 to 18* 

The above details prove this grass to have meritsr 
which, if compared with those of other species^ rank 
it with some of the best grasses. The small loss of 
weight which it sustains in drying might be expected 
from the nature of the substance of the grass; and the 
loss of weight at each period is equal. The grass 
;;tfordsthe greatest quantity of nutritive matter when 
in flower, which makes it rank as one of those best 
adapted for hay. 

LXVII. Poa feriiUs. Var. B. Host G. A. The 
species. Fertile meadow grass. Variety 1. 
Nat. of Germany. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a brown 
sandy loam, is 

Grass, 23 oz. The produce per acre 350470, — 15654 6 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 34dr.') ' 

The produce of the space, ditto „ 156 253 ^^^** ® "" ^^^ ® ^ 

The wei^t lost by the produce of one acre in drying SiOOO 14 

64 dt. of grass liflTord of nutritive matter Sdi.*) 

The produce of the space, ditto 17.1 drJ ^^^^ '^"" '^^ ^^ ^^ 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Grass, 22 oz. The produce per acre 239580 -« 14973 12 

SOdr.ofgrass weigh when dry 44 dr. 7 . 

The produce of the space, ditto 193,2 dr. J '31769 - 3235 ^ 



ut APPENDIX. 

oz. or if &gt;i. f&gt;er acre 
1 be vei^ht lostby the produce of one acre in drying €r38 3 9 

64 dr. of ^rtua afTord of nutritive matter 5 dr. ^ 

The produce of tlie space, drtto 27. 2 dr. 5 ^^^ ^'^ ^ "" ^ ^^^ ^^ ^ 

The weight of nvtritlve matter which is lost by taking the 
crop at the time of flowering, exceeding one third part 
of ks value is * - • - - . - - - 436 1 3 

The proportional value which the grass at the 
time of flowering, bears to that at the time the seed is 
r^e, is as 12 t:a 20. 

The produce of latter-rmath is 

CIrats. ro«. f hie produce pir Mce 76230 0—^4764 6 

^dr.ofgrtssaflTuraofnariuyi mattUt, 1.2 dr. 1786 10— 111 10 la 

The proportional VcJue which, il^ grass of the 
btter'4Qath, bears to that at the time of fiowermg, is 
as 6 to 12s ^d to that at the time the seed is ripe&gt; as 
&amp; to 20, 

LiXVIIL Cynoturus erucafortms. Beckmannia erucae- 
formis. Host, G. A. S. t. €• 
Linear-spiked dog's-tail grass. Nat. of 
Germany. 
At the time the seed is npe, the produce is 

Grass, 18 oz« The produce per ac e 196020 0-^13251 4 

89 dr. of grass weigh when dry 36 dr. ^ 

The ppciduee of the space, ditto 129. 2 2-5 &gt; ^^^ — 5513 1 

I'he weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 6738 3 (^ 

64 dr of grass aflTord of nutritive matter 3.1 dr. &gt; 

Theproduceofthf space, ditto 14l2 2 4&gt;^^^ 2— 622 2 ^ 

LXIX. Phleutn nodosum. W. B. 2; P. 118. 

Bulbous stalked cat Vtail grass. Nat of Bri« 
tain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a clayey 
loam, is 

^Snss^ldoz. The produce per acj^ 19602O 0-*-12251 4 



APPENDIX. till 

ftz, tf fbs. per acre 
80 dr. of grass weigh wbeii &lt;!ry 38 dr. ^ 

The produce of the space, diito 1364.5$^^^^ ^^ ^^^ ^ ^ 

The weight I .st by the produce of one acre in drying 6431 14 8 

64 4r. of grass aifprd of nutritive matter 2.2 dr. ^ 
The prduceofthespac, ditto 11.1 dr. V^^^ 0—478 9 

This grass is inferior in many respects to the 
Phleum pratense. It is sparingly found in meadows. 
From the number of bulbs which grow out of the 
straws, a greater portion of nutritive matter might 
have been expected. This seems to prove, that these 
bulbs do not form so valuable a part of the plant as 
the joints, which are so conspicuous in the Phleum 
praiensey the nutritive powers of which exceed those of 
the P. nodosum'y as 8 to 28. 
LXX. Phleum pratense. Wither. 2, P. 11 ?• 

Meadow cat's-tail grass. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a clayey 
loam, is 

GtHbs, 60 i}z. Ttie ptoduce per acre 653400 — 40837 8 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 34 dr.-\ 

The produce of the space, ditto 408 dr. 5^^^^ 0-^1735515 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 23481 9 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2-2 dr. ) 
The produce of Uie space, ditto 37.2 dr. 5 ^^^^ "^ *" ^^^ ^ ^ 

The weight of nutritive matter which is lost by leaving the 
crop 'ill the seet^ h*»ripe, exceeding one halfof it«5 vulue 2073 11 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Grass, 60 02. The produce per acre 65340U 0—40837 8 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 38 dr. ) 

The produce of the space, ditto • 456 dr.5 ^'°^ 0-19397 13 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drsring 21439 11 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutntive matter 5.3 dr. ) 

The produce of the space, ditto 86.1 dr. $ ^^^ M— 3668 15 14 

The latter-math produce is 

Grass, 14 oz. 1 he produce pbr acre 152460 — 9528 12 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2 dr. 4764 6 -«&gt; 297 12 6 



iiv APPENDIX. 

64 dr. of the straws afford of nutritive matter 7 dr. 
The nutritive powers of the straws simply, therefore, 
exceed those of the leaves, in proportion as 28 to 8; 
and the grass at the time of flowering, to that at the 
time the seed is ripe, as 10 to 23; and the latter-math, 
to the grass of the flowering crop as 8 to 10. 

The comparative merits of this grass will appear, 
from the above particulars, to be very great; to which 
may be added the abundance of fine foliage that it 
produces early in the spring. In this respect it is 
inferior to the Poa fertilise and Poa anguestifoBa only. 
The value of the straws at the time the seed is ripe, 
exceeds that of the grass at the time of flowering, as 
28 to 10; a circumstance which increases its value 
above many others ; for, by this property, its valuable 
early foliage may be cropped, to an advanced period of 
the season without injury to the crop of hay, which, in. 
other grasses which send forth their flowering straws 
early in the season would cause a loss of nearly one 
half of the value of the crop, as is clearly proved by 
former examples ; and this property of the straws, 
jnakes the plant peculiarly valuable for the purpose of 
hay. 

LXXI. Phleum prateme. Var. minor. Wither. B. 
2. 118. Var. 1. Meadow cat's-taii grass. 
Var. Smaller. Nat of Britain. 

At the time of ripening the seed, the produce from a 

clayey loam, is oz. or Ibs. per acre 

Grass, 40 ox. The produce per acre 435600 — 27225 

SOdr. of grass weigh when dry 34 dr.") ^ -^ *. 

Theproduceofthe.p.ce.ditta 272drJ'8^'30 0-11570 10 



APPENDIX. I.V 

o7. or lbs per acre 
The we'igfit lost by the produce of one acre in drying 15654 6 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2.3 dr. 7 

The produce of the space, ditto 272 dr.i ^^^^ ^ "" ^^^^ *^ ^ 

The latter-math produce is 

Grass, 14 02. The produce per iicre 152460 0—9528 1^ 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1 2. dr. S573 4 — 223 5 4 

LXXn* Elymus arenarius. Engl. Bot. 1672. 

Upright sea lyme grass. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time the seed is ripe, the produce from a 
clayey lo2Un&gt; is 

Grass, 64 oz. The produce per acre 696960 — 43560 

80 dr. of grass wtigli when di7 45 di*.'1 

The produce of ihespscp, ditto 576 drj ^^^^^ 0—24502 8 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 1895/ 8 

64 dr. of grass a0brd of nutritive matter 5 dr. ^ 

The produce of the space, ditto SOdr-S ^^^^ 0-5403 2 

LXXIII. Elymus geniculatus. Pendulous lyme grass* 
Engl. Bot. 1586. Pendulous sea lyme 
grass. Nat. of England. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a sandy 

soil, is 

Grass* 30 oz. The produce per acre 326700 — 20418 12 

60 dr. of grass weigh when dry 32 dr. ^ 

The produce of the .pace, ditto 192 dr. 5 ^^^ '*-«'«'' " » 

The \veight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 12251 4 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 3.1 dr. &gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto 24.1 1-2 dp. i ^^^^ ^ "^ ^^^^ ^* ^ 

I.XXIV. JBromus inermis. Host. G, A. 1. 1. 9. 

Awnless brome grass. Nat. of Germany. 

Introduced by Mr. Hunnemanin 1794. 
At the time the seed is ripe^ the produce fj^m a 
black sandy soil, is 

Grass, 18 oz. The produce per wre 196020 — 12251 4 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 35 dr. J 

TlieprodiicbofM,t0tacfc.diw lS6&lt;!r.$ ^^^ «- W50 1*4 12 



I.VI ' APPEfNDlX. 

oz. or lbs. •])€? acre. 
Tb« wei|^I)t lost by the produce of one acre in drying 6891 5 4 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 4. 1 dr. ) 

The produce of the space, ditto 19. S-5 j ^^^^ ^^ "" ®^^ ^ ^^ 

The produce of latter-math is 

Grass, 13 oz. , I'he vroduce per acre 141570 — 8848 2 

64 dr. of grass afford ot nut i it ive matter 1. 1 dr. 2765 — 172 13 

LXXV. Agrostis vulgaris* Wither, Bot. 2, 132. 
, Hud. A. capilaris. Dr. Smith, A. arenaria. 
Fine bent grass. Nat. of Britain. 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce from a 
sandy soil, is 

Grass, 14 uZ. The produce per acta 152460 — 9528 12 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 40 dr. ^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 112ar.5 '^^^^^ — 4764 6 

The weight lost by tlie produce of one acre in drying 4764 6 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1.2 3-16 dr. 7 

The produce oftbe space, ditto 5,1 M6 54019 15—2513 15 

This is one of the most common of the bents, 
likewise the earliest ; in these respects it is superior 
to all others of the same family, but inferior to several 
of them in produce, and the quantity of nutritive mat- 
ter it affords. As the species of this family are 
generally rejected by the cultivator on account of the 
lateness of their flowering ; and this circumstance, as 
has already been observed, does not always imply a 
proportional lateness of foliage, their comparative 
merits in this respect maybe better seen, by bringing 
them into one view, as to the value of thdr early 
foliage. 



APPENDIX. LVii 

The apparent difference of time. Their nutritive powers. 

Jgrostis .vulgaris Middle oft April 1.2 3.4« 

palustris One week later j 2.3 

stolonifera .T^o, ditto ». 3,2 

canina Ditto, ditto 1.3 

stricta Ditto, ditto 1.2 

, . nhea Three weeks, ditto 2 

littoralis Ditto, ditto 3 

repens Ditto, ditto 3 

mexicana Ditto, ditto 2 

fascicularis Ditto, ditto 2 

LXXVI. Agrostis palustris. Wither. Bot. 2, P. 129. 

Var. 2, alba. Engl. Bot. 1189. A. alba. 

Marsh tent grass. 

At the time of flowerings the produce from a bog 
earth, is 

oz. or lbs. per.acre 
Grass, 15 oz. The produce per acre 163350 6 — 10309 6 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 36 dr.i 

Theproduocofthe space, ditto IwS^v.y^^ 8 — 4594 3 8 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 5615 2 8 

64 dr. of grass afford of nut litive matter 2. 3 dr. "&gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto 10.1 1-43 '^^^^ ^^"" ^^ ^^ ^^ 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produce is 

Grass, 20 oz. The produce per acre 217800 — 13612 8 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 32 dr. ^ 

The produce ofthe space, ditto 128 dr. 5 ^^^^^ ^"" 5445 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying ,8167 8 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2.3 dr.*) 

The produce of the space, ditto 13.3 dr-i ^^^® ^ "" ^^^ 14 9 

The weight of nutritive matter wliich it lost by taking the 

crop at the time of flowering, being one fourth part of its \ -.. 

value , - - 146 3 10 \ 

The proportional value of grass, in each crop is equal. 

h 



Lx APPENDIX. 

02. er lbs. per acre. 

80 dr. of grufl. weigh when dry 34 dr:&gt; 

The produce oftbesptce, ditto 63 1-55. 43013 — 2688 5 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in dryjng 343/ 5 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2.2 dj-. 1 

The produce of the space, ditto 521 1-2 j ^^^ .8— :239. 4 8 

LXXXL Agrosiis camna. Var. muticae. 

Awnless brown bent, Nat, of Britain. 
At the time the seed is ripe, the produce from a 
sandy soil, is 

Gmesv, 21 oz. Tberproduce per acre 228690 — 14293 2 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 24 dr. ^ 

Theproduceofthespaccditto 100.3 l-SS 63607.0^4287 15 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying i.' 1QD&lt;^ 3 

64dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1.3 dr. ^ ^ • ,^ 
The prrKluce of the .■ipce, ditto 9.0 3-4 3^^^^ 3 — 390 13 3 

iThe weight of nutritive matter which the. produce of 
one acre of the iawnless variety, exceeds that of 

' the last mentioned species . -. .15 8 11 
L3^X3tII. Agrostis sirtcta. Curt. A, rubra, . 
/^^ Upright bent grass. Nat., of Britain. 

' At the time the seed is ripe, the produce from a 
bo^ soil, is 

Grass, 11 oz. The produce per acre 119790 — 7486 14 

to dri Of grass weigh when dry 29dr.'&gt; 

The produce of the space, do 63 4-5 dr. y ^^^3 14^ 2713 15 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in dryii^ 4772 15 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1-2 dr. &gt; 

The pn&gt;duce of the spacer ditto 4.0 540 i ^^^'^ 9— 175 7 9 

LXXXni; Jgrostis'fiwera.' 

. Snowey bent grass; Nat of Britain. 

At the time the seed is ripe, the produte from a 
sandy soil, is 

Gra8^,7oz. The produce per acre 76230 — 4764 &lt;5 



APPENDIX,- Lxt 

oz. «r Ibft. per acre 
SO dr. of grass weigh wben dry 22 dr.-j ^ ' • 

The produce of the space, dd. 30.31-5 dr.j ^^^^ f — 1310 .3 
The weightiest by the produce of one acre in drying ' 3454 3 

64 dr. of grass afford of nilCritive matter 2-dr.l ^ 

The Dr^uce of the space; ditto'' 3 1-2 di:. &gt; . ^??"^ "" ^^^ ^^ ^ 

•LXXXIV. Agrostisfascicularis. Huds. Var. 
canina. i.Curt, .Tufted leaved bent. 
Nat. of Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the prodtce' from a light 
sandy soil, is ti " 

-Griss, 4 ^z.- • The produce per acre - . - - ■ 435Q0 — 2722 8 
•80 dr. of grass weigh when dry ' • 20 tlr.&gt; • 

T^eproddceofthe spice, ditto 16dr,P. .,^W. .^"^^^? ^^ ^ 

'Theweight lost by tbe.pcoduce of one acre in Vli-ying 2041 14 . 6 
64 dr. of gr^ss affoijd of ni^tVitlve matter 2 dr.7 ' ' ' * 

tl'ir'noduccofthe srace.dhti ^^ I i2 6r.'&gt; i^^.M.'*"?^ . ^ * 

LXXXV. jF^j/2^^^//&gt;i;zij/^. Bfotttuispirinatus. • ' 
• , ; '■ , Engl., 'tot^ " 736;'^' &lt;*^; ^ -;^ '^^ ' . ^ -^ 
/' Spike(f¥c^due.*'N^^^^^ '-'^^^ 

At the tiiii^ the seed {fe ripe, tW*ptod\ke froiri^ « 
light sandy soil', with 'manure, is "• --^^^ 

Gi-ass, 30 ox. The protiucc pet kcve ' ' ' 32i5rbO { ^^itViUS^ « 13 "O 

'k)dr; of grass weigh when ity .32rdr;? ' ' 1 ;- 

/ r*u v7 .Q« , f 130680 . 0—8167 8 

The produce of the space, ditto 192 dr. J ... .^ ,. 

The weight lost by the produce of one apre in drying ^ 12251 4 ;0 

64dr.ofgrassaflroi^ofn\ltfitivematterlidr. &gt; •- ■ •- • 

The .. .dncof th. sp«. , ditto : .9 l5^ S ^^^^'^^ ^ ^^ ^^ 13 

I4XXXVL F^fticu^ . viride. Curt. , J.pnd. Engl. 

Bot. 67^. Green panic grass. Nat. of 

Britain, 
At the time the seed is ripe, the produce from a 
light sandy soil, is 

Grtssy 8 oz. The produce per acre 87120 '— 5445 



Mil APPENDIX, 

oz. . or lbs per acre 
80dr. of c^ass weigh when dry 31 dr. 
The prcAucc of the sp«e. ditto 511.5.5 ^^^ 0^2178 'O 

The weig;htlostby theprodtM^ofon^Aoreindryifli^ 3267 • 

64 dr. of grass afford of miiritive awtter 1.2 dr. &gt; 

The produce of the fepace, ditt© 3 dr. 5^^*^ ^^ "" ^^' ^ ^^ 

LXXXVIL P/micumsanqmndk. Curt Lo9d* £9^&gt; 
Sot. S4Q. filbod coloured panic grass. 
^ Nat. of Britain^ 

Atlhe :dine:iiie:seed.b rv^^ thie produce from a 
sandy soil, is 

^Xiniss, 10 wz The produce per acre 108900 — 6806 4 ^ 

64 dr. of grass if -rd of nutritive matter 1.0 2-16 1914 4 — 119 10 4 

This and the preceding species are strictly annu- 
al, and from the results of this trial, their nutritive 
^xywers appear to lie very incp^asiderable. The seed 
of this ^pecie^ Mx. j^ehreber ^^Cribes (in JS^s&lt;;hrei- 
bung der Graser) as the mapi^L ^ss* In Poland, 
Lithuania, ice. it is coU^cte^ ii^0*eat^bundance, when 
^f^r.bei^gthoroUj^ly sq)arat;ed froi^ the hu$t:s,it is 
fit for use. When boil^ witlvwlk&gt; or wine, it forms 
can cxtiteosely p»!^rtable food, &lt;Mid is most commonly 
made use of whole, intoianner of sago, to whi$h itis;^ 
general preferred. 

LXXXVIIL AgnosHs hbata. Curtis, lobita et are- 
naria; X.d&gt;ed bent grass. 

At the time of flowering, the pddiice from a sattdy 
soil, i^ * 

Grass, 10 oz. The produce per acre 108900 0—6806 4 

^Tlr. of grass weig^whfeiKxiry -40 dr.^ ^^ 0-3403 2 

The produce ofthe spacer ditto SOdr.i ■ 

The weightioat by UiefixKluce of &lt;mcaore.4n drying 3403 2 



APPENDIX. wiM 

oz. or lbs. peracrs 
64 dr.ofgpassailbrdornutritive matter *^^^'7 rtai 11 - 

The produce of the spnce, ditto 7.2 dr.5 ^*^ "--»&gt;W 11 

LXXXIX. Agrostis repens. Wither. Bot. A* nigi^ 
Creeping rooted bent^ black bent. Nat. 
of Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a clayey 
loam, is ^ 

Grass, 9 oz. The proJuce|)er acre "98010 — 6125 10 

80 dr. ofgrass weigh when dry 35 dO ^jg^n g _ 2679 15 « 

The produce ofthe space, ditto esdri *^^^^— ^79 15 € 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 3445 10 10 

64 dr. of grass aiford of nutritive matter 3 dr. ^ 

The produce of ihe space, ditto 6.3 dr. 5 ^^^* 3 — 287 2 3 

XC# Agrostis memcana. Hoit. Kew, I. P. 150» 
Mexican bent grass. Nat of S. America.^* 
Introduced 178*;, by M. G. Alexander; 
At the time- of flowering, the produce from a 

black sandy soil, is 

Grass, 2802. The produce per acre 304920 — 1905f 8 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 28 dr.-^ 

The produce ofthe apace, ditto 156.31-55 ^^^^^ 0—6670 2 

The weightiest by the prodjice of one acre in drying 12387 6 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2. dr. "I 

The produceVthesp.ee, ditto 14dr.&gt;^^^^ 12 — 595 8 12 

XCI. Stipa pennata. Engl* Bot. 1356. Long- 
awned feather grass. Nat. of Britain. 

At the time of flowering the produce from a heath 
soil, is 

Grass, 14 oz. The produce per acre 152460 — 9528 12 

SOdr.ofgrasswdgh when dry ^^^-\ sS!6&amp;i3-2^S4, 2 la 

The produce of the space, ditto 811-5dr^ 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 6074 9 4 



twv . APPEJ^JblX. 

02. OP lbs. per acre 
64 fir. of grass afi'ord of nutritive matter • 2.3 c3r.s «. ^ J^ 
The produce f;f the" s])ACf, ditto 9.2 X-2 5 

XCII. . Triiiiym npens. EngL Bat- 909* 

Creeping rooted wheat grass. Nat. of 
Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a light 
clayey loam, is 

Grass, 18 cz. The produce per acre 196020 0—12251 4 

80 dr. of gra«s weigh when dry 32 dr. \ ^g^g ^ _ ^^^q ^ ^ 

t*he produce ofthe space ditto 115 1-5 J 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 7550 12 

64 dr. of «Tass afford of nutritive matter 2 dr. 1 ^^^,5 ^q _ 332 13 jq 
The produce of the space ditto 9dr. &gt; 

64 dr. of the roots, afford of nutifitive matter 5.3 dr. 
The proportional value of the roots, is therefore to 
that of the grass, as 23 to 8. 
XCIII. Alopecurus agrestis. Engl. Bot. 848. 

A. myosuroides. Slender fox-tail grass.-— 
. Nat of Britain. Curt. Lond.^ 
At the time of flowering the produce from a 
light sandy loam is 

Qrass, 12 0Z. The produce per acre 130680 — 8167 8 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 31 dr ^ ^^^33 g^ 3x54 14 g 

The produce of the space ditto 74. 1. 3-5 dr. &gt; 

64 dr. of i^rass afford of nutritive matter 1.3 dr. ) ^.^_ . ^_ _ ^ . 
/ - , ,. ^ &lt; J r *^57o 4 — 223 5 4 

The produce of thp space ditto 5.1 dr, &gt; 

XCIV. Bmnusasper. Engl. Bot, 1172. Curt. 

Lond. Bromus hirsutus. Huds. Bromus 

ramosus. B. sylvaticus, volger. B. altissi- 

- mus. Hairy stalked brome grass,. Nat. of 

Britain. 

At the time of flowering, the produce from a light 

sandy soil, is 

Grws, 20 02. The produce per acre 217800 — 13612 8 



APPENDIX. ^ ixv 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 24dr.-^ 

Theproduccofttd space, ditto 96Hr.j^^^0 — 4083 12 

The weight lost by tbe produce of one acre in drying 9533 12 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 2 dr. "&gt; 

Thepmducv of the space, ditto V 10 dr. 3 ^^^^ 4 — 425-6 4 

XCV- Phalaris canariensh^ EngL Bot ISIO, 
Common canary grass. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a clay- 
ey loam, is 

Grass, 80 oz. The produce per acre 871200 — 54450 

80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 26 dr,^ 

The produce of the space, ditto 416 drj ^^^'^ 8-176979 8 

The produce in weight lost by drying -. - - 36752 6 6 

64 dr, of grass afford of nutritive matter 1.2 dr. V 

the produce or the space, ditto 30 dr. J ^^^^^ ^2 —1876 2 12 

XCVI. Melica ctzrtdea. Curt. Lond. Engl. Bot. Y50 
Purple mfelic grass. Nat. of Britain. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a light 
sandy soil, is 

oz. or lbs. per acre 

Grass, 11 oz. The produce per acre 119790 —7486 14 
80 dr. of grass weigh when dry 30 dr.*\ 

The produce of the space, ditto 66dr.5 ^^^^^ 4 ~- 2807 9 4 

The weight lost by the produce of one acre in drying 4679 4.2 
64 dr.of grass afford of nutritive matter 1,2 dr. &gt; 

The produce of the space, ditto 4.02-4 3 ^^ 8 — 172 4 8 

XCVII. Dactylis cynosuroides. Linn. fil. fesci. 1, P. 17. 

American cock's foot grass. Nat. of N. 

America. 
At the time of flowering, the produce from a clayey 
loam, is 

Grass, 102 oz. Theproduce per acre 111780 0—69423 1 

SOdr.ofgrass weigh when dry ^^'\mm O^Al^^ 4 

Theproduce of the space, ditto 979 1-5 dr.3 

The weight lost by the produce ofone acre in drying 27769 8 

64 dr. of grass afford of nutritive matter 1.3 dr. *&gt; 

Th«pjpoduce of thespaoe, ditto 44.2 2-45 ^^^''^ ^r^^^^^ ^ 



LXVt 



APPENDIX. 



Of the Time in which different Grasses pro- 
duce Flowers and Seeds. 

To decide positively the exact period or season, 
\irhen a grass always comes into flower, and perfects 
its seed,, will be found impracticable; for.^ variety of 
circum3tances inderfere* Each species seems to po^ 
sess a peculiar life in which various periods may be 
distinctly marked, according to the varieties of its age, 
of the seasons, soils, exposures, and mode of culture. 

The following Table, which shews the time of 
flowering, and the time of ripening the seed of those 
grasses growing at Wobum, which are mentioned in 
the Experiments, must, therefore, only be considered 
as serving for a test of comparison, for the different 
grasses, growing under the same circumstences. 





Time of 


Time of ripening 


Names. 


flowering. 


the seed. 


Apthpxanthum odorattun 


April S9 


June 


21 


irolcua odoratus 


April 39 


Jane 


2S 


Cyno^nTOt cseruleus 


April 30 


June 


20 


Alopecuras pratensii 


May 20 


June 


24 


Aiopecurus alpious 


May 20 


June 


%k 


Poa aipina 


May 30 


June 


30 


Poa pr«tensiftr 


May 30 


July 


W 


Fo»c9rB]«a 


mj 3© 


V July 


14 


ilv«na pitbescens 


Jane 13 


July 


8 


f estnca Hocdifarmis 


June It 


I J^y 


10 


Poa trivia] Is 


Jane 13 


' July 


10 


F^ittuca glauca 


June 13 


July 


10 


Festaca glabra 


June 10 


July 


10 


VesfcDca rtibra^ 


, , J»1i« ao 


July 


10 


Festoca ovina 


Juoe 24 


JUly 


Mr 


Briza inedU 


June 24 


July 


10 


Ba'ctylis glomerata 


June 34 


July 


14 


Bromus tectwum 


June 24 


July 


10 


Festuca cambi ica 


Jane 28 


July 


10 


Bromus cjiandrus 


June 28 


Jtxly 


15 


Poa angustifolia 


Jane 2ft 


July 


15 


Avena elatior 


June 28 


July 


10 


poa elatior 


June 38 


Jtdy 


Ift 


Festuca duriascala 


July 1 


July 


20 


Milium effusum 


July 1 


July 


20 


Fescoca prafensia 


July 1 


Jaly 


2&lt;&gt; 


LoUum terenue 


JBly I 


July 


20 



APPENDIX. 



LXVIK 



Names. 



Cynosonu cri«ei»tos 

Avena prarensis 

Bromu» mulcifloras 
' ^estnca loliacea 

,Poa cristaita 

FettDca tuynras 

Aira fl^Xaosa 

Honlenni balbosism 

Fes^aca calamaria 

BromQs littoreus 

Festttca elatior 

Xardas stricca 

Tritieom, (s{iQciet of) . 
' Festaca Flaitans 

F«tta«a dooietopam 

Holctts lanatQS 

Poafertilis 

Arondo colorata 

Fea (species of) 

Cynosorus eracaeformit 

Phleotn nodosom 

Fhleuni pratense 

Klymils arenarittt 

Klymus genictrlatns 

THt'oUom prateh^e 

Trifoliam macrorhiinm 

tkiDguisorba caaadensit 

Ban lag orien talis 

Medieago sativa 

Hedysarom onobryehit 

Hordeum pratense 

Foa compreaaa 

Foa aqoatica 

Bromtu isristatttt 

Elymus sibircBt. 

Air.) cjfrspiccsa 

Aven:i flavescent 

Bromus sCerilis 

Holcus mollis 

Broititts inermt* 

Agrostis vulgaris 

Agrostis palastrtf 

Fanicttin dacfylop 

Agroatis atotonifera 

Agrostis stoloiilfen (var.) 

Agrostis canina 

AgrostU stricto 

Featuca |»eanata 

Faiiicttin viride 

Panicum sangainale 

Agrostis lobata 

Agrostis repens 

Agrostis f^cietUarit 

Agrostis nirea 

Triticttfk repeftf 

Alopectfm agrtitfti 

Bromua aspor 

Agroitit aieaicana 



Time of 


towering. ^ 


July 


fl' 


July 


9 


Jaly 


6 


July 


I 


July 


4 


July 


- • 


July 


6 


^uly 


10 


July 


10 


July 


IS 


July 


IS 


July 


12 


Jaly 


IS 


July 


14 


. July. 


14 


July 


14 


July 


14 


July 


16 


Jttiy 


10 


July 


10 


July 


10 


July 


10 


July 


10 


July 


18 


July 


18 


July 


18 


July 


18 


July 


18 


July 


18 


July 


18 


Jaly 


30 


July 


to 


July 


SO 


July 


S4 


July 


S« 


July 


24 


July 


84 


July 


84 


July 


84 


July 


84 


Jaly 


84 


July 


«8 


July 


S8 


July 


S8 


July 


28 


July 


S8 


July 


88 


Jttly 


S^ 


Aug. 


t 


Aug. 





' Aug. 





Aug. 


8 


Aug. 


10 


Aug. 


10 


Aug. 


ift 


Aug^ 


w 



Titae of ripening 
Che Seed 



July 28 
July SO 
July 88 



Aug. 10 
A^%, 15 



July 


SO 


July 


» 


July 


28 


July 


88 


July 


28 


July 


38 


Aug. 





Aug. 


6 


Aug. 


0. 


Aug 


io 


Aug. 


IS 


July 


20 


July 


80 


July 


28 


July 


88 


July 


30 


July 


30 


July 


30 


Jnly 


30 


July 


30 


July 


30 


July 


SO 


July 


30 


July 


30 


Jttly 


30 


Aug: 




Aug. 




Aug. 




Aug. 




Aug. 




Aug. 


10 


Aug. 


10 


Aug. 


10 


A«g. 


If 


Aug. 


so 


Aug. 


so 


Attg. 


so 


Aug. 


•0 


Aog. 


si 


Aug. 


St 


Aug. 


H 


Aug. 


St 


Aug. 


St 


Aug. 


30 


Aug, 


so 


Aug. 


» 


Aug. 


so 


Aug. 


so 


Aug. 


SI 


Aug. 


30 


Aug. 


30 


Attg. 


30 


Sept. 


• 


Sept. 


10 



Sept. 88 



LXVIII 


APPENDIX. 


'^ 


Naaes. 


TliAeof 
flowering. 


Time of ripening 
the Seed. 


8tipA pennata 

yiularis csnMiienslf 
INetfllft cynoeoroides* 


Aug. 15 
Aug. SO 
Aug. 30 
Aug, 30 


Sept. U 
Sept. 90 
Sept. 90 
Oct. 20 



Of the different Soils referred to in the 
Appendix. 

In books on agriculture and gardening much un- 
certainty and confusion arises from the want of rega-' 
lar de6nitions of the various soils, to distinquish them 
specifically by the names generally used: thus the term 
bog-earth, is almost constantly confounded with peat- 
moss, and heath-soil; also the term Might loam/ 
^ heavy soil,' &amp;c. are given without distinguishing whe- 
ther that be ' light' from sand, or this * heavy* from 
clay. In minute experiments, it is doubtless of con- 
sequence to be as explicit as possible in those parti- 
culars« The following short descriptions of such 
soils as are mentioned m the details of the experiment 
are here given for the above purpose. 

1st. By ^ loam' is meant any of the earths com- 
bined with decayed animal, or vegetable matter. 

2nd. ^ Clayey-loam' when the greatest proper* 
tionisclay. 

Srd. ^ Sandy-loam' when the greatest proportion 
is sand. 



* In the esperimeots made en tlie gnantitr of nutritive matter in the gTaetei^ 
cat at the time the leed Wat ripe&gt; the seeds were always separated: and the calcu- 
latioat for nutritiTe natter&gt; as it evident from the detaiU^ made for grass aad 
nothay. 



4th. * Brown-loam* when the greatest propor- 
tion consists of decayed vegetable matter. 

5tfa. ^ Rich black loam' when sand, clay, ani* 
mal and vegetable matters are combined in unequal 
proportions, the clay greatly divided, being in the least 
proportion^ and the sand and vegetable matter in liie 
greatest. 

The Terms * light sandy soil,* ' light brown 
loam,* &amp;Ct are varieties of the above, as expressed. 



%.n APPENDIX. 

Observations on the chemical Compmition of 
tftf ftntrilive matter afforded by the gras- 
M8 in their different States. B^tht Edi- 
tor. 

I have made experiments on most of the soluble 
products supposed to contain the nutritive matter of 
the grasses, i)btained by Mr. Sinclair; and I have an- 
alysed a few of them. Minute details on this subject 
would be little interesting to the agriculturist, and 
would occupy a considerable space; I shall therefore 
content myself with mentioning some particular facts, 
and some general conclusions, which may tend to elu- 
ddate the inquiry respecting the fitness of the different 
grasses for permanent pasture, or for alternation as 
green crops with grain. 

The only substances which I have detected in the 
soluble matters procured from the grasses, are mucil- 
age, sugar, bitter extract, a substance analogous to 
albumen, and different saline matters. Some of the 
products from the after-math crops gave feeble indica- 
tions of the tanning principle. 

The order in which these are nutritive has been 
mentioned in the First Lecture, the albumen, sugar, 
and mucilage, probably when cattle feed on grass or 
hay, are for the most part retained in the body of the 
animal; and the bitter principle, extract, saline mat- 
ter, and tannin, when any exist, probably for the most 
part are voided in the excrement, with the woody 
fibre. The extractive matter obtained by boiling the 
fresh dung of cows, is extremely similar in chemical 



APPENDIX, MXi 

characters to that existing m the soluble prodiu:ts from 
the grasses. And some extract, obtained by Mr- 8ia- 
dtair, from the dung of sheep and of deer, which had 
been feeding upon the Lolium perenne, Dactylis gloni- 
erata, aii4 Trifolium repez]^^ had qualities so anala- 
gous to those of the extractive matters obtained from 
the leaves of the grasses, that they might be mistaken 
for each other. The extract of the dung, after beinjj 
kept for some weeks, had still the odour of hay. Sus- 
pecting that some undigested grass might have remain- 
ed in the dung, which might have furnished mucilage 
and sugar, as well as bitter extract, I examined the 
soluble matter very carefully for these substances. Il 
did not yield an atom of sugar, and scarcely a sensible 
quantity of mucilage. 

Mr. Sinclair, in comparing the quantities of solu- 
ble matter aiForded by the mixed leaves of the Lolium 
perenne, Dactylis glomerata^ and Trifolium repens, 
and that obtained from the dung of cattle fed upon 
them, found their relative proportbns as 50 to IS. 

It appears- probable from these facts, that the bit- 
ter extract, though soluble in a large quandty of wa- 
ter, is very little nutritive; but probably it serves the 
purpose of preventing, to a cotain extait, the fermen- 
tadon of the other vegetable matters, or in modifying 
or assisting the Auction of digestion, and may thus 
be of considerable use in forming a constituent part 
of the food of cattle. A small quantity of bitter 
extract and saline mattier is probably all that is needed^ 
and beyond this quamity the soluble matters must be 
more nutritive in proportion aa they contain more al- 



Lx«i APPENDIX. 

bumen, sugar, and mudlage, and less nutridve in prd- 
portion^ as they contain other substances. 

Id comparing the composition of the soluble, pro- 
ducts afforded by different crops from the same^rass, 
I found, in all the trials I made^ the largest quantity 
of truly nutritive matter, in the crop cut when the seed 
was ripe, and least bitter extract and saline matter; 
most extract aiid saline matter in the autumnal crop; 
and most saccharine matter, in proportion to the other 
ingredients, in the crop cut at the time of flowering. 
I shall give one instance: 

100 parts of the soluble matter obtained from 
the Dactylis glomerata, cut in flower, afforded^ 
of sugar . - - - 18 parts 
of mucilage - - - 67 

of coloured extract, and saline matters, 
with some blatter renderedins(4uble by 
evaporation - - - 15 

100 parts of the soluble matter from the 
seed crop afforded 

Sugar - - . - - 9 parts * 
Mucilage - - - - 85 

Extract, insoluble, and ^line matter 6 
100 parts of soluble matter from the afber-math 
crop give 

of sugar .... 11 pgfts 

of mucilage - . - 59 

of extract, insoluble, and saline matters SO 
The greater proportion of leav^ in the spring, 
and particularly in the late autumnal crop, accounts 
for the difference in the quantity of extract; and the 



APPENDIX. Lxxm 

inferiority of the comparative quantity of sugar in the 
summer crop, probably depends upon the agency of 
Ughty which tends always in plants to convert sacchar- 
ine matter into mucilage or starch* 

Amongst the soluble matters afforded by the 
different grasses, that of the Elymus arenarius was re* 
. markable for the quantity of saccharine matter it con- 
tained, amounting to more than one third of its weight. 
The soluble matters from the different species of Fes- 
tuca, in general afford more bitter extractive matter 
than those from the different species of Poa. The 
nutritive matter from the seed crop of the Poa com- 
pressa was almost pure mucilage. The soluble mat- 
ter of the seed crop of Phleum pratense, or meadow 
cat's-tail, afforded more sugar than any of the Poa or 
Festuca species. 

The soluble parts of the seed crop of the Holcus 
mollis and Holcus lanatus contained no bitter extract, 
and consisted entirely of mucilage and sugar. Those 
of the Holcus odoratus afforded bitter extract, and a 
peculiar substance having an acrid taste, more soluble 
in alcohol than in water. , All the soluble extracts of 
those grasses that are most liked by cattle, have either 
a saline or subacid taste ; that of the Holcus lanatus, 
is similar in taste to gum arabic. Probably the Holcus 
lanatus which is so common a grass in meadows, might 
be made palatable to cattle by being sprinkled over 
with salt. 

I have found no differences in the nutritive pro- 
duce of the crops of the different grasses cut at the same 
season, which would render it possible to establish a 

K 



LxxiT APPENDIX. 

scale of their nutritive powers; but probably the sdiA^Ie' 
matters of the after-math crop are always from one sixth 
to one third less nutritive than those from the flowar 
or seed crop. In the after-math the extractive and 
saline matters are certainly usually in excess; biit the 
after«math hay mixed with summer hay^ particularly 
that in which the fox-tail and soft grasses are abun- 
dant, would procure ^n excellent food. 

Of the clovers, the soluble matter from the 
Dutch clover contains most mucilage, and most matter 
analogous to albumen: all the clovers contain more bit- 
ter extract and saline matter than the common propier 
grasses. When pure clover is to be. mixed as fodder^ 
it should be with summer hay, rather than after-math 
hay. 



INORX. 



Acidsj account of those found* 

• in yegetableS) 96. . 

Age oftreesyby what limited^ 
225. 

Alcohol, the&lt;Hy of its forma- 
tion, 119. 

Alburnum, uses of, 54, 225. 

Alkalies, method of ascertain- 
ing their presence in plants, 

.99, 

effects produced by, in 

. vegetation, 17. 

Animalsubstances, their com- 
position, &amp;c. 245. 

..^..^^.^decomposition of, 244. 

Atmosphere, nature and con- 
stitution of, 183. 

Animal matter, mode of ascer- 
taining its eustence in soils, 
148. 

Bark, its office and uses, 51, 

211. 
Barks, their relative value for 

tanning skin, 81. 
Blight in com, its cause, 236. 
Bread, its manufecture, theory 

of its prod action, 1 2 3. 
Burning, its use in improving 

soils, 309. 

Canker in trees, probable mode 
of curing, 234. 

Carbonic acid, a part of the at- 
mosphere, 186. 

-—necessary to vegetation, 
197. 



Cements, on those obtained 

from Mmestone, 290. 
Chemistry, its application to 

agriculture, 5. 
-^ importance in ag- 
ricultural pursuits, 23. 
Combustiblesi simple^ referred 

to, 40. 
Combustion, supporters of, 

mentioned 39. 
Courses of crops, partLculaer 

ones recommended, 319. ' 
Corn, its tillering, theory of 

this operation, 2Q7. 

Diseases of Plants, their causes 
discussed, 233. 

Earths, on those found ia 

plants, 101. 
Electricity, its influence on ve- 

getadon, 37. 
Elements chemical, of bodies, 

40. 

4awsof their com- 



binations&gt; 46. 
Excrements, use of as ma* 
nures, 261. 

Fairy rings, their causes, 319. 
Fallowing, theory of, 21,315. 
Fermentation, phaenomena of, 

118. 
Fly-turnip, plan for destroying 

or preventing, 195. 
Flowers, their parts andoffice&gt; 

61, 



INDEX. 



GeoIogXt referred to as teach- \ 
ing the nature of rocks, 170* 

drafting, general views on this 
process, 236. 

Grasses, on those fit for pas- 
ture, 322. 

Gravitation, its effects on 
plants, 29. 

Green crops rccomniended, 
317. 

Gjpsum, its use as a manure^ 
293. 

Heat, its effects on vegetables, 
34, 158. 

Husbandly drill) its advan- 
tages, 317. 

Ice, its anti-putrcscent pow- 
ers, 248. 

Irrigation, theory of its effects, 
313. 

Irritability, vegetable, its exis- 
tence doubted, 216. 

Land, causes of its fertility, 
179. 

barrenness. 1 80. 

Leaves, their functions, 58. 
Light, its effect on vegetation, 
197, 
'" Limestone, its nature and uses, 
19,281. 

action in the soil, 19. 
- mode of burning, 



293, 
magnesian, its peculiar 

properties, 31, 287. 
Lime,' mode of ascertaining 

the quantity in limestones 

and soils, 147. 

' ■ salts of, on the mode of 

detecting them in soils, 152, 

Hacures on their applications, 

339. 
&gt; " how taken into the ve- 

getabk system, 340. 



Manures, fermentation of, 6, 

269. 
in what state to We 

used, i.'69. 

animal, 261. 

mineral, 285. 

vegetable, 249. 

. saline, 260, 279. 



Malting, theory of the process 

of, 192. 
Matter, powei's of discussed, 

28. 
Metals, account of, 42. 
Metallic oxides, those found 

in plants. 104. 
Mildew, cause of, 236. 
Meat, method of preserving it, 

248. 

Oils, fixed, their nature and 
production, 92. 

Oxygene, its presence in the 
atmosphere, and uses, 188, 

— : necessary to germina- 
tion, 179,206. 

Paring and burning, theory of 

their operation, 309. 
Pasture, where advantageous, 

322. 
Plants, organization of, 50 j 1 23. 
Plants, parasitical, described as 

the cause of disease in coruj 

234. - ' ' 

Peat mosses, on their forntia- 

tion, 169. 

on their improtc- 



ment. 181. 

Putrefaction, methods of pre- 
venting, 248. 

Pith, nature of, 56. 

Plants, parts of, 50. 

Quicklime, injurious to soils, 

283-. 

Rocks, their number and ar- 
rangement, 171. 



INDEX. 



Rocks, those from wliich soiis 
are derived, or oh which 
they rest, 175. 

Sap, cause of its ascent discus* 

sed, 211. 
. ■ ' course of 8, 209. 

•— i— its composition discus- 
sed, 131. 

Salts their uses as manure, 
261,279. 

■ on such as are found in 

vegetables, 102. 
' ' " on those found in soils, 
account of, 139. 

Seeds, on those produced by 
crossing, 229. 

-i — -germination of, 189. 

their nature and uses, 63. 

Simple substances described, 
40. 

Soils, properties of, 157, 142. 
^— — composition of, 136, 154. 

— : — method of analysing, 140. 

— — * formation of, i66. 

••-^ their constituent parts, 
136. . 

— improvement of, 181. • 

their classification, 17B. 

Subsoils, varieties af, and their 
effects, 166. 

Soot, properties of as a ma- 
nure, 274, 

Sugar, mode of refining, 71. 

Tanning piinciple, its applica- 
tion to tannings 79. 

— — — *— quantity in differ- 
ent barks, 80. 

— — — artificial, 83. 

Temperature of soils discus- 
sed, 158. 

Trees, habits of, discussed, 
232. „ 

cause of their decay, 

225. 



Trees, age of, 226. 

Urine, its use as a manure, 
261. 

Vegetables, their chemical 
composition, 6T. 

•iinprovement of, by cul- 



tivation, 228. 

renovation of the at- 



mosphere, 203. 

the cavrses of their 



growth discussed, 220. 

Vegetable matter, mode of as- 
certaining its quantity in 
soils, 148. 

— • — ——its analysis, 107. 

decomposition of, 



described, 244. 

principles, their ar- 



rangement in plants, 123. 

Vegetable life, phenomena of, 
discussed, 219. 

matter, decomposition 

of, 242. 

Vegetation, influenced by gra- 
vitation, 29. 

influence of light in. 



208. 



302. 



•progress of, 195, 
• its effect on a soil. 



318. 

Veins or mines, tlieir situa- 
tions, 174. 

Water, absorption of by soils, 
I6i. 

its state in the atmos- 



phere, 186. 
Wheat, transplantation of, 208. 
crossing of, 228. 



Wines, theory of their forma^- 
idon, 119. 

quantity of spirits they 



contain, 121. 



INDEX TO THE APPENDIX. 



^gro9tit eafdna, brown bent, 

,— canma var, muticaj 

awnless brown bent, Ix. 

- famctUariny tufted-lea- 



ved bent, Ixi. 



lobed bent 



grass, Ixii. 

mcxicanoy 



mexican 



bent g^ass, IxUi. 
— , — mvea^ snowy bent 
grass, Ixvi. 

fiaiuatrisy March bent 



grass, Ivii. 

re/tensj cree(Hng root- 



ed bent, Ixlti. 

; — stricta^ upright bent 

gras8&gt; Ix. 

odi »/o/oni/era, fiorin creep- 



ing bent, Iviii. 

atoloni/era var. an^s^ 



tifolia, creeping bent narrow 
leaves, Ux. 

»■ vulgaris^ fine bent 



grass, Ivi. 

Mra aquaticay water hair grass, 
xlvii. 

*— aesfiitoM, turfy hair grass 

. xlviii. 

Jlexuoaay waved moun- 
tain hair grass, xxxv. 

AlofiecuriM agrosth^ slender 
fox-taii grass, Isdv. 

alfiinu9, alpine fox- 
tail grass, X. 

— .. firatenais^ meadow 

fox-tail grass,, viii. 

Anthoxanthuin cdoratufn^swtet 
scented vernal grass, v. 

Artindo colorata^ striped«leaved ; 
reed grass, xli. 

jivena elatiorf tall oat grass, 

XXV. 



— — — Jlqrveacensy yeliow oat 
grass, xlix. 

firatensisf meadow oat 



grass, xxxii. 

" ■■ fiubeaccTisy downy oat 
grass, X. 

Briza mediae quaking grass^ 

XX. 

Bromus aa/ier^ Ixiv. 

criatatu»j xlvii. 

diandru^ xxiii. 

'■ erectusy upright peren^ 
nial brome grass, xxvii. 

fntfri»:«) awn less brome 



grass, Iv, 

littoreusy 



sea sid^ 



brome grass, xxxvii. 

mulcifloruay many 



flowering bronxe grass, xxxii. 
. tectorufriy nodding pan- 



nicled brome grass, xxu. 

«rmV{«, barren brome 



grass, 1. 
Buniaa orientalUy xlii. 

Cynosurua c^ruleue^ blue moor 

grasjft, vii» 
Cynosurua criatatua/ crested 

dog's-tsdl grass, xxxi. 

eruc^formia^ linear 



spiked dog^s-^tail grass, lit. 

Dactylia cyncwuroidea, Ameri- 
can cock's foot grass, Ixv. 
glomeratUy round-head- 



ed cock's foot grass, xxi. 

Elymua crenariuay upright sea 
lyme grass, Iv. 

gemculatu^y pendulous 



sea lyme grassj Iv. 



INDEXi 



'Elymun mkericusi Sibeiian 
lyme grass, xiviii. 

Fe%tuca calamaria^ reed'-m&amp;e 

. fescue grass, scxxv. 
— - — camhrica^ xxii. 
— ■ duriusculai hard fescue 

grass^xxvi* 
•— T — dumetorum^ pubescent 

fescue grass, xL 
•■ — — elatiorytsW fescue grass 



xxxyui. 

— r— - Jittitans^ floating fes- 
cue grass, xxxix. 
■ , • glabra^ smooth fescue 
^rass, xvi. 

— glauca, ^laucares fes- 
cue grass, xv; 

• — — . hordiformiayhdsltY like 
fescue grass, xiii. , 

/o/wcea, spiked fescue 



grasS) xxxui. 

myuru8j wall fescue 



grass, xxxiv 

■: ovina^ sheeps' fescue 

grass, xix. 

• fiennatuj spiked fescue 



grass, Ixi 
: xfaratensisy meadow fes- 



cue grass, xxvm. 

0^ rwdra, , purple fescue 

grass^xviiL . 

HedyMarum onobrychisy sain- 
foin, xlv. 

Hordeum bulbosum^ bulbous 
barley grass, :itxxv, 

— - marinum^ wall barley 

grasS) xiviii. 

fimtenae^ meadow bar- 



ley grassi xlvi. 
Holctcs lanatusf meadow soft 

grass, xl. 

• — tnolHsf creeping soft 

, ^rasS) L 

— — — ^odoratu€y sweet-scent- 

«d soft grass, vi. 



Lclium fierenne^ perennial iyt 
grass, xxix. 

Medicago safiva^ hiceme, xlv. 
Melica cxnikay purple malic 

grass, Ixv. 
Milium effusum^ common mii- 

iet grass, xxviii. 

Mirdum strictly upright, mat 
grass, xxxix. 

Panicum dactylovy creeping 
panic grass, Iviii. 

sanguinalCf blood-co«&gt; 



loured panic grass, Ixii. 

viride^ green panic 

grass, Ixi. 
Phalaris cananicnsi^j common 

canary grass, Ixv. 
Phleum nodoaunij bulbous* 

stalked cat Vtail grass, lii.^ 
Jiratenacy meadow 

cat's-tail grass, liii, 
— Twan tninavy meadow 

cat's-tMl grass, van smaller, 

liv*. 
Poa alfiinay alpine . meadow 

grass, x» 
— ^— angusfyhliat narrow- 
leaved meadow grass xxiii.' 

aqmticay reed meadow 

grass, xlvii. 

c£ruleay v. p. firatense, 

short bluish meadow grass, 

xiii. , 
compr,e&amp;Bay flat-stalked 

meadow grass, xlvi. 

cristacuy crested mea- 



dqw grass, xxxiv. 
-r elatiory tall meadow 

grass, xxvi* , 

— — — fertiliBy fertile meadow 

grass, xli. 
-"r^vary b, fertile 

meadow grass, var. L li. 

maritima^ sea meadow 

grass, xxx. 



INDEX. 



P(ia firatenuat smooth- 
stalked meadow grass, xii. 

'■■ ■ trivialia^ roughish mea- 
dow grass, xiv. 

Potiriuni sangtdgorbay burnet; 
xxxvii. 

Stifta ficnnatai long armed fea- 
ther grass, Ixiii. 



TrifoHum macYorkizum^ long 
rooted clover, xxxviii. 

firatenacy broad lea- 



ved cultivated clover, xiii. 

.^^.._ refieTUy white clover, 
Ixiii. 

TrUicum refiena^ creeping root- 
ed wheat grass, Ixiv. 

' afi, wheat grass, 



XXXIX. 



FINIS. 



\ 



''■n 






"W,.. 



7^' 



h.. ... ^• 



r / 









V 



HOME USE 

CIRCULATION DEPARTMENT 

MAIN LIBRARY 

This book is doo on tlie last date stamped below, 
l-fflontli loans may be renewed by calling 642-3405. 
6-month loans may be recharged by bringing books 

to Circulation Desk. 

Renewals and recharges may be made 4 days prior 

to due date. 

all books are subject to recall 7 days 
jJfmlmLmecked out. 




m- 






i 



wdclrtiMR? 1983 




&gt;ia]r2T19fi3 ^ 



JUL21t984 ^J 



cut. JAN?l^ 



TjD21 — A-40m-12,*74 
(S2700L) 



Oeiwral Libranr 

Uiiwrtity sf California 

Barinlty 



u-ru«*i.:i^ 



Vr- 








I ..- '" &lt; 




•I" ■:"vifc:i\?§a5tf^fvis!«"'iiifi^^ 



</pre>        </div>
      </div>
    