

PEACE WITHOUT DISHONOR RWAR 
WITHOUT HOPE. &lt;* 



BEING 



A CALM AND DISPASSIONATE 

ENQUIRY 



INTO THE 



QUESTION OF THE CHESAPEAKE, 



AND THE 



NECESSITY AND EXPEDIENCY 






WAR. 

f&lt;. : *^ 



BY A YANKEE FARMER: 



JBOSTON: 



$ BY GREENOUGH AND STEBBIN& 
__ 



TO THE PUBLICK. 

IT cannot be expected, that a farmer should 
display the ornaments of a polished style The au 
thor has aimed only at perspicuity, impartiality, and 
truth. A boldness and freedom characteristic of 
the real, ancient New-England farmers, will be found 
strongly marked in every part of this little essay. 
The publick good is the author s only object true 
patriotism his only stimulus and the promotion of 
justice, and vindication of our national good faith, his 
only aim. 

In these times of party spirit he cannot hope 
to escape censure. His love of truth his display 
of our own errors his disposition to render justice 
to other nations will probably be attributed to the 
basest motives For such is too often the fashion of 
the day to abuse those whom we cannot answer. 

It would not surprise him, if he should even 
be called an Old Tory or a British hireling ; for he 
has often remarked that this is a species of argument 
which never fails of success, when all other reasoning 
or abuse is found ineffectual. But he shall despise 
the calumnies, and smile at the attacks of all the 
partizans of war, a few of whom, broken in fortune 
or reputation, can only hope to rebuild both on the 
ruins of their Country. 



TO THE FARMERS, MERCHANTS, AND 
MECHANICKS OF NEW-ENGLAND. 

FELLOW CITIZENS, 

IF at any time a citizen is juftified in making an ap 
peal to your underftanding, to your fober reafon If a cool and 
difpaffionate difplay of your danger, and your true interefts be at 
any period a duty, it furely becomes fuch, when you are threatened 
with a calamity by which your rights, liberties, property, and lives 
are to be expofed to the moft imminent danger. * We are told by 
the publick ncwfpa^crs wmch have ufually been the vehicles of the 
language of our adminiftration we are alfo informed, that many 
very influential men in and out of the adminiftration, concur with 
the publick papers in declaring, " that War will probably take 
place, and that it is inevitable, unlefs the government of Great- 
Britain mould make ample reparation for the attack on our frigate 
the Chefapeake." We alfo know, that all defcriptions of people in 
Great-Britain, however oppofed in political opinions, concurred in 
one fentiment, that Great-Britain never could, and never ought to 
yield the principle for which they believed that we contend, the 
right of enlifting and harbouring the deferters from their publick 
mips of war. It is rendered almoft certain, therefore, that Great - 
Britain, " while (he will explicitly difavow the claim to fearch our na 
tional Jkips of war, will neverthelefs contend, that we have no right 
to enlift her deferters, and protect them under our publick flag, 
but that if we do fo conduct, and refufe to deliver them on demand, 
me will retake them by force, on a common jurifdiftion, the High 

* See the language of the National Intelligencer, and of the Aurora, who 
eonfider war as inevitable, unlefs Great-Britain grants reparation for the at 
tack on the Chefapeake. Mr. Gallatin, Mr. Dearborn, and other publick offi- 
.cre are alledged to have declared that war is to be expected. 



6 

teas." If fuch faould be her ilnal decifion, as we have reafon to 
fear, fhe cannot punifn Admiral Berkeley without manifefl injuftice 
to him. 

If, therefore, our adminiftration are fincere in their determina 
tion to go to war, unlefs reparation be made for the attack on the 
Chefapeake, war feems, as they privately aflert, to be inevitable, 
unlefs the prudent and temperate deliberations of Congrefs, or the 
feafonable expreffion of publick opinion, mall check this deftruc- 
tive, and I may add, rq/h policy. War, at all times a publick ca 
lamity, becomes peculiarly alarming and deftru&ive to a nation, 
which has been for twenty-four years exclufively devoted to the 
arts of peace which has negle&ed every mean of national de 
fence which has devoted none of its revenues to a wife prep 
aration for war, to which all nations are occafionally expofed. 
It is peculiarly alarming to a nation, governed by an adminiftra 
tion not only deftitute o f military talents, but who have always 
avowed their oppofition to every thing lik^. military preparation, 
and who, while they have profefled to rely upon the moft frail of 
all fupports, the juftice of nations, and have therefore neglected 
every mean of preparation or defence, have moft unfortunately 
brought us to the verge of a moft awful precipice, where we have 
no alternative but either to plunge headlong to a certain and de- 
ftru&ive fate, or to retrace our fteps, as they fay, with ignominy 
and difgrace. If at a moment fo eventful, and in a pofition fo tre 
mendous, any friendly hand mould point out to us a path by which 
we might fave both our lives and our honour, one would naturally 
imagine, that it ought to excite our gratitude, rather than our ha 
tred to merit our thanks, rather than punifhment ; but other 
doctrines feem to prevail. The friends of the adminiftration, 
wounded at the true picture of our fituation, provoked that any 
man mould unanfwerably prove fame errors in our own conduct 
which diminim the juftice, and of courfe, the necefiity of a war, 
have advanced an idea novel in the hiftory of free nations, that *" it 
is treafon to queftion the juftice or expediency of a war," even be- 

* Extract: from the National Intelligencer in anfvver to Pacificus, a writer in 
the Boflon Centinel, againft the neceffity of War. This may be found in the 
Palladium, of September 29, in a piece entitled " Modern Liberty." 



tore the only conftituted authority authorized to decide this ques- 
tion, the Legiflature, had convened to deliberate upon it. 

The example of Great-Britain, whole tyrannical principles have 
fo long been the theme of popular harangue, one would think would 
be conclufive on this point and that whatever may be done with 
Impunity in that monarchical and fevere government, might certainly 
be permitted in our free and enlightened country. It is well known 
that all the publick writers in England, both before and after the de- 
cifion of Parliament, as to the queftion of war, undertake to arraign 
its juftice, its policy, its neceffity, its expedience, their own weaknefs, 
the means which they have of annoying the enemy, and to magnify 
the refources, power, and talents of their foes : nor can there be 
found, in a fingle inftance, an attempt to check this freedom of en 
quiry, either by profecution or threats. 

If this example, and the explicit lan&*ge of our own Conftitu- 
tions were not fufficient authority, we might cite an illuftrious man, 
whofe opinions a large part of the community would be unwil 
ling to queftion. Prefident Jefferfon lays it down as an eftablifhed 
axiom, " that the utmoft liberty of the prefs may be fafely indulg 
ed, in fuch a country as ours, and that errors in opinions can do no 
injury, where reafon is left free to combat them." 

If this doctrine be true in ordinary cafes, how much more ftrong 
its application to the important queftions of war and peace ? To 
what terrible confequences would the tyrannical doctrine of the 
National Intelligencer, above quoted, lead us ? A foreign nation 
makes an attack which is alledged to be caufe of war : Such an 
attack muft always involve a queftion of fact, and a queftion of law 
or right. If the opinion of any particular fet of men, even of dig 
nified officers, could be conclufive as to thefe two quejlions : If no pri 
vate citizen who might be in pofleffion of better evidence as to the 
faffs, or better authority as to the law, could divulge thefe facts, 
and make known his principles of law, it would follow that our 
Conftitution would be a dead letter ; the Legiflature would be 
come mere tools in the hands of the executive, and the nation might 
be involved in all the calamities of war at the pleafure of a fmgle* 
man. But the doctrine of the Government paper goes farther, you 
can not only not ditcufs the queftion of right, but you muft be filent 



as to the refources or ability of the nation to gain the object of the 
war. The opinion of the Executive is conclufive on this point alfo. 
The National Intelligencer tells the people of the United States, 
that Great-Britain has done an unprovoked aft, which juftifies a de 
claration of war on our part ; this point, it fays, it is treafon in any 
body to difprove. It adds, that this war would be expedient, be- 
caufe " we can bring Great-Britain to our feet. We can ruin her 
manufacturers ; we can ftarve her colonies ; we can take Canada 
and Nova-Scotia : while the injury will be trifling to ourfelves, as 
we can fupply ourfelves as plentifully with foreign goods by prizes 
we mall take, as we are now fupplied by commerce ; and our pro 
duce will meet as ready a fale in war as in peace." 

But any attempt to difprove thefe propofitions, efpecially if made 
with truth and ability, it declares to be the high offence of treafon, 
inafmuch as it tends to piov the opinions of great men erroneous, 
and to difcourage the people from undertaking a war, which thofe 
great men have refolved to wage. 

Braving all the dangers to which thofe writers are expofed, who 
venture to give light to the people, on this moft interefting fubject, 
and defpifing the threats of profecution for treafon, I mail attempt 
to develope the principles, to trace the hiftory, and to expofe the 
facts in relation to our alledged caufe of complaint againft Eng 
land ; to examine our own conduct, and the allegation fo often 
made, that the attack on our National flag, was wholly without 
provocation ; and laftly, to confider the expediency of war, in 
which will be involved, its objects the profpect of fuccefs or de 
feat ; our refources, and means of annoyance of our propofed ene 
my ; and the power, fituation, and interefts of the nation with 
whom we are about to contend ; and I mall conclude with confid- 
ering the effects of fuch a war, whether it prove fuccefsful or dif- 
graceful upon our general politicks, interior and exterior, and upon 
thofe great and permanent interefts, which ought never to be over 
looked when we are weighing minor queftions, or debating upon 
injuries and incidents which do not affect, or compromife our wel 
fare or exiftence. 

It will not be denied, that on the 24th day of June laft, when 
the attack was made on the Chefapeake, the relations between 



Great- Britain and the United States, were thofe of peace and 
amity. This is proved by the declarations of the Prefident to 
Congrefs, and the communications of our Minifters at the Court of 
Great-Britain, which were laid before that honourable body.* It 
is farther proved by the language of the Britifli Minifters in and out 
of Parliament, and by the circumftance of our Minifters extraordi- 
nary having figned a Treaty of Amity, which fettled all our differ 
ences, except the {ingle one, of the right of fearch of merchant 
mips for Britifh feamen, and on which point, it is faid from good 
authority, Great-Britain was ready and offered to yield the right 
of fearch except as it refpe&ed the narrow feas, or that portion 
of the fea which immediately furrounds Great-Britain, and where 
the danger of the lofs of their feamen, who are their only defence, 
was peculiarly imminent, 

It cannot be doubted, therefore, that peace, fo much to be de- 
fired by this country, would not have been interrupted, and that 
our profitable neutrality would have been continued, had it not 
been for the affair of the Chefapeake, which cannot be too much 
deplored. The queftion, therefore, is limited to the examination 
of the caufes of that unfortunate act, and of the confequences which 
ought to refult from it. 

As a great portion of the irritation which has been produced, 
excited, and encouraged, has proceeded from an ignorance of the 
fafts which preceded and accompanied that affair, it will be ufeful, 
before we enter into an inveftigation of the Law of Nations upon 
this fubjecl, to fettle, as far as poffible, ihefefafls. 

In the fummer of 1806, a French fquadron of line of battle 
(hips and frigates having met with a gale upon our coafts, a part of 
them took refuge in the Chefapeake, to melter themfelves from their 
enemies. This rendered it neceffary for Great-Britain to detach a 
fquadron to watch the motion of their enemies, and they accord 
ingly, as they lawfully might, took their ftation in Hampton 
Roads. By the Law of Nations, and the principles of an impar 
tial neutrality, we owed to both thefe fquadrons, equal protection. 
While we permitted the French to repair and refit their mips, re- 
See the Prefident s Communications to Congrefs, on this fubjedfc. 

B 



10 

claim their deferters, and to prepare to encounter their enemies, thV? 
laws of hofpitality equally demanded, that we mould allow equal 
privileges and indulgence to the Britifh fquadron, and more eipe- 
cially that we mould not countenance or encourage any meafures 
by which their means of encountering their enemy mould be, while 
they were under our protection, weakened. 

*On the 7th day of March laft, five Br ttt/b feamen belonging to 
the Britifh floop of war Halifax, Lord James Townfhend command 
er, while employed in weighing the anchor, rofe upon their officer, 
threatened to murder him, and made off with the boat to the Amer 
ican fhore, where they landed. Their names were, Richard Hu 
bert, fail-maker, born in Liverpool ; Henry Saunders, yeoman of 
the meets, born in Greenock ; Jenkin Ratford, born in London ; 
George North, captain of the main-top, born in Kinfale ; and 
William Hill, born in Philadelphia ; who entered in a Britifh port 
voluntarily, viz. in Antigua. 

The facts of their birth and citizenfhip were taken from the fhip s 
books, and were fworn to have been their own declarations at the 
time of their entry on board the fhip. 

The nature of this evidence is conclufive, and itsfazmefs isjtrongly 
marked by their not attempting to conceal the fact, that one of the 
iivewas born in Philadelphia. 

The very day after their landing, they were enlifted as part of 
the crew of the United States fhip Chefapeake. Perhaps this wa;; 
done ignorantly, though it is worthy of remark, that an Englifh- 
man, and efpecially a Scotchman and Irifhrnan, may be almojl as 
readily difcerned from an American, by thofe who are converfant 
with failors, as a black man can be diftinguifhed from a white one. 
It is certain, however, that thefe men could not have been pofleffcd 
of American protections. The very day after the enliflment, Lord 
James Townfhend demanded thefe men of Lieutenant Sinclair, the 
recruiting officer of the Chefapeake. The government of the 
United States had, as Captain Barren afferts, ordered the recruiting 
officers not to enlift Brlti/h deferters. Thefe deferters were not at 

* For thefe fa&s, fee the affidavits of the commander and officers of the 
Halifax, printed in the Trial of Jenkin Ratford, one of the mutineers, and re 
printed at Bofton. 



11 

this time on board the fhip,but at the rendezvous. It naturally oc 
curs to afk, why did not Lieutenant Sinclair, in obedience to the 
orders of the government, immediately difcharge thefe men ? If he 
had enlifted them ignorantly, the /pint, nay, the letter of his orders, 
obliged him to difcharge them as foon as he knew from the higheft 
authority, their commanding officer, that they were deferters from his 
fliip. Many honefl well meaning men have contended, that the 
word of a publlck officer ought to be refpe&ed. 

This is an excellent general principle, and the obfervance of it 
would tend very much to preferve the peace of nations : but we 
fliould not forget that this rule has a double application. It op 
erates as much in favour of the officers of other nations as of our 
own. When, therefore, Lord James Townfhend pledged his word 
to Lieutenant Sinclair, that the men whom he had enlifted, contrary 
to the orders of our government, were his failors, and that the 
Britifh government had a property in tkeir ferviccs, it was as much 
the duty of Lieutenant Sinclair to give full faith to the word of 
Captain Townfhend, as it was the duty of Captain Humphreys to 
give credit to the declaration of Captain Barren: it was ftill 
ilronger ; Lieutenant Sinclair did not, could not know that the 
declaration of Lord Townfhend was untrue ; but Captain Hum 
phreys did know that the declaration of Commodore Barron was 
7anfounded, and he turned out to be right in the fact. 

Lieutenant Sinclair made an evafive anfwer to the application of 
Captain Townfhend, and did not deliver or difcharge the men. An 
application was then made to Captain Decatur, who referred him 
back to Sinclair. The Britifh Conful applied to the Mayor of 
Norfolk for thefe men, but without effed and laftly, the Britifh 
Minifler applied to our government, who replied, that they had on 
a former occaficm ftated their reafons for riot complying with their 
requeft, and that moreover the men were Americans. 

Thefe men, who, with the exception of Hill, were all native Brlt- 
t/hfeamen, and had no claims from refidence or other caufes on our 
proteaion, were all continued on board the Chefapeake, while at 
Wafhington, under the eye of our government. No meafures ap 
pear to have been taken to afcertain their claims to our proteaion. 
No evidence down to this day has ever been publifhed in relation ta 



either of thefe men. We muft conclude, therefore, that they are, a 
the Britifh have proved under oath, all native Britiih feamen, except 
William Hill. It cannot be pretended that the government are in 
poffeffion of evidence in refpeft to them which it does not think it im 
portant to publiih, becaufe we know that they have been at great 
pains to collect and publifh the evidence with refpect to three other 
feameti) whofe cafe has no connection with the caufe of the attack 
on the Chefapeake. 

Thefe feamen were among the crew of the Chefapeake at the pe 
riod of the faid four leveral, folemn demands, and continued on 
board till the fliip failed down the river, when four of them deferted. 
The fifth, Jenkin Ratford, remained on board till after the laft de 
mand made by Captain Humphreys, and to which demand Captain 
Barron replied, that " he knew of no fuch men as Captain Hum 
phreys defcribed." After the action, Ratford was found hid in 
the coal hole of the Chefapcako, and has fmce been tried, found 
guilty of mutiny, and executed. He confeifed himfelf to be a na 
tive of London, that he had entered his Britannick Majefty s fer- 
vice voluntarily ; that he was perfuaded to enter on board the 
Chefapeake, in order to protect himfelf from the fearch of his offi 
cers, and that on his entering, he was afked if he had not a fecond 
name ; that he thereupon entered by the name of Wilfon. As foon 
as thefe repeated demands and refufals were known to the com 
mander in chief, Admiral Berkeley, finding, as he alledges, that the 
feamen of the Britifh fleet were deferting every day, he iffued the 
order referred to in the note below,* in fubftance directing the offi 
cers of his Majefty s mips under his command, to require permif- 
iion of the Captain of the Chefapeake to fearch that fhip, on the 
high feas, for the deferters referred to in faid order, and to proceed 
and fearch for the fame, at the fame time offering a like and recip 
rocal permiffion to the American officers. Captain Humphreys, of 
the Leopard, was entrufted with the execution of this order, and 
the manner in which he executed it, is too well known to need rep- 
ctition. Two or three remarks, however, may not be amifs, as an 
opportunity will not again occur in the courfe of the propofed dif- 

Advrnral Berkeley s order, printed in the Trial of Jenkin Ratford. 



13 

cuflion : 1ft, That another formal demand was made of their own 
feamen, by the Britifh officers, before the laft alternative was re- 
forted to ; that this demand was couched in terms fo polite and 
refpe&ful, that it would not have been beneath the dignity of Cap 
tain Barren to have met it with equal politenefs, and to have ftated 
the cafe truly to Captain Humphreys, that three of the men de 
manded had efcaped, and that the fourth he was ready to deliver ; 
this would probably have finifhed this unhappy affair. 2d, That 
nothing in the anfwer of Captain Barron, is a fufficient excufe for 
his not delivering up Jenkin Ratford, one of the mutineers, then 
on board the Chefapeake. 

The reafon affigned to the Britifh officer, that he was ordered 
not to fuffer his crew to be muftered, by any but his own officers, 
does not apply There was no neceffity of mujlering them at all. 
At that time it was well known, it muji have been known on board 
the Chefapeake, who the men demanded were. And he declares 
that he had pofitive orders from the Govefnment not to enlift 
deferters, which amounted to an order to deliver them, if he had 
enlifted them ignorantly. 

He might therefore have obeyed both thefe orders of the Govern 
ment, and have preferved the honour of our flag ; and what is more, 
the honour, faith, and reputation of our officers. By fending on 
board the Britifh fhip, Jenkin Ratford, of London, a mutineer, and 
deferter, and accompanying it with a declaration on his honour, 
that the others had deferted from the Chefapeake, he would have 
fatisfied Capt. Humphreys, would have fubftantially obeyed the 
order of our Government not to enlift deferters, and have prevent 
ed the unhappy cataftrophe. 

3dly. The meannefs of many of our publick papers and refolu- 
tions, in representing this attack as cowardly, and affaffin-like, can* 
n,ot be too much condemned by every candid and ingenuous mind- 

The Leopard was a 50 gun fhip, and carried a fmaller number 
of men than the Chefapeake ; the Chefapeake was a large 44, 
which our officers have often declared equal to a Britifh 64. So 
far from the Britifh officers knowing, that the Chefapeake was un 
prepared, it turns out by the charges of our own officers againft 
Barron, that me was fully prepared. Indeed the Britifh officers 



14 

are faid to have avowed to ours, before fhe failed, that they were, 
mflru&ed to obtain thefe men by force if they were not given 
up. Our own officer after having refolved to defend his fhip, 
ought to have nailed his flag to the maft, and to have funk his 
adverfary, or to have gone down himfelf with his flag undifhon- 
oured. It is the difgrace which this conduct feems to fix 
upon us, which makes us feel fo pungently. 

Had Capt. Barron vindicated our national honour as he ought 
to have done, we mould have feen this affair in a very different 
light. We mould have acknowledged that we were wrong in the 
principle of enltfting their feamen, but we might have added, that no 
nation mall infult our flag with impunity : we need not indeed 
have faid this ; the faft would fpeak a plainer language. 

After the colours of the United States fhip had been ftruck, 
the Britifh officers proceeded to fearch for their deferters. 

The refult of this fearch was this : they found Jenkin Rat- 
ford, one of the feamen demanded and John Strachan, Daniel 
Martin, and William Ware, three other deferters, whom they did 
not fufpedl had been enlifted ; who were not contained in the or 
der of Admiral Berkeley, but who are admitted by our Govern 
ment to have been deferters from the Britifh frigate Melampus. 
Thefe men were no more the caufe of the attack, than if the 
Britifh had found an anchor on board, which had been^o/^ from 
their fhip, but which they could never expeEl to find on board one 
of our publick mips. They alfo found twelve other Britifh fea 
men, who not being deferters, they fuffered to remain. It 
turned out therefore, that there were on board the Chefapeake, 
when fhe was at Wafnington, five Britifh deferters from the Hali 
fax, three deferters from the Melampus, and twelve other Britifh 
feamen. 

The Britifh officers took away the Jingle feaman whom they 
found of thofe demanded, and the three other deferters from the 
Melampus, whom they were not ordered to take, becaufe they were 
not known to have been on board. 

The aftonifhment and indignation of every American was excited 
foon after, by the Prefident s declaration, " that the feamen de 
manded had been previoufly afcertained to be native citizens of the 



15 

United States." That the Britifh Admiral fliould have the hardi 
hood to demand, and to order the retaking by force, native citizens 
of America, was fo incredible in itfelf, that fome writers ventured 
to doubt it. This drew out the evidence on both fides, and it 
turns out mojl unequivocally, that the Prefident was grofsly mifin- 
formed. No doubt thefe high officers muft rely upon the veracity 
and accuracy of inferior agents. Unhappily the fource of the 
Prefident s information was impure ; and a publick, folemn, nation 
al declaration, by the negligence or falfehood of fome fubaltern offi 
cer, turns out to be unfupported by faffs. 

The cafe was this : The Proclamation ftates, that the aft of 
the Britifh officers was fo much the more unpardonable, " as it 
had been previoufly afcertained that the feamen demanded, were 
native citizens of the United States." 

The ejence of the criminality confifted in demanding native citi 
zens of the United States, and in attacking a fhip of war for not 
delivering fuch citizens. Now it turns out that all the feamen de 
manded, were native Britifh feamen, and therefore, all this exagger 
ated point of criminality falls to the ground. 

When the publick called upon the Government for the evidence 
of the citizenfhip of thefe deferters, the Prefident, it is prefumed, 
called on the inferior officers, on whose report he had made the 
declaration ; and they, in order to cover their errors, inftead of fur- 
nifhing the evidence of the citizenfhip of the deferters from the 
Halifax, who were demanded, gave the documents in relation to the 
deferters from the Melampus, who were not demanded, but who 
being found among the crew of the Chefapeake, were taken out. 
Thefe documents were publifhed and applied to fupport the pro 
clamation, and to prove that the Britifh officers made an attack 
for the recovery of native Americans. This is now known to be 
falfe. For an explication of this point, fee the notes.* 

* Seamen who deferted from the Halifax, Lord James Townfhend, and who 
were fo often demanded, and for whom the attack on the Chefapeake was made, 

viz. Richard Hubert, of Liverpool,") demanded, but efcaped from the Chefa- 
Henry Saunders, of Greenock, I do. do. [peake, 

Jenkin Ratford, of London, &gt; demanded and taken. 
George North, of Kinfale, I demanded, but efcaped from the Chefa- 

William Hill, of Philadelphia, j do. do. [peake, 

[See the- continuation of tins note in tie next fage.^ 



16 

In fact no evidence has yet been, and no evidence eve? can be 
adduced to prove that the feamen demanded, and whofe protection 
by us was ihefole caufe of attack, were Americans ; becaufe they 
were and have been proved by the higheft evidence to be native 
Brittft) fcamen* 

But fince the cafe of the men taken from the Melampus, har 
been blended with that of the others, let us fee how the facts turn 
out as to them. 

Inftead of fupporting the proclamation, as to the fact of their 
having been afcertained to be native citizens, it turns out, that Capt, 
Barron had fimply taken the Jlory of the culprits : It turns out 
further, that one of them was born at Bonaire, in Spanifh Amer 
ica, and was not even a citizen of the United States ; that the two 
others were black men, born (laves in Maryland, and ftrictly there 
fore, not native citizens, though natives. That they all told Capt. 
Barron a falfehood, in Hating that they had been impreffed on 
board the Melampus, becaufe they referred to their former mafter, 
Capt. Crafts, who ftates, that he fufpected and charged them with 
theft in England, that they therefore abfconded, and in order to 
protect themfelves, entered on board the Melampus voluntarily. 
Capt. Crafts, pleafed, probably, with getting rid of fuch rafcals, 
never demanded them either of the Captain of the Melampus, or of 
the Britifh Government, after they were enlifted, and they remain 
ed on board that frigate till they again deferted from her in our 
country. 

Some honeft men doubt, whether the Britifh officers had a right 
to enlift thefe men ; and if they had, whether they could reclaim 
them from us, after defertion. 

Protefting that it has no connexion with the affair of the Chefa- 
peake, they not being the men demanded, I would obferve, that it is 
not competent for our Government to deny the right of our citi 
zens to enter into foreign fervice, in a foreign jurifdiction, becaufe 
1ft. The prefent adminiftration and all the party now in power iw 



Seamen deferted from the Melampus, 

John Strachan, of Maryland, 1 ^ not demanded, but taken. 
William Ware, of Maryland, C do. do. 

Daniel Martin, of Bonaire, J do. do&gt; 



17 

the United States, oppofed the plan of the Wamington adminiftra- 
tion to prohibit fuch conduct, and they contended that a citizen in 
time of peace, might expatiate himfelf at pleafure. The famous 
example of Commodore Barney muft be in every one s recollection. 

2dly. The Act of Congrefs prohibiting our citizens from enter 
ing into foreign fervice within our own territory is a ftrong, and al- 
moft irrefiftible implication that they may do it in other countries. 

3dly. The late anfwer of our Government to the Britifh Min- 
ifter, that we cannot ftop to enquire of what country a man is a 
fubject, when he offers himfelf to enlift as a foldier or failor, is a 
perfect anfwer to us upon that fubject. And our practice from the 
commencement of our Government to this day, of inviting, and 
naturalizing the citizens of all countries, even of nations at war, 
ought to make us perfectly filent on this topick. 

4thly. If a man has a right to enlift in a foreign country, and 
does fo enlift, figns the articles of war, receives the bounty and 
wages, he becomes to all intents and purpofes a fubject of his 
newly adopted country, and all our claims over him, and his to our 
protection abfolutely ceafe. To illuftrate this cafe, let us fuppofe 
that Capt. Barney had delivered up the frigate which he command 
ed, to the Britim in the Chefapeake, and had landed, and the 
French Government had demanded the delivery of him for the 
purpofe of punifliment, and had threatened us with war, in cafe of 
refufal, is there any doubt that we mould have delivered him up ? 
And mould we not be juftly deemed accomplices of his crime, if 
we mould refufe ? 

Now the cafe of thefe two black men, is precifely the fame with 
that of Capt. BarntTy. Mr. Jefferfon calls them citizens of the 
United States ; if fo, their right of expatriation is as great as that of 
Capt. Barney, or of Mr. Jefferfon ; and when once legally entered 
into foreign fervice, if they defert, they are as much reclaimable as 
either of the others would be. 

I have briefly confidered the cafe of thefe men belonging to the 
Melampus, becaufe fome people have or pretend to have, fcruples 
en this fubject ; but I repeat, that the cafe of thefe men forms no 
part of the real queftion. 
C 



18 

It will conilitutc no part of the difcufiion between the two 
countries ; it does not affedt the merit or demerit of Admiral 
Berkeley : He ordered his officers to take Richard Hubert, Jen- 
kin Ratford, and George North, thefe were all native Englifhmen. 
His officers could find but one of thofe men, but they found three 
others, whom they had no orders to take, but who were deferters. 
If they were miftaken in thefe three laft men, (which they were 
not) and had no right to take them, it does not render the order 
for taking the real Englifhmen, and the a&ual execution of it by 
feizing one of them lefs correct. My brother farmers, will under- 
ftand this better, if I put a cafe jujl Me it. A Sheriff has a war 
rant to fearch a neighbour s barn for two ftolen horfes, fufpe&ed 
to be concealed there : He enters, and finds one of thejlolen horfes, 
and he alfo takes a cow, which he thinks was ftolen from another 
neighbour. Suppofe it mould turn out that he mould be wrong 
as to the cow ; does it render the warrant for the horfe illegal, 
when he really found one of the ftolen horfes concealed there ? 

Thus, then I have confidered, and ftated all the fads as yet 
afcertained, as to the caufe of this attack ; and it appears, that four 
native Britljh feamen and deferters, who deferted in our territory, 
Were contrary to orders enlifted and entered in our (hip Chefapeake ; 
that they were demanded of the inferiour officers, and laftly of the 
Government, and were not delivered ; that a forcible attack was 
made to recover thefe men ; and though three of them had efcaped, 
one was actually found concealed on board of our (hip j and that 
twenty Britlflj failors were found to have been entered on board of 
her. 

I mail now proceed to examine the principles of the Law of 
Nations on this subjeft, and whether we were in good faith obliged 
to deliver up thefe deferters ? 

The firft queftion which prefents itfelf on this point is, how far 
the fubje&s of a nation in time of war, have a right to expatriate 
themfelves, or to enlift in foreign fervice, even in ordinary cafes, 
where they have not entered into fpecial engagements with their 
Sovereign ? On this point all the writers on the Law of Nations, 
moil of whom are on the fide of freedom, and the privileges of the 
citizen, agree, that fubjefts not in publick employ, cannot expa- 



19 

triate themfelves while their nation is at war. Burlamaqui, Vattel, 
Grotius, and Puffendorf, all hold the fame opinions, but as it would 
exceed the limits of this eflay, to quote the opinions of all of them 
at large, I mail confine myfelf to thofe of Grotius, a Dutch writer, 
whofe excellent treatife on the rights of War and Peace, has been 
confidered a flandard work upon this fubject. 

In the XXIVth fection of his Vth chapter, he lays it down as a 
general principle, that the fubjects of any nation may change their 
country at pleafure, to which general rule, he makes the following 
exceptions : " And yet herein alfo, we are to fubmit to natural 
equity, that it mould not be lawful when the publick was damnified 
by it. For as Proculus obferves, always not that which is 
profitable to fame one of the fociety is ufually to be obferved, but 
what is expedient for the whole. 

" But it is expedient for the whole, that in cafe any great debt 
be contracted, no citizen flmuld forfake the city, until he have 
firfl paid his proportion of it, Alfo, if upon confidence of the number 
of their citizens, they have begun a &lt;war, but efpecially if they are 
in danger to be bejieged, no citizen ought to forfake it, till he have 
firfl provided a perfon as able as himfelf to defend the Common 
wealth." 

In this point all the writers on the Law of Nations, are agreed, 
and if they had been filent, the dictates of common fenfe and natur 
al equity, and the firfl principles of the focial compact, would have 
decided the queftion. 

In the cafe of Great-Britain, all the reafoning of Grotius, applies 
to the contefl in which me is now engaged. 

It will not be denied that me has undertaken this war " in con 
fidence of the number, and ability of her fubjects ;" nor will it be 
queflioned, " that fne is not only in danger, but is actually threat 
ened with being befieged" by the mofl formidable power which the 
world has ever feen. We cannot therefore, refift the conclufion 
of Grotius, that no private citizen of Great-Britain has a right to 
forfake his country, without providing a perfon equally able to de 
fend the Commonwealth. 

If this doctrine is true with refpect to private citizens,, who are 
only bound by a tacit and implied contract, how much flronger is 



the principle when applied to perfons in publick employ, bound by 
an exprefs agreement, obliged by their having received the publick 
money for their fervices, and on whofe fidelity the exiftence of the 
nation more immediately depends ? 

All civilized nations have united in confidering defertion from 
publick fervice, one of the moil heinous offences. 

In America, France, and Great-Britain, it has been often punifh- 
ed with death, 

If it be therefore the higheft crime, and one of the greateft inju 
ries which a fubject can do to his country to defert its fervice, can 
it be neceffary to prove that it is unlawful for a friendly nation to 
receive, encourage, enlift, and defend by force fuch deferters ? 

In fupport of the monftrous opinion, that it is not unlawful, 
fome people have remarked, that by the modern ufages of nations, 
criminals who have committed offences lefs than murder and forgery t 
are by the courtefy of fuch nations, not demanded when they efcape 
out of their own country into a foreign one. 

But let me afk, why are murderers and forgers excepted from 
the general rule ? Is it not alledged to be, becaufe juftice requires 
that fuch heinous criminals mould not efcape punimment ? Becaufe 
the peace of the nation, whofe laws have been violated, requires 
that an example fhould be made of fuch great offenders ? 

And fuppofe that it mould be more important to a nation to re 
quire the delivery of her military deferters, than of the criminals 
abovementioned, would (he not have a right to require them ? 

On the queftions of the Colonial trade and of the impreffment 
of feamen from our merchant mips, our Secretary of State founds 
his chief argument upon the filence of the writers of the Laws of 
Nations on thofe fubje&s. And cannot the argument be retorted 
with equal force on this point ? Not a dictum can be produced from 
any writer to prove that neutral or friendly nations have a right to 
protect the deferters from the fervice of belligerents. And yet all 
thefe writers difcufs the queftion how far nations can harbour the 
criminals who efcape from other nations ; and if any fuch right as 
the one for which fome Americans contend, was conceived to 
exift, is it poflible that fome one of thefe numerous writers would 
not have mentioned it ? 



21 

In fa& the acknowledged ufage of all civilized neutral nations, 
in reftoring fuch deferters from the armies or fhips of nations at 
war, the abfolute neceffity of fuch an ufage to the exiftence of 
nations, perfectly account for this filence. A fa& which took 
place the laft year, in our own country, proves that the French 
officers view it in this light. Admiral Willaumez met with an 
American brig at fea ; he found in her four deferters, who had 
efcaped from the Valeureufe frigate. Not content with taking 
them out, he writes a letter* in a moft indignant ftrain, to his Minifter 
at our Court, and defires him to demand fatisfaction for this mifcon- 
du& ; not for the mifconduft of one of our publick officers, in 
enlifting his men, and refufing to deliver them when demanded, but 
for the mifconduft of a private citizen, in daring to employ men, 
who had been once in the fervice of his Imperial Majejty. This 
cafe, though an extravagant one, and partaking of the character of 
French domination, is ftrong evidence of the general underftanding 
of military men, that u deferters from publick fervice cannot be 
harboured." 

Such feems to have been the impreffion of our own Government, 



* "To Gen. TURREAU, French Ambaflador at Wafhington. 

" MY LORD, 

" You have learnt by the arrival of fome of my fcattered fhips in America^ 
the unfortunate event by which they were feparated from me." [Here Admi 
ral Willaumez gives the detail of the tempeft.] That at this date the Foud- 
royant was nearly new mafted, and proceeds to enforce to General Turrreau, 
how neceflary it was that the {hips which had put into the American ports in 
diftrefs, fhould haften to join him at the Havana, where his fquadron if colledt- 
ed and united to the Spanifh. force at that place, would in effect oppofe a 
ftrong fquadron, and double to that of the Englifh, who at Jamaica, have only 
two line of battle fhips. Admiral Willameuz further fays, that he purpofed 
going to Vera Cruz, agreeably to the project of the government of the Spanifh 
colony of Havana, to bring fome millions of dollars, which he ftates will be 
more apropos, as the French Emperor had a right to the payment of one mill 
ion of dollars of which the fcarcity was very great at the ifland of Cuba. Ad 
miral Willaumez then continues, " I have juft apprehended four feamen, defert 
ers from the Valeureufe frigate, which I found on board an American brig, 
where they had engaged at feventeen dollars per month. Now, fir, if you can 
fucceed in making the American government pay down a compenfation for 
this mifcondudl, in feducing thus our feamen, you will punifli it by making it 
fmart in that point in which it feels moft, viz. its avarice in money, and with 
fo much the more juftice, thofe people (meaning the American merchants) have 
for three years paft been continually injuring our marine by feducing our beft 
feamen from us. (Signed) 

JLe C. Ad. P. WILLAUMEZ, 
Onboard the Foudroyant, Havana, 25th October, 1806." 



22 

and its orders on this fubjeft are conclulive as againft ourielves. It 
directed its officers not to enlift deferters from the Britl/h Jhlps ; if 
this order had been iffued and executed in good faith, we fhould have 
been fully acquitted, even if deferters had been unintentionally en 
tered and found on board, and the whole weight of unprovoked hof- 
li/ity, with which Great-Britain has been charged, would have reft- 
ed upon her officers. But unhappily for us, after admitting the 
Law of Nations to be as we have ftated, by iffuing the abovemen- 
tioned order, our fubfequent conduct evinces either a want of fincer- 
ity in iffuing that order, or a fubfequent change in the policy which 
dictated it. If it had been made with good faith, why was not a 
regular formal enquiry made upon Mr. Erfkine s demand ? Why 
were not the Britifh officers invited to point out the men, and ex 
hibit the evidence of their claim to them ? Was not the demand of 
a publick Minifter fufficiently folemn, and did it not require fome 
notice and refpect ? Could it be imagined that our officers could 
know the deferters by intuition ? or was it prefumed that they knew 
them to be on board, in dlrecl breach of the orders aforefaid, not 
to enlift them ? 

Will it be contended, that they were ignorant who they were, 
and that they relied upon the culprits coming forth of their own 
accord, out of a crew of 4&lt;00 men, and faying " Ecce homines, we 
deferve a halter ?" 

It is apparent to every fair and candid man, that if the order 
was iffued in good faith, when the Britifh officers gave notice that 
five of their feamen were enlifted, there was but one plain, upright 
cour f e to afk the Britifh officers to point out the men. 

But would you deliver up men upon the mere declaration of 
Britifh officers ? ! ! Do not be alarmed, I would not ; but I 
would inftitute an official enquiry, in which the Britifh officers as 
profecutors, ftould be permitted to exhibit their proofs of their 
claim to the men charged ; and the alledged deferters fhould have 
ample time, and the aid of Government to fubftantiate their claims 
to our protection. 

This was the courfe of nature, of truth, of good faith, of national 
juftice. It was the way to avoid mifunderflanding, to fave the 
lives of our citizens, which have been deftroyed in confequence of 



23 



the neglect of this courfe, to avoid War, with which we are threat 
ened. 

There is nothing in this procedure derogatory to our national 
honour. It was referving the jurif diction and trial of the queftion 
to ourfehes. It would have given perfect fatisfaction to all par 
ties, and would have heightened the confidence of all nations in our 
good faith. 

It was peculiarly proper in this cafe, becaufe the alledged defer- 
tion had taken place in our own territory, while the {hips of a 
friendly power were under our protection. We were therefore 
bound to know, or at leaft to enquire into the facts, and to render 
juftice. A re/peff to our territorial rights, alone prevented the Brit- 
ifh from retaking their criminals by frefli purfuit. A refpect to 
ourfelves, and to the obligations of an impartial neutrality, required 
that we mould render them that juftice which their refpeft for us pre 
vented them from doing for themfelves. 

But why was not this natural and fair courfe of procedure adopt 
ed ? The hiftory of the cafe gives the anfwer. Upon fuch an in- 
veftigation and enquiry, the deferters from the Halifax would have 
all turned out to be native Britim fubjects ; of courfe there could 
have been no apology for not reflating them. On the other hand, 
to reftore to thofe enemies of the human race, as I have heard fome 
perfons call them (hojles humani generis) the very means by which 
they were to annoy the fleet of our illuftrious friend, the Emperor 
of the Weft, and this in the very face of his auguft reprefentathe, 
would have been to hazard the difpleafure of our firmeft, fafteft 
friend. In other words, deep rooted, and cultivated antipathy to 
Great-Britain, and an habitual dread, as well as fincere partiality to 
France, forbad the adoption of any meafures, which, by conciliating 
the former, would tend to render the latter more jealous of us. 

But fome honeft, and a few able and refpectable men, who go 
along with us in our opinions to this point, who agree, that the 
practice of enlifting Britim deferters is extremely wrong, and a vi 
olation of neutrality, and even in the opinion, that our own conduct 
in this affair might juftify hoftilities from the government of Great- 
Britain, ftill contend that Berkeley had no fuch right, that it be 
longed only to his government to wage war. 



0* 

To this opinion two anfwers may be given, both of which arc 
perfectly fatisfactory : 1ft, That although this doctrine may be 
generally true, and it certainly very much conduces to the peace of 
nations to maintain it, yet it is an affair altogether between the 
fubaltern officer and his government. Surely no man will be fo mad 
as to contend, that Admiral Berkeley s having done this act with 
out the authority of his government, is a greater caufe of complaint, 
a greater infult, or a more juftifiable ground of hoftility, than if 
the Britifh government had ordered it. If, therefore, that govern 
ment, after reviewing all the conduct of that officer, and the cir- 
cumftances of provocation, (hall approve the fteps he took, it will 
(land precifely on the fame footing, as if Mr. Erfkine had reported 
our refufal to deliver the deferters to his government, and that gov 
ernment had iffued an order to re-feize the men by force. 

2dly, It is a great miftake to fay, that a fubaltern officer can in 
no cafe whatever, of his own authority, make reprifals or commit 
an aft of hoftility. It is true that military men are confidered in 
a great meafure as machines, in the hands of their fuperiors ; they 
are bound to obey orders, and can exercife their difcretion fo far 
only as is necejjary to the execution of thofe orders. But if in the 
courfe of fuch duty, an unexpected incident takes place, which 
goes to defeat the object of their orders, that fame military ftrict- 
nefs requires that they mould remove fuch obftacle if practicable. 
An officer is fent, as was the commander of the Britifh fleet in 
Hampton roads, to watch and prevent the efcape of an enemy 
hi lands the guns of one of his mips to careen her. A neutral fhip 
of war, directly before his eyes, lands and puts the guns on board, 
and proceeds to fea will any man be fo unreafonable as to contend, 
that the Britifh officer cannot purfue fuch fhip, demand his guns, 
and on refufal, compel by force the furrender of them ? Shall he 
fubmit to fee the object of his expedition defeated, and report to 
his government that he conceived it to be more proper that the 
guns fhould be diplomatically demanded ? 

But, fay fome other objettors, true, in extreme cafes, the law of 
felf-prefervation will juftify an inferior officer in making forcible re 
prifals, but was the cafe of Admiral Berkeley fuch an one ? My an- 
fwer is, that every officer fo entrufted, muft judge for himfelf. He 



25 

takes his honour and life in one hand, and his fword in the othef. 
If his government juftifies him, he efcapes if me condemns, befalls. 

But that Admiral Berkeley had reafon to apprehend a total de- 
ftruction of the Britim fquadron on our coafls, the following facts 
feem to eftablifh : 1ft, It is alledged that defertion had become fo 
frequent that the Britimfquadron had loft nearly an hundred men, 
between March and June, and great rewards had been offered at 
Halifax, by the Province, for the apprehenfion of thefe deferters. 
2dly, Although Captain Barren gave fuch wretched protection to 
the deluded men who entered on board his (hip, ftill the example 
was fo contagious, that immediately after three men deferted, landed 
near Hampton, and were fecreted by our inhabitants. Nineteen 
Britifli feamen rofe upon a Britim cutter, and brought her into the 
Delaware, where they landed, were protected, and have not been 
delivered up ; on the contrary, our newfpapers congratulated " thefe 
much injured and high fpirtted men," on their fuccefs. ,* Six men ran 
away with a boat of the Columbine, at New- York and fix more 
landed at New- York, from the Jafon, and are all concealed in our 
country : and laftly, fixty-five failors rofe upon their officers, in 
the Jafon, with the intent of efcaping to our friendly Jh ores and 
they would have fucceeded, had it not been for the timely and 
fpirited interference of their officers. This frigate has fmce arrived 
at Halifax, with fifty of her crew in irons, fo that her cruife againft 
her lawful enemy was defeated. Can any one deny, after thefe ex 
amples, that the cafe was fo extreme as to juftify an officer in re- 
forting to force, after every other means had failed ? 

But it muft not be forgotten that the true, and indeed only 
real queftion between the two nations is, whether the facts which 
preceded the attack on the Chefapeake, amounted to fuch a provo 
cation, that if reported to the government of Great -Britain, that 
government would have been authorized to make reprifals, or even 
to declare war againft us ? Let any man confult the writers on 
the Law of Nations, or his own feelings of moral propriety, and 
decide. This is certain, that as a belligerent nation, we mould 
be the la/I to fubmit to a principle, which in its operation 
would completely defeat the beft concerted military enterprifes. 
And "Me mould think that our moderation had been fufficiently 
D 



manifefled, if, after three feveral inferior demands, our publick mm - 
ifters had made a formal demand of another fovereign, and been re- 
fitfed redrefs. 

But admit, if it be pofliblej that all the reafoning we have cited is 
wrong, and that we have good caufe of war againft Great-Britain, 
does it follow, that war is neceffarily to be undertaken ? Are there 
no cafes in which war, though juftifiable, may be avoided, without 
dishonour ? Let us Men to Grotius on that point : " It is better 
fometimes to remit our own. right, than to engage in a doubtful war 
for it," " efpecially if undertaken to exaft puni/hment" which is 
precifely the cafe in this inftance. We have no principle, no inter- 
eft, no motive for war, but to exaff puni/hment in a doubtful cafe. 
Again fays Grotius, " No prudent man will adventure in fuch an 
enterprise, where good fuccefs fliall bring little profit, but where 
the leaft mifcarriage may prove fatal." " Grant that our griev 
ances are unjuft, and unworthy to be borne, yet it will not follow, 
that we ought, by ftriving againft them, to make our condition 
worfe." Apply it to our prefent cafe. 

If vizfucceed in the war, we gain the right to cover a few Britifli 
deferters, whom we do not want, and which, as Grotius fays, will 
bring little profit ; but we hazard our lives, our liberties, our gov 
ernment we do not hazard our property ; that, together with 
our neutral advantages, will inevitably go to enrich our enemy. But 
fome people fay, we do not go to war for Briti/h deferters tliofe 
we do not want we are better without them we go to war to 
make Great-Britain give up the right of fearch of omjhips of war. 

This is one of thofe ERRORS which certain artful men have pur- 
pofely interwoven with the cafe of the Chefapeake, with which it 
has no connexion. Great-Britain does not claim this right me will- 
renounce it by treaty me at this moment absolutely difclaims it.* 
The cafe of the Chefapeake was not grounded upon it ; it was a 
reprifal for a wrong done by us ; for a wrong for which remedy 
had been refufed ; and it is, by the Law of Nations, the only rem 
edy fh or t of war. 

* It is not improbable that Admiral Berkeley will be recalled to afcertaiu 
fatisfaclorily whether the affair of the Chefapeake is truly a juflifiable a&lt;St of 
reprifal, or the affumption of a general right to fearch publick fhips, which 
latter they difclaim. 



27 

It was no more founded on the tight of fearch, than if one of 
our fhips on the high feas, in time of peace, (hould forcibly feize a 
boat belonging to a Britifh fhip, with a lieutenant and crew on 
board, and (hould hold them in durefs after demand ; and thereupon 
the Britifh captain mould attack and difable our fhip, and retake 
his men ; both thefe ads are equally reprifals for previous injuries, 
and are both founded on the laws of nature and nations. 

I afk, once more, is war always to be undertaken, when it is 
juftifiable ? 

I anfwer, our own practice proves the contrary. France captur 
ed our fhips in violation of the treaty of 1778 me afterwards fet 
up the abominable doctrine of the role d equipage, and condemned 
millions upon it me afterwards decreed, that all neutral veffels, 
having one dollar s value of Britifh manufactures on board, mould, 
together with their cargoes, be lawful prize ; and feveral more 
millions fell under this pretext. 

All thefe ads were violations of the law of nations all of them 
were cdnfe of war yet we did not go to war we made a treaty, 
and inftead of her making either acknowledgment or fatisfaftion for ei 
ther of thefe injuries, we explicitly renounced all claims to them. 

Spain fhut the port of New-Orleans, contrary to treaty me did 
it with marked infolence me has fince marched armed men into our 
territory, feized our citizens, and lately has taken poffeffion of fome 
of our national military ftores ftill we have not made war upon 
Spain, though war would have been juftifiable, and though, both 
with regard to France and Spain, we had given no caufe of offence, 
as we have done in this cafe to Great-Britain. 

If it be afked, how it happens that the men who were in favour 
of war with France and Spain, are oppofed to one with Great- 
Britain I anfwer, 1ft, That the injuries of France and Spain were 
unprovoked, and therefore atrocious : 2d, That thofe of Great- 
Britain have been provoked, even by the acknowledgment of our 
government, who ordered its officers not to enlift deferters, which or 
ders were openly difobeyed and therefore the caufe of war is doubtful : 
but laftly, Such was the local and political fituation of France and 
Spain, that they could not injure us, while they were at war with 
Great-Britain. An impaflable gulph lies between us but we are 



28 

vulnerable at every pore by Great-Britain. By her immenfe and 
gigantick naval force, fhe comes in contact with us in every fea. 
To deftroy our commerce, would be mere fport to her marine ; and 
although the Editor of the National Intelligencer, and his patrons, 
may think the ruin of 250,000 merchants a matter of fuch perfect 
indifference, that he will not fuffer it to mar a fine calculation, yet 
the people of New-England feel differently. They know that they 
are neceffarily a commercial people ; they have not one million 
Haves to labour for their fupport ; they live by the fweat of their 
own Irows ; their fons, their kinfmen, their friends, are engaged in 
commerce ; and we farmers of the northern ftates, are not fo fool- 
ifh as to believe that you can deftroy commerce without inflicting a 
deep wound upon the interefts of agriculture. 

We are now naturally led to confider the expediency of war, in 
relation to our means of annoyance, refources, probable loffes, and 
general effects. 

In eftimating thefe various branches of this extenfive queftion of 
expediency, I fhall not enter much into the details, but ftiall ftate 
them with all poffible brevity, confiftent with perfpicuity. 

Our means of annoyance, and refources as ftated by the advocates 
of war, are of two fpecies, direct and indirect, military and commer 
cial. 

Of our military refources one would think that but little need be 
faid. The jealoufy of military force always fufficiently ftrong, has 
been ftrengthened by our philofophick adminiftration ; the necefiity 
of conforming to the falfe opinions and prejudices by which they ac 
quired power, has obliged them to deftroy even the little military 
and naval force, which their predeceffors had built up. The Prefi- 
dent has taught the people to believe, that the experience of all 
nations and of all ages, was of no avail ; that all his predeceffors in 
power, from Saul to Bonaparte, have been miftaken in believing in 
the neceffity of force in order to maintain refpe ft ; that the fenfe of 
juftice is the firmeft hold, and reafon the moft effectual weapon to 
protect our rights, or to avenge injuries. With this all conquering 
weapon he has marched boldly on, till he has brought us into 
the field with a foe, who having been challenged to meet us there, 
will take the liberty to ufe his own weapons. 



29 

If our little band of 3000 foldiers, could be drawn off from the 
defence of a frontier of 5000 miles, and from our tottering forts, 
more dangerous to their defenders than their aflailants, and if Mr. 
Jefferfon could by the force of reafon, perfuade our enemies to 
enter a fmall defile, like that of Thermopylae, perhaps even this 
little knot of heroes might be immortalized by victory. So alfo, 
if our enemies would be gracioufly pleafed to run their line of battle 
mips aground in convenient numbers, Mr. Jefferfon s naval force 
would be found very effective, or, which would be flill more con 
venient, and good humoured on the part of our enemies, if they 
would fend one (hip at a time, to permit Mr. Fulton to make three 
or four experiments, we could in the courfe of two years, deflroy 
the Britifh navy. 

But we have 100,000 militia, and we can by the very cheap 
procefs of an a& of Congrefs, increafe this number at pleafure. If 
the war was to be a defeniive one, like the laft, it muft be admit 
ted, that this fpecies of force may be calculated upon. But the 
militia cannot be marched out of the United States, and we have 
no ufe for them within. 

But they would volunteer their fervices to take Canada and No 
va-Scotia. I do not fay that this achievement is impoflible ; but I 
am furprifed, that our publick writers mould be fo little fparing of 
our feelings, as to recal thofe two fcenes of our misfortune. The 
plains of Abraham, and the Ifthmus of Penobfcot, exhibit no hon 
ourable monuments of either our power or conduct. 

But perhaps we might have better fuccefs in another attempt ; 
perhaps with the lofs of twenty thoufand men, and the expenfe of 
fifty millions of dollars, we might take, and garrifon thofe provinces, 
with the exception of the city of Quebeck ; that city we probably 
could not take.* Suppofe us then in quiet poffeffion of thefe 

* It is furprifing with what confidence men who are totally ignorant of the 
ftate of thefe provinces, boaft of taking them at a (broke. Quebeck was in a 
ruinous fituation when attacked before, and yet we failed in our attempt, though 
we had two armies before it. It has fince, been thoroughly fortified, and is 
now the Gibraltar of America. We have no reafon to doubt, that it would 
hold out againft the whole French army, at leafl as long as Dantzick. We on 
the other hand, are deflitute of engineers, or military Ikill fufficient for fuch an 
operation. But we fhall be told, that we fhali have French officers, French (kill, 
French artillery.-" And is this our confutation ? Hie metus ! heu libertas ! 



30 

provinces ; of what benefit will they be to us, or what injury the 
lofs of them to our enemy ? To her they have been a conftant 
fource of expenfe. To us the one would add a inafs of population, 
hoftile to us in feelings, language, manners, religion, and attached, 
fmcerely, and irrevocably fo, to the nation whofe power and afcend- 
ancy we have the highefl reafon to dread. Every Canadian is a 
Frenchman at heart ; flaves to their priefts, they can eafily be per- 
fuaded to join the imperial banner of France, whenever the Empe 
ror lawfully authorized by the Sovereign Pontiff, mall think proper 
to difplay it. 

Fifty thoufand Canadians, difciplined by French veteran officers, 
after effecting a junction with 50,000 Louifianians, who are equally 
French in character and feelings, would become very uncomfortable 
neighbours to the United States. 

Nova-Scotia does not offer a more tempting prize. A country, 
poor, miferable, producing no ftaple article, populated by men, em 
bittered againft us, by a thoufand recollections, and who, probably, 
in half a century, will not have forgotten their deep rooted preju 
dices againft us, and our fyflem of government. We cannot, more 
over, retain Halifax, without a fuperior naval force. 

It will not be pretended therefore, that our exifting military 
means, directed and applied by our pacifick commander in chief, 
ought to infpire great confidence in fuccefs. 

But we may be told, and ive are gravely told, that we have an 
Immenfe revenue. Our overflowing treafury appears to have em- 
barraffed our government to find means to employ it. As reafon 
is Mr. Jefferfon s only weapon in his exifting contefts with Great- 
Britain and Spain, and as that cofts no more than Mr. Madifon s 
falary and clerk hire, he never dreamed that it was poflible that his 
reafon might perchance fail of producing its effect, and that we 
mould have occafion for the ultima ratio regum, powder and balls. 

It is poffible that fome weak minds may really believe that our 
revenue is a war refource, and that it juflifies our holding a bullying 
language to Great-Britain. For the information of fuch men, we 
mall ftate this point briefly. Our revenue in time of peace, is 10 
millions of dollars, of which nine tenths are derived from impofts 
en merchandize. This revenue, if it could continue, is but one 



31 

feventeenth part of that of our propofed enemy, and would be 
wholly inadequate to war operations. Four millions of it are 
pledged to pay the intereft of the national debt, which if we fail to 
do, not a cent will ever be obtained by loans or otherwife. The 
remaining fix millions, would defray the expences of a war about 
three months annually. For the remaining nine months, each year, 
we muft feek other means, and incur a new debt. But as it is ad 
mitted by Mr. JefFerfon s paper, that our commerce will be deftroy- 
ed, our revenue founded folely on that commerce, will/tf// with it. 

Two refources which our prefent rulers have rendered as unpop 
ular as their talents would permit, muft then be reforted to loans 
and taxes. 

Paft experience has rendered the monied intereft too wife, to ad 
vance their money without the pledge of new taxes ; and even with 
fuch a pledge, an adminiftration which has avowed its hoftility to 
publick faith, and the individuals of which openly propofed to cheat 
the publick creditors, before they came into power, can with a very 
ill grace propofe to borrow, or expect to be believed, when they 
promife to pay. 

But grant that loans are obtained, and that the war is carried on 
with fpirit ; taxes muft be raifed to pay the intereft of thefe new 
loans. The odious fyftem of excife muft be revived, and the ad 
miniftration muft be compelled to acknowledge by their conduct, 
the wife forefight of their predeceffors. But as an excife of double 
the former amount, would only produce as much as the former, 
owing to the diminution of confumption produced by the diftrefles 
of war, this fource of revenue will only produce 750,000 dollars 
per annum. We muft then calculate upon about 20,000,000 dol 
lars direct taxes annually, on land and Jlaves. In laying this tax, 
Mr. Jefferfon will have occafion for all his 100,000 militia and 
volunteers ; and if we thought him as much of a ftatefman, as his 
friends pretend to do, we mould have fuppofed that this was the 
motive for raifing them. To bring this part of the happy effects 
of a war for Britt/h deferters, home to the bofoms of the farmers of 
Maflachufetts, this ftate s proportion of the annual war taxes to be 
levied on lands, would be about two millions of dollars per annum ? 
or about fixteen times the amount of our prdfent^Kofe tax,, and about 



32 

double that of our whole flate debt ; and if the war fhould laft five, 
years, and there is no profpeft of a fhorter iflue, we fhould have 
paid, if we fhould be able, 10 millions of dollars, or a fum equal to 
eighty years prefent taxes. Nor is this the worft fide of the pic- 
lure ; as the New-England farmers are in the habit of paying 
what they owe, as long as they have any thing to pay with, and as 
the citizens of fame other ftates do not pay till they are compelled, it 
would refult, that the chief burden of the war would, as before, fall 
upon us ; heavy balances of debts would be accumulated againfl 
the fouthern ftates, and, after the peace, we fhould have another 
aft of Congrefs to wipe off thefe balances, as was urged with re 
gard to thofe contracted during the revolutionary war.* 

Thus then we fee what fort of reliance we can place upon the 
American army, navy, and revenue, in an offenfive war againft 
Great-Britain. 

But we are told, that we can make a predatory war upon the 
Britifh commerce, and our adminiftration gives another proof of 
its fpirit and ability, by propofing to repofe the conduct of the 
war in the individual enterprize of its citizens. This is precifely 
in character : but even this reliance, feeble and humiliating as it is, 
will fail. They will permit the people of MafTachufetts, to be as 
good judges of this fubjeft, as any in the United States. 

Inftead of fitting out their 700 dull failing merchantmen as pri 
vateers, their paft experience teaches them, that with every advan 
tage that fyftem cannot be purfued.f Great-Britain towards the 

* South-Carolina is faid to be juft collecting the tax laid in 1798, and which 
~ive paid) nearly feven years fmce ; and as fhe pays, I prefume, no intereft for 
this delay, it has been at our expenfe. She has faved 50,000 dollars by this 
plan, out of the dates who paid with punctuality. 

f The opinions here exprefTed are perfectly conformable to thofe of our 
beloved Wafhington in a cafe fimilar but lefs flrong. Thefe opinions may 
be feen in a letter addrefTed from the Executive department to Mr. Mon 
roe, dated Sept. 12, 1795 of which the following is an extract. 

" How prepofterous is that policy which requires us to abandon and 
dcftroy the very objetf, for the prefervation of which hoftilities are to be 
commenced ! It may not be amifs," he adds, " to enlarge on the confe- 
quences of our engaging in the war againft Great-Britain. 

" 1. Seeing fhe lias the command of the fea (and appearances iiuEcate Jlrong- 
ly that he will maintain that command,) our commerce might in one year 
be annihilated, and thoufands of our feamen be fhut up or dying in jails 
and prifon fliips. In addition to her fleets now in commiffion, privateers 
would fwarm, as foon as objects fo alluring and fo affailablc as American 
commerce fhould prefent. 



S3 

clofe of the laft war, had learned the fecret of paralyzing this 
fpecies of hoftility. Can it then be expeded, that with no enemy 
on the ocean, and with double the number of mips of war, (he will 
fit ftill, and permit us peaceably to rob her citizens ? Every naval 
officer, and every merchant knows, however ignorant they may be 
at Wafliington, that fifty faft failing frigates would as completely 
blockade our ports, and fecure our privateers from the power of 
doing injury, as if they were under lock and key, or hauled up a la 
Jefferfon, in the dry docks of the Potomac. 

We proceed then to confider the other branch of our means of 
annoyance, which may be called commercial warfare. It is main 
tained, that we can by a war bring Great-Britain to an acknowl 
edgment of our claims ; by confiscating the debts due to her 
merchants ; by ruining her manufacturers ; by refufing to be 
cloathed ; and by ftarving her Weft-India colonies. Although it 
would be eafy to (hew, that all thefe meafures would eventually 
produce more diftrefs to the United States than to Great-Britain, 
that in all cafes of this nature, the dependance is mutual, and that 
in fuch contefts, the po r jrejl ftate always fuffers the moft ; yet I 
mall leave this point to the good fenfe of my readers, and confider 
them as operating only on Great-Britain. 

Firft then, we are to carry on the war, and to diftrefs our enemy 

" If we look back to the two laft years of our revolutionary war, a 
judgment may be formed on this point. A {hiking defecSt in her naval 
arrangements in preceding years, left our ports open for the entry of com 
merce, for the equipment of privateers, and the introduction of prizes. A 
different arrangement in the latter part of the war, totally changed the 
fcene. The fmall privateers were hauled up as unable to cope with arm 
ed merchantmen, and the larger privateers were taken. Our fhipping fell 
at the fame time a facrifice to the vigilant operations of the Britifh navy. 

" At the prefent moment (1795) her naval power is extended beyond all 
former examples ; while that of her enemies is at leaft not increafed. 

" 2dly. Our landed as well as commercial interefts would fuffer beyond all 
calculation. Agriculture above the fupply of our own wants, would be fuf- 
pended, or its produce perish on our hands. The value of our lands and ev 
ery fpecies of domeftick property would fink. 

" Sdly. The fources of revenue failing, publick credit would be deftroyed, 
and multitudes of citizens involved in ruin. The people at large would be 
plunged from the fummit of profperity into an abyfs of ruin, too fudden 
and too fevere to be patiently borne. To increafe their calamities, direct 
taxes must be levied to fupport the war ; and it would be happy for us 
if we could comtemplate only foreign war, in which all might unite" 



34 

by reforting to the old difgraceful fyftem of confiscation. If the 
profligacy and infamy of fuch proportions have no weight in the 
eftimation of our fellow citizens, (which I will not believe) they 
will furely liften to the maxims of experience, a dear bought expe 
rience, and an enlightened policy. How trifling a fum it produced 
to the nation in the laft war, every publick man knows. Its only 
tendency was to fcreen a few fraudulent debtors, who rejoicing in 
an opportunity to defraud their honeft creditors^ could of courfe, 
think it no robbery to defraud the publick. Nothing came into 
the publick cheft, and even the joy of the fraudulent debtor was 
extremely fiort lived. At the treaty of peace, Great-Britain, as 
muft always be the cafe, infilled as a fine qua non, upon the reftor- 
ation of the rights of her bona fide fubjefts. The courts were 
opened to the Britifh creditors, and the debtors were compelled to 
pay with accumulated intereft : nor was this the ivorjl part of it ; 
the Virginia legiflature refufed to obey the publick authority ; it 
neglected to open its courts ; their citizens who owed the Britifh 
merchants, availed themfelves of this fufpenfion of right, of this 
Jlate rebellion againft the treaty, and became bankrupt. Great- 
Britain infiiled on redrefs, for this violation of the treaty, and Mr. 
Jefferfon ratified a convention on this fubjeft, and has paid to 
Great-Britain three millions of dollars, on account of thefe fufpend- 
ed debts. 

Is our paft experience then favourable to a repetition of this 
fyftem of iniquity ? But nations ought to be governed by more 
extenfive policy ; meafures ought never to be reforted to, the 
tendency of which, is to debafe the morals of the people, and to 
fink the national character. 

If we go to war with Great-Britain, it will not be eternal ; 
peace muft fooner or later arrive : our interefts, the great and ef- 
fential interefts of our country, require that Europe mould be our 
work mop : fo fays Mr. Jefferfon ; fo all fenfible men admit. 
Great-Britain is the cheapeft labourer ; her manufactures are fuited 
to our habits, and our neceflities. But neither Great-Britain, nor 
any other nation with whom we may by pofiibility be embroiled, will 
ever truft us, if we pafs confifcation laws, without adding to the price 
of the goods a premium for the rifle of a fraudulent confifcation ; 



35 

and as all fuch rifles are over eftimated, we mall probably pay ten 
times over, for the paltry and wicked fatisfa6lion of robbing her 
private citizens, who have trufted their property to curs. 

Such were the enlightened views of Mr. Jay and Preiident 
Wafhington, and few men had better opportunities of judging of 
the effects of confifcation. Mr. Jay was directed, and did accord 
ingly agree to an article, which is a permanent one, and (till in 
force, ftipulating, " that in all future wars between us and Great- 
Britain, no confifcation of private debts mould be made." Can 
it then be contended, that in the only cafe in which the article was 
to operate, it becomes void ? And will it be pretended that nations 
can make no regulations to foften the rigors, and leflen the calam 
ities of war ? 

Without fuch an article, Great-Britain never would make peace 
with any nation whom (he fupplies, without ftipulating for the 
payment of debts due to her citizens, and with fuch an article in her 
hand, what could any honeft American commiflioners for making 
peace, fay to her negotiators ? The man muft be hardened indeed, 
who will contend, that we ought to exercife a power, malum in fe, 
debafing, corrupting, difgraceful, and in face of a pofitive, humane, 
and honourable ftipulation. 

But fecondly, we are to ruin the manufacturers of Great-Britain, 
at the very profpect of a war they were to rife in rebellion ; the 
prophecy on this fubject, has turned out already to be partially falfe. 

Inftead of that terror, that violent oppofition to war from the 
manufacturers, we hear of no difturbance, and very little uneafmefs. 
The great manufacturing towns in England, have taken no fteps to 
prevent a war or to exprefs their anxiety about it ; on the con 
trary, we learn from perfons who have arrived from England, that 
a war with us is at leajl not unpopular, and efpecially in Birming- 
ham, which is the greateft work Jhop for this country. I might 
reft the argument here, for it will be admitted, that no people are 
better judges of their intereft, than the manufacturers of England j 
and if a war would be fo ruinous to them, they certainly would 
not be quiet as we know they were, though a war was expected. 

But I will give a very brief fummary, to (hew that a war would 
not be very injurious to thefe manufacturers. 



36 

lit. Their articles are many of them of the frjl necefiity, and 
nations at war with them, muft and will get them, in fpite of pro 
hibitory regulations. Bonaparte has exerted all his power for live 
years, to mut out their manufactures, and yet his own army, and 
even court, are openly clothed in them. If 700,000 troops can 
not mut them out of France, will patriotifm without a fword, ef 
fect it in America ? Patriotifm did not prevent hundreds of our 
countrymen from fitting out privateers and taking our own veflels ; 
many have grown rich by plunder of this fort. Patriotifm does 
not prevent the flave trade, though the laws are fo feverely pro 
hibitory. In fhort, patriotifm cannot be calculated upon, to effect 
that which power finds it vain to attempt. 

2dly. A much fmaller proportion of the population of the unit 
ed kingdoms of Great-Britain and Ireland, are employed in manu 
facturing for us, than we have ufually thought. Not more than 
one fixth part of the population of Great -Britain, is employed in 
any manufaflures. Four fifths at leaft of the manufactures of all 
nations, are confumed at home. Great-Britain exports only about 
fix millions worth annually, to America, and it is only the profits 
on this capital, which me would lofe, which would not exceed one 
million. She might not even lofe that ; the capital which is now 
employed in manufacturing for us, may be withdrawn from manu 
factures, and employed in agriculture and commerce, and it would 
only be the difference of profit between the new employ, and the 
old, which flie would lofe. But grant that me mould lofe one mil 
lion per annum will that materially affect the policy of a nation 
whofe revenue is 40 millions ? Is Great-Britain to be ruined by an 
additional million ? If that be the cafe, to borrow a phrafe from a 
writer of our own, " We have only to gather up our garments and 
fall, with decency." If Great-Britain be fo reduced as to be ruin 
ed by one million more, Jbe muft fall, and how long our rights and 
liberties, and the liberty of the feas will furvive her, I mail endeav 
our to mew briefly in the conclufion of this {ketch. 

But laftly, we are to ftarve her Weft-India colonies. It is reaU 
ly aftonifhing, that men will be fo blinded by their hatred to Great* 
Britain, as to urge and appear to believe fuch abfurd notions. 
Why did they not ftarve during the revolutionary war ? Nova- 



37 

Scotia then fupplied them with little or nothing ; fhe can now 
fupply them with nearly all they want. They do not take our 
beef and pork in peace, they are fo dainty ; and yet we talk of 
ilarving them ! But if they could fupport a war of eight years, 
when Nova-Scotia was a young, uncultivated country, when our 
privateers fwarmed in thefe feas, and the ocean was covered with 
the fleets of France, Spain, and Holland, how much eafier will it 
be to fuftain a war, when the provifion veflels of England, can 
navigate in perfect fafety, having no o: e to make them afraid ? 
But do we not view the other fide of the picture ? Poffeffed as 
they will be of Buenos Ayres, where provifions are cheaper than 
in any part of the world, is there not danger, that a war with uc 
may turn their attention to other channels of fupply, and thus 
deftroy, perhaps for ever this branch of our commerce ? 

It will be feen then, that the hope of coercing Great-Britain by 
commercial warfare, is as delufive and defperate, as by arms ; and 
after a long, but bloodlefs war, in which we mould be called upon 
to fuffer rather than act, we mould probably be obliged to aban 
don the claims for which the war was undertaken, unlefs Great- 
Britain, from caufes totally out of our control, mould be obliged to 
yield to the refiftlefs power of France. 

Let us now take a brief view of the effects of a Britifh war, up 
on ourfelves. Thofe, who deluded by the language of the war 
newfpapers, and efpecially Mr. Jefferfon s, believe, that we are to 
enter into a war in which Great-Britain will be the only fufferer ; 
and that we mail continue to profper as before, will be woefully 
deceived. Not a man who has any thing to lofe, not a labourer, 
who depends on the fweat of his brow, but will feel, and rue the 
effects of fuch a war : they will be almofl equally felt, and per 
ceived in the compting-houfes of the merchants ; the parlours of 
the rich ; and the cottage of the poor. 

The farmer will furrender his cattle to the tax gatherer ; the 
mechanick will be obliged to hang up his rufty tools ; and the 
children of our induftrious fifhermen, will demand their bread in 
vain. This is not the picture of a fourth of July orator it is 
fober reality. The National Intelligencer with the fang froid of 
a true philosopher, configns to beggary 250,000 merchants. He 



38 

admits " that commerce will be deftroyed by a war, and in its 
fall will crufh its immediate dependents ;" but he infults the un- 
derftandings of us New-England farmers, by infmuating that all tl.e 
other claffes of fociety will efcape its effedls. Who are to employ 
and give bread to the 300,000 mechanicks in our feaport towns, 
after the merchants are beggared ? Who are to pay the banks 
when all the property of their debtors is annihilated by war ? 
When the banks flop their dividends, and lofe part of their capitals, 
what will become of the widows and orphans who have depofited 
their little modicum in thefe publick inftitutions ? When the fmall 
country banks fail, who will indemnify the farmers who hold their 
bills? \ 

What, will become of the country traders, and the farmers, who 
owe them, when the creditors of the beggared merchants call upon 
them for immediate payment ? 

It is admitted, by the advocates of war, that commerce will be 
wholly annihilated ; with that falls our revenue : the collection 
of direct taxes will be found fo flow, and fo unpopular, and the 
calls on government will be fo much more preffing than thofe of the 
publick creditors, that the intereft of the national debt will be fuf- 
pended. The party in power, have always been oppofed to this 
clafs of publick creditors, and though they have as yet paid punttu- 
ally, and have not violated the contract, it is only becaufe they 
have had ample means, and it was a convenient engine of power ; 
it was a ftrong hold over their political enemies. But create more 
preffing exigencies, and thoufands of honeft creditors will be left 
to ftarve. This is what they formerly propofed it would gratify 
manyfecret wiflies. 

If a war, then, will annihilate commerce, as the National Intelli 
gencer admits, will ruin 250,000 merchants, beggar all the me 
chanicks immediately dependant on the merchants, injure fome, and 
produce the failure of many of the banking inftitutions if it will 
deflroy our revenue, and oblige the government to fufpend the pay 
ment of the intereft of the national debt if, moreover, as a necef- 
fary confequence, it will cripple, if not bankrupt our infurance 
companies, can the farmers hope to efcape the general devaftation ? 

Are there none alive who recoiled the effeds of our revolution. 



ary war ? Can agriculture flourim, when there are no buyers 
When all the other orders of fociety are ruined, the taxes muft fall 
upon the land-holders and we have fhewn, that the revenue from 
impoft failing, the farmers will be called upon to defray the whole 
expenfes of the war, which will annually amount to about fixteen 
times the fum of our prefent State tax. 

Can any agricultural profits meet thefe exigencies ? When our 
children are called off from the labours of the plough, to thofe of 
war, can we fupport our families, and pay the extraordinary demands 
of government ? Let thofe who view thefe as light and tolerable 
evils, be clamorous for war j but for my part, I prefer to renounce 
the right of protecting and enlifting the fubjects of foreign nations, 
when our own population furnimes men fufficient for our commerce 
and our navy, to embarking in a doubtful conteft, ruinous in its ef 
fects, and uncertain as to its iffue. 

I have faid that the war, which we are called upon to wage, 
would be a war without hope. I have endeavoured to mew that we 
can place no reafonable reliance on our oiv n refources in an offeniive 
and extraneous war againft Great-Britain : but I mall be told, that 
we may calculate upon the aid of France, Spain, Holland, and 
Ruflia. Indeed, we have been already told, that fuch an alliance 
would fecure us fuccefs.* Without entering into the impolicy of 
thus embarking in the wide field of European politicks, let us ad 
mit that we do fo embark, and that the utmoft fuccefs crowns our 
efforts let us fuppofe our enemy, Great-Britain, proftrate at the 
feet of the allied powers would our fituation be ameliorated ? 
Should we be confidered as principals, or, like the other allies, as 
humble vaffals in the train of the victor ? Rome too had her allies, 
but was their fituation lefs dependant than thofe of the vanquimed ? 



* We already perceive, by the fubjoined account of the celebration of the 
late French victories in Georgia, that fome of our citizens have already con- 
needed our deftinies with thofe of France. This article is copied from the 
Palladium, of Oa. 2. Savannah, Sept. 12. On Saturday, the 12th inftant, a 
numerous company of republicans aflembled at the Filature, to celebrate the 
victories of the French nation over the allies of England events leading to the 
peace and profperity of thefe U. States the Hon. Edward Telfain Prefident, 
William Stephens, and Peter H. Morel, Elq rs. Vice-Prefidents." Are we neu 
tral ? Are Ruffia and Pruffia our friends ? Is it ufual to rejoice over the de- 
ftruction of one s friends ? 



40 



Grant all that is affumed, that Britain is the tyrant of the 
will the man who fubjugated the brave and inoffending Swifs, who 
annihilated the republick of Italy, to place a diadem on his own 
brow, who compelled the ftubborn Dutchman, our friend and ally,* 
to receive a mafter, after 100 years of unexampled refiftance 
to oppreffion who has left not one mred of liberty or independ 
ence, through the vaft, populous, and powerful regions, over which 
his victorious arms have extended, be delicately or fcrupuloufly re 
gardful of the maritime rights of nations ? 

Having conquered the continent of Europe, he exclaimed, " all 
I want are commerce, colonies andjhips." Can any virtuous and high- 
minded freeman of our country believe, that in procuring the grat 
ification of thefe wants, he will be more fcrupulous or tender of the 
nghts of other nations, than he has been in attaining the vaft and 
immeafurable power which he now poffeffes ? 

It may perhaps be thought by Jbme, that I have been too free in 
my cenfures of the prefent adminiftration, that I have intimated 
that they have rather courted, than fought to avoid, the prefent 
itate of mifunderilanding between us and Great-Britain. I con- 
fefs that if fuch mould be the inference, it would not be an unfair 
one. I have always been apprehenfive, that the marked partiality 
or dread of France, and the deep-rooted hoftility to Great-Britain, 
which they have invariably difcovered, would lead to unpleafant 
confequences. It is well known, to all men who have noticed the 
courfe of our political hiftory, that the perfons now adminiftering 
the government of the United States, have avowed, both before 
and fince they came into power, a fettled oppofition to Great- 
Britain. 



* Holland has been one of our fafteft, firmeft friends fhe took an early and 
an honeft part in favour of our liberties. Her aid was not, as the French direc 
tory fay theirs was, the " fruit of a bafe fpeculation." The Dutch love freedom 
fevenly years war for the attainment of it, had endeared it to them. Who 
Avould have imagined that our prefent adminiftration would have been the firft 
to infult a nation, to whom we were bound by fo many ties of gratitude, by 
congratulating their upfhrt tyrant on his acceffion to the throne ? Who would 
have thought that our republican Prefident would have been fo eager to ad- 
drefs his " dearly beloved brother of Holland ?" What would have been 
faid of Wafhington, if he bad thus put the feal to tyranny, efpecially when 
having no minifter at that Court, there could be no neceffity of faying any thing 
on the fubje&lt;fl ? Sod tempora mutantur et nos mutamur cum illis ! 



41 

It is of no moment to confider the private motives which have 
led to this undue prejudice.*- It is fufficient to fay that the fa& 
exifts, and is avowed and juftified in Mr. Jefferfon s paper, the Na 
tional Intelligencer. 

They even declare that we ought to go back to the events of the 
revolutionary war, to fharpen our refentments againft Great-Britain. 

Whether thefe prejudices had any (hare in induciug the Prefident 
to fend back the treaty, made by his own minifters extraordinary, 
I mail not undertake to decide ; but I take the liberty to make 
on this topick three remarks. 

1ft, That it is a thing unexampled in the hiftory of nations, to 
fend back a treaty made by authorized agents, unlefs they were ei 
ther corrupt, exceeded their authority, or compromifed the moft ef- 
fential interefts of the State, in either of which cafes the minifters 
ought to be recalled. 

2d, That it is unreafonable to expe& in a publick treaty with 
another nation, that every article mould be in our own favour 
fomething muft neceffarily be given up on both fides, or a ftate of 
hoftility never could ceafe. The only queftion ought to be, wheth 
er it was as good, as under all the circumftances of the cafe, we 
had a right to cxpeA ? It is believed that this treaty, on the whole, 
was fuch an one as the United States ought to have accepted. 

3d, That there was no foundation for the report, that there was 
annexed to the treaty a condition which the United States ought 
not to have acceded to. 

It may perhaps occur to fome of our readers, convinced as they 
will be of the impolicy of entering into a war with Great-Britain, 
and of the total incompetency of our means to cany on fuch a 
war, to a(k, Is it good policy to expofe the weaknefs of our coun 
try to the world ? Does it not betray a want of patriotifm, to pub- 
li(h our opinion of our own mifcondu6l, and to endeavour to prove 
that we are unable to cope with a nation with whom we may poffi- 
bly be embroiled ? This is a fpecies of popular error, too common 
with many defcriptions of perfons in our country. 

With my juftification on this topick, I mall clofe this addrefs to 
my fellow-citizens. 
F 






In all free governments, publick opinion mult eventually direct j 
the molt important meafures of the adminiftration. When once ex- ifl 
prefled by the legal *conftituted authorities , it is binding upon all the 
citizens, though it isjli/l competent for them to ufe the prefs, in 



* We fay, that when exprefled by the conjlituted authorities, this publick opin 
ion ought to be treated with the Ugheft refpeft ; and one would have fuppofed, 
that in a country like ours, which boafls of its light and information, a con 
trary opinion could not prevail : but the National Intelligencer, in its ferious 
reafoning, conliders the expreflion of the publick opinion, by the populace in 
about twelve mercantile towns as binding on all the citizens. In reply to fome 
reafonings, endeavouring to fliew that war would not be justifiable, that paper 
remarks, that it is unneceffary to enter into the difcuflion of the juftice of a war, 
" the people have decided that queftion they have -willed it, unlefs ample rep 
aration be made." 

The Chronicle holds the fame language. 

Now we undertake to fay, that the numbers and the violence difplayed on 
this occafion, were lefs than thofe which appeared in oppofition to the Britifh 
Treaty every one of the fame great cities was in oppofition to that inftru- 
ment but, happily for our country, Wafhington did not miftake the clamours 
of a multitude in a great city, which peaceable men think it more prudent to go 
with than to oppofe, in the firft paroxyfms of its rage, for the will of the people. 

Governor Sullivan and Sheriff Allen tried at that time the effect of oppofi 
tion, and they had very convincing proofs of the wifdom, good fenfe, and rea- 
fonablenefs of an infuriated populace. 

It is ridiculous to call the proceedings at the State-Houfe, in Boflon, the 
fenfe of the inhabitants of Maffachufetts. Thofe of us who were near enough 
to Boflon to lift up the fplendid veil with which thefe things are covered, 
know, that neither that meeting, nor the one figned by William Cooper, were 
correct expreffions of the publick will. 

The hiftory of thefe meetings is briefly this : The cool and judicious men of 
both parties in Boflon, were oppofed to having any meeting on the fubject, 
and openly exprefled their difapprobation of them. Not that the inhabitants 
of this metropolis are ever behind their fellow-citizens in their zeal to vindicate 
the rights, and maintain the honour of their country but they thought that 
we were too ignorant of the facts, and too uncertain of the true courfe to be 
purfued, to venture to give a decided opinion upon the fubject. Such was 
the temper of the inhabitants, when a refpect for the citizens of Norfolk, in 
duced the Selectmen to call a town-meeting. At this meeting, it is well known 
that fo great an uncertainty prevailed, as to the true policy to be adopted, that 
the inhabitants, on the propofi tion to appoint a committee, did not generally 
vote on either fide, and the refpectable Moderator, thinking that the luke- 
warmnefs difcovered was not fufficiently refpectful for the occafion, intimated 
the propriety of more apparent zeal, and actually put the queftion a fecond time. 

This ftate of facts is well known, and the Editor of the Aurora, at Philadel 
phia, has an arch allufion to it, when he obferved, that the refolutions of Bof- 
ton were force-meat. The Chronicle repeated this wit againft its own town, 
and yet has the effrontery to cite thefe refolutions, as expreffive of the publick 
will. It may be faid, that this goes to prove that many individuals acted with 
infincerity. 

I afk, how people muft be expected to act in a popular government, when 
the paffions are fuddenly and violently inflamed ? To foothe and perfuadc 
or oppofe and inflame ? 



43 

order to effed a change in the adminiftration, or a repeal of the 
meafures. 

But as this publick opinion may be direded or foreftalled by 
artful and defigning men, or may be mifdireded by error or paflion, 
it is not only the right, but the duty of thofe who believe that fuch 
errors exift, to endeavour to corred them. 

When, therefore, a party of men, from finifter or from honejl 
motives, mifreprefent the condud of a foreign nation, prefent an 
unnatural and diftorted view of fads, appeal to the publick paffions, 
attempt to filence aUjf|jj||jfion, reprefent our ability to wage war 
in a moft extravagant J(fcftagnify our means of injuring our en 
emy, and diminifti her power and ability to injure us, and efpecially 
if all this be done while the queftion is ft ill open, and before the 
Legislature, who are alone authorized to decide it, are convened 
it is the mo&folemn duty which a citizen is ever called upon to exer- 
cife, to corred fuch falfe ftatements, to remove erroneous impref- 
fions, and to endeavour to condud his fellow-citizens from the mazy 
labyrinth of error and prejudice, into the paths of light and truth. 
Such an office I have, with confcious inability, attempted to exe 
cute : Happy, if my feeble efforts mall in any degree contribute 
to preferve my beloved country from the dangers which furround it. 





