
A SECOND VISIT 



THE UIITED STATES 



NORTH AMERICA, 



BY SIR CHAKLES IYELL, F.R.S., 

PRESIDENT OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OK LONDON, AUTHOK OF "THE PHINCIPLES 
OF GEOLOGV," AND " TBAVELS IN NOKTH AMERICA." 



IN TWO VOLUMES. ^^"^ 

S ~f" 
VOL. I. 

NEW YORK: 

HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS. 
LONDON: JOHN MURE AY. 

1849. 



\ (O 



CONTENTS 



OF 



THE FIRST VOLUME. 



CHAPTER I. 

PAGE 

Voyage from Liverpool to Halifax. Gale. Iceberg. Drift Ice and Gulf 
Stream. Coast of Newfoundland. Engine room of Steamer. Con 
versations on Coolies in the West Indies. Halifax. News of Judge 
Story s Death. Boston. Success of the Mail Steam Packets. Cus 
tom House Officers 13 



CHAPTER II. 

Boston. Horticultural Show in Faneuil Hall. Review of Militia. 
Peace Association. Excursion to the White Mountains. Railway 
Traveling. Portsmouth, New Hampshire. Geology, Fossils in Drift. 
Submarine forest. Wild Plants : Asters, Solidagos, Poison Ivy. 
Swallows. Glacial Grooves. Rocks transported by Antarctic Ice. 
Body of a Whale discovered by an American Trader in an Iceberg . 27 



CHAPTER III. 

Portland in Maine. Kenriebec River. Timber Trade. Fossil Shells at 
Gardiner. Augusta the Capital of Maine. Legal Profession: Advo 
cates and Attorneys. Equality of Sects. Religious Toleration. Cal- 
viuiscic Theology. Day of Doom ....... 41 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER IV. 

PAGE 

Journey from Portland to the White Mountains. Plants Churches, 
School-houses. Temperance Hotel. Intelligence of New-Englanders. 
Climate, Consumption. Conway. Division of Property. Every 
Man his own Tenant. Autumnal Tints. Bears hybernating. Willey 
Slide. Theory of Scratches and Grooves on Rocks. Scenery. 
Waterfalls and Ravines. The Notch. Forest Trees and Mountain 
Plants. Fabyan s Hotel. Echo 53 

CHAPTER V. 

Ascent of Mount Washington. Mr. Oakes. Zones of distinct Vegeta 
tion. Belt of Dwarf Firs. Bald Region and Arctic Flora on Sum 
mit. View from Summit. Migration of Plants from Arctic Re 
gions. Change of Climate since Glacial Period. Granitic Rocks 0* 
White Mountains. Franconia Notch. Revival at Bethlehem. Miller- 
ite Movement. The Tabernacle at Boston. Mormons. Remarks on 
New England Fanaticism ......... 66 

CHAPTER VI. 

Social Equality. Position of Servants. War with England. Coalition 
of Northern Democrats, and Southern Slave-owners. Ostracism of 
Wealth. Legislators paid. Envy in a Democracy. Politics of the 
Country and the City. Pledges at Elections. Universal Suffrage. 
Adventure in a Stage Coach. Return from the White Mountains. 
Plymouth in New Hampshire. Congregational and Methodist 
Churches. Theological Discussions of Fellow Travelers. Temper 
ance Movement. Post-Office Abuses. Lowell Factories . . .80 

CHAPTER VII. 

Plymouth, Massachusetts. Plymouth Beach. Marine Shells. Quick 
sand. Names of Pilgrim Fathers. Forefathers Day. Pilgrim Rel 
ics. Their Authenticity considered. Decoy Pond. A Barn Travel 
ing. Excursion to Salem. Museum. Warrants for Execution of 
Witches. Causes of the Persecution. Convert iiou with Colored 
Abolitionists. Comparative Capacity of White uud Negro Kaot-e. 
Half-Breeds and Hybrid Intellects ....... 93 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

PAGE 

Pretended Fossil Sea Serpent, or Zeuglodon, from Alabama. Recent 
Appearance of a Sea Serpent in Gulf of St. Lawrence. In Norway in 
1845. Near Cape Ann, Massachusetts, 1817. American Descrip 
tions. Conjectures as to Nature of the Animal. Sea Snake stranded 
in the Orkneys proved to be a Shark. Dr. Barclay s Memoir. Sir 
Everard Home s Opinion. Sea Serpent of Hebrides, 1808. Reasons 
for concluding that Pontoppidan s Sea Snake was a Basking Shark. 
Captain M Quhae s Sea Serpent 107 



CHAPTER IX. 

Boston. No Private Lodgings. Boarding-houses. Hotels. Effects of 
the Climate on Health. Large Fortunes. Style of Living. Serv 
ants. Carriages. Education of Ladies. Marriages. Professional 
Incomes. Protectionist Doctrines. Peculiarities of Language. 
Literary Tastes. Cost of Living. Alarms of Fire .... 122 



CHAPTER X. 

Boston. Blind Asylum and Laura Briclgeman. Respect for Freedom 
of Conscience. Cemetery of Mount Auburn. Channing s Cenotaph. 
Episcopal Churches. Unitarian Congregations. Eminent Preach 
ers. Progress of Unitarians why slow. Their works reprinted in 
England. Nothingarians. Episcopalian Asceticism. Separation of 
Religion and Politics . . 133 



CHAPTER XI. 

Boston. Whig Caucus. Speech of Mr. Webster. Politics in Masachu- 
setts. Election of Governor and Representatives. Thanksgiving Day 
and Governor s Proclamation. Absence of Pauperism. Irish Repeal 
Meeting. New England Sympathizer. Visit to a Free School. 
State Education. Pay and Social Rank of Teachers Importance of 
the Profession. Rapid Progress and Effects of Educational Move 
ment. Popular Lectures. Lending Libraries . . . . .141 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER XII. 

PAGE 

Boston, Popular Education, continued. Patronage of Universities and 
Science. Channing on Milton. Milton s Scheme of teaching the 
Natural Sciences. New England Free Schools. Their Origin. First 
Puritan Settlers not illiterate. Sincerity of their Religious Faith. 
Schools founded in Seventeenth Century in Massachusetts. Discour 
aged in Virginia. Sir W. Berkeley s Letter. Pastor Robinson s Views 
of Progress in Religion. Organization of Congregational Church 
es. No Penalties for Dissent. Provision made for future Variations 
in Creeds. Mode of working exemplified. Impossibility of conceal 
ing Truths relating to Religion from an educated Population. Gain 
to the Higher Classes, especially the Clergy. New Theological Col- 

. lege. The Lower Orders not rendered indolent, discontented, or ir 
religious by Education. Peculiar Stimulus to Popular Instruction in 
the United States 155 

CHAPTER XIII. 

Leaving Boston for the South. Railway Stove. Fall of Snow. New- 
Haven, and Visit to Professor Silliman. New York. Improvements 
in the City. Croton Waterworks. Fountains. Recent Conflagra 
tion. New Churches. Trinity Church. News from Europe of Con 
verts to Rome. Reaction against Tractarians. Electric Telegraph, 
its Progres in America. Morse and Wheatstone. 11,000 Schools in 
New York for Secular instruction. Absence of Smoke. Irish Voters. 
Nativism 178 

CHAPTER XIV. 

New York to Philadelphia. Scenery in New Jersey. War about Ore 
gon. Protectionist Theories. Income Tax and Repudiation. Re 
criminations against British Aggrandizement. Irish Quarter and 
fraudulent Votes. Washington. Congress and Annexation of Texas. 
General Cass for War. Winthrop for Arbitration. Inflated Elo 
quence. Supreme Court. Slavery in District of Columbia. 
Museum, Collection of Corals. Sculpture from Palenque. Conversa 
tions with Mr. Fox. A Residence at Washington not favorable to a 
just Estimate of the United States. False Position of Foreign Diplo 
matists . 191 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER XV. 

PAGE 

Washington to Richmond. Legislature of Virginia in Session. Substi 
tution of White for Slave Labor. Progress of Negro Instruction ,~ 

-^-SJave-dealers. Kindness to Negroes. Coal of Oolitic Period near 
Richmond. Visit to the Mines. Upright Fossil Trees. Deep Shafts, 
and "Thickness of Coal Seams. Explosion of Gas. Natural Coke. 
Resemblance of the more modern Coal-measures to old Carboniferous 
Rocks. Whites working with free Negroes in the Mines . . . 205 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Journey through North Carolina. Wilmington. Recent Fire and Pass 
ports for Slaves. Cape Fear River and Smithfield. Spanish Moss, 
and Uses of. Charleston. Anti-Negro Feeling. Passage from Mu- 
lattoes to Whites. Law against importing free Blacks. Dispute with 
Massachusetts. Society in Charleston. Governesses. War-Panic. 
Anti-English Feeling caused by Newspaper Press. National Arbitra 
tion of the Americans. Dr. Bachman s Zoology. Geographical 
Representation of Species. Rattle-Snakes. Turkey Buzzards . .218 

CHAPTER XVII. 

Charleston to Savannah. Beaufort River, or Inland Navigation in South 
Carolina. Slave Stealer. Cockspur Island. Rapid growth of Oysters. 
Eagle caught by Oyster. Excursion from Savannah to Skiddaway 
Island. Megatherium and Mylodon. Cabbage Palms, or tree Palmet 
tos. Deceptive Appearance of Submarine Forest. Alligators swal 
lowing Flints. Their Tenacity of Life when decapitated. Grove 
of Live Oaks. Slaves taken to Free States 230 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

Savannah to Darien. Anti-Slavery Meetings discussed. War with 
England. Landing at Darien. Crackers. Scenery on Altamaha 
River. Negro Boatmen singing. Marsh Blackbird in Rice Grounds. 
Hospitality of Southern Planters. New Clearing and Natural Rotation 
of Trees. Birds. Shrike and Kingfisher. Excursion to St. Simon s 
Island. Butler s Island and Negroes. Stumps of Trees in Salt 



CONTENTS. 



PAGH 

Marshes proving Subsidence of Land. Alligator seen. Their Nests 
and Habits. Their Fear of Porpoises. Indian Shell Mound on St. 
Simon s Island. Date-palm, Orange, Lemon, and Olive Trees. Hur 
ricanes. Visit to outermost Barrier Island. Sea Shells on Beach. 
Negro Maid-Servants 240 

CHAPTER XIX. 

Rivers made turbid by the Clearing of Forests. Land rising in successive 
Terraces. Origin of these. Bones of extinct Quadrupeds in Lower 
Terrace. Associated Marine Shells. Digging of Brunswick Canal. 
Extinction of Megatherium and its Contempories. Dying out of rare 
Species Gordonia Pubescens. Life of Southern Planters. Negroes 
on a Rice Plantation. Black Children. Separate Negro Houses.-^ 
Work exacted. Hospital for Negroes. Food and Dress. Black/ 
Driver. Prevention of Crimes. African Tom. Progress of Negroes j 
in Civilization. Conversions to Christianity. Episcopalian, Baptist, 
and Methodist Missionaries. Amalgamation and Mixture of Races . 256 




Library, j 




A SECOND VISIT 

TO 

THE UNITED STATES, 



CHAPTER I. 

Voyage from Liverpool to Halifax. Gale. Iceberg. Drift Ice and Gulf 
Stream. Coast of Newfoundland. Engine-room of Steamer. Conver 
sations on Coolies in the West Indies. Halifax. News of Judge Story s 
Death. Boston. Success of the Mail Steam Packets. Custom House 
Officers. 

Sept. 4. 1845. EMBARKED with my wife at Liverpool, in 
the Britannia, one of the Cunard line of steam-ships, bound for 
Halifax and Boston. On leaving the wharf, we had first been 
crammed, with a crowd of passengers and heaps of luggage, into 
a diminutive steamer, which looked like a toy by the side of the 
larger ship, of 1200 tons, in which we were to cross the ocean. 
I was reminded, however, by a friend, that this small craft was 
more than three times as large as one of the open caravels of 
Columbus, in his first voyage, which was only 1 5 tons burden, 
and without a deck. It is, indeed, marvelous to reflect on the 
daring of the early adventurers; for Frobisher, in 1576, mado 
his way from the Thames to the shores of Labrador with two 
small barks of 20 and 25 tons each, not much surpassing in size 
the barge of a man-of-war ; and Sir Humphry Gilbert crossed to 
Newfoundland, in 1583, in a bark of 10 tons only, which was 
lost in a tempest on the return voyage. 



14 GALE. [CHAP. I. 

The morning after we set sail we found ourselves off Cork, in 
the midst of the experimental squadron of steamers and ships of 
the line, commanded by Sir Hyde Parker. They had been out 
several weeks performing their nautical evolutions, and we had 
the amusement of passing close to the largest ships of the fleet 
the St. Vincent and the Superb. Our captain fired a salute as 
we went under the batteries of the last of these the Admiral s 
ship. 

After sailing at the rate of more than 200 miles a day for 
four days, our progress was retarded, Sept. 8, by an equinoctial 
gale, which came in from the southwest, and. blowing for twelve 
hours, raised such a sea, that we only made four miles an hour. 

Another gale of still greater violence came on six days after 
ward, on the night of the 14th, when the ship was running at 
the rate of ten and a half miles an hour, along the eastern edge 
of the Great Baifk. The wind had been N.E., when suddenly, 
and in an instant, it blew from the N.W. I was in my berth 
below when this squall struck the vessel, and supposed that we 
had run upon some floating timber or an iceberg. We felt the 
ship heel as if falling over. On inquiry next day of the captain, 
and the only passenger who was on deck at the time of this con 
cussion, I learnt that they saw a cloud of white foam advancing 
toward them on the surface of the sea from the N.W., like a 
line of surf on a beach. The captain had time to get the sails 
hauled half up, all except the top-sail, which was torn to pieces, 
when the advancing line of foam reached the ship, at which 
moment there was some vivid lightning, which the passenger 
thought was the cause of the blow resembling the stroke of a 
solid body against the steamer. When the wind first filled the 
sails in an opposite direction, it seemed as if the masts must give 
way. All hands had been called on deck, and the men went 
into the rigging to furl the sails with the utmost order and cool 
ness. In a few minutes the wind had veered rapidly round the 
compass, from N.W. to N.E., and then went on to blow from 
this, the old quarter again, a perfect hurricane for twenty-three 
hours ; the spray being carried mast high, so that there was a 
complete mingling of sea and sky. We could never tell whether 



CHAP. I.] POKPOISES. 15 

the cloud which enveloped us consisted chiefly of the foam "blown 
off the crests of the waves, or of the driving mist and rain which 
were falling during the greater part of the day. 

Among our passengers were some experienced American sea- 
eaptains, who had commanded vessels of their own round Cape 
Horn, and, being now for the first time in a steamer at sea, were 
watching with professional interest the Britannia s behavior in 
the storm. They came to the conclusion, that one of these vessels, 
well appointed, with a full crew, skilled officers, and good en 
gineers, was safer than any sailing packet ; being light in their 
rigging, and having small sails, they run no danger of having 
their masts carried away in a stiff breeze, and the power of steam 
enables them always to make way, so as to steer and keep their 
head to the wind, on which safety depends. It sometimes hap 
pens, when a wave strikes a sailing vessel in a squall, that before 
she has time to work round and get her head to windward, an 
other wave breaks over and swamps her, and to such an accident 
the loss of several packets between the United States and Liver 
pool is attributed. 

I observed that there was no lightning conductor in our ship ; 
and it seems to be the prevailing belief that steam-boats are less 
liable than other vessels to suffer from lightning, although the 
steamers in the royal navy are fitted with copper-wire rope con 
ductors. 

My chief amusement, when the weather was moderate, was 
to watch the porpoises (Delphinus phoccena) gamboling, rolling, 
and tumbling in the water, and yet keeping up with our ship 
when she was running eleven miles an hour. They were very 
numerous, usually following each other in a line at short intervals, 
each individual about four or five feet long, their backs of a blue- 
ish-black color, swimming without effort, and seeming scarcely to 
move either their fins or tail. Occasionally they dive, and then 
re-appear to take breath at a great distance, often leaping up out 
of the water, so as to display their silvery white bodies. The 
only other living creatures which attracted our attention, when 
still far from land, were enormous flights of sea-birds, which filled 
the air, or were seen swimming on the ocean near the shoal called 



16 ICEBERG. [CHAP. I. 

the Flemish Cap, lat. 47 35 N. ; long. 44 3.2 W. They 
feed on fish peculiar to these comparatively shallow parts of the 
Atlantic. 

But the event of chief interest to me on this voyage AV.-IS be 
holding, for the first time in my life, a large iceberg. . It came 
in sight on the 13th Sept., a season when they are rarely met 
with here. We were nearing the Great Bank, which was about 
eight miles distant, the air foggy, so that I could only see it 
dimly through the telescope, although it was as white as snow, 
and supposed by the officers to be about 200 feet high. The 
foggy and chilly state of the atmosphere had led the captain to 
suspect the proximity of floating ice, and half-hourly observations 
had been made on the temperature of the sea, but the water was 
always at 49 F., as is usual in this month. We were then in 
lat. 47 37 N., long. 45 39 W., our latitude corresponding to 
that of the Loire in France. 

To a geologist, accustomed to seek for the explanation of vari 
ous phenomena in the British Isles and Northern Europe, espe 
cially the transportation of huge stones to great distances, and the 
polishing and grooving of the surfaces of solid rocks, by referring 
to the agency of icebergs at remote periods, when much of what 
is now land in the northern hemisphere was still submerged, it is 
no small gratification to see, for the first time, one of these icy 
masses floating so far to the southward. I learnt from our cap 
tain that last year, June 1844, he fell in with an iceberg aground 
at some distance from the land ofT Cape Race, on the S.E. point 
of Newfoundland, in lat. 4G 40 N. It was of a square shape, 
100 feet high, and had stranded in a sea of some depth ; for its 
sides were steep, and soundings of fifty fathoms were obtained 
close to the ice. It was seen at the same spot ten days after 
ward by a brig. A military officer on board also tells me that 
last year, when he was in garrison in Newfoundland, an iceberg 
continued aground in the harbor of St. John s for a year, and 
they used to fire cannon-balls at it from the battery. There are, 
indeed, innumerable well-authenticated cases of these islands of 
floating ice having stranded on the* great oceanic shoals S.E. of 
Newfoundland, even in places where the water is no less than 



CHAP. I.] DRIFTING OF ICEBERGS. 17 

100 fathoms deep, the average depth over the Great Bank being 
from forty to fifty fathoms. That they should be arrested in. 
their course is not; surprising, when we consider that the mass of 
floating ice below water is eight times greater than that above ; 
and Sir James Ross saw icebergs which had rur. aground in 
Baffin s Bay, in water 1500 feet deep. If we reflect on the 
weight of these enormous masses, and the momentum which 
they accjuire when impelled by winds and currents, and when 
they are moving at the rate of several miles an hour, it seems 
difficult to over-estimate the disturbance which they must create 
on a soft bottom of mud or loose sand, or the grinding power they 
must exert when they grate along a shelf of solid rock overspread 
with a layer of sand. 

Mr. Redfield of New York has lately published * a chart show 
ing the positions of the icebergs observed in the North Atlantic 
daring the last fifteen years, and it will be remarked, that they 
have been met with at various points between the 47th and 36th 
parallels of latitude, the most southern being that which Captain 
Couthuoy encountered, lat. 36 10 N., long. 39 W., a mile 
long and 100 feet high. This berg w^as on the extreme southern 
boundary of the gulf stream, which it had crossed against the 
direction of the superficial current, so as to get as far south as the 
latitude of the Straits of Gibraltar. In fact, these great ice- 
islands coming from the Greenland seas are not stopped by the 
gulf-stream, which is a mere superficial current of warmer water 
flowing in an opposite direction, but are borne along from N.E. 
to S.W. by the force of the arctic under-current, consisting of 
colder water, into which the icebergs descend to a great depth. 

All the circumstances connected with the geographical outline 
of the coast, the shape of the sea-bottom, the oceanic currents, 
and the prevailing winds, although liable to be modified and 
greatly altered in the course of time, may continue nearly the 
same for the next ten thousand or twenty thousand years ; and 
in that period thousands of bergs, occasionally charged with frag 
ments of rock, and many of them running aground in a variety 
of places, will be conveyed in every century over certain tracts 
* Amer. Journ. Science, vol. xlviii. 1844, 



18 COAST OF NEWFOUNDLAND. [CHAP. I. 

of the Atlantic, and in given directions. The natural course of 
oceanic currents transporting ice from polar regions is from N.E. 
to S.W. ; the westerly inclination being due to the influence of 
the increased velocity of the diurnal rotation of the earth s sur 
face as we proceed southward. Now it is a well-known fact, 
and one of great geological interest, which I had an opportunity 
of verifying myself in 1842,^ that in Canada the polished surfaces 
of hard rocks exhibit those strise and straight parallel grooves 
(such as are generally ascribed to glacial action) in a N.E. and 
S.W. direction, and the blocks called erratic have also traveled 
from N.E. to S.W. Their course, therefore, agrees, as Mr. 
Redfield has pointed out, with the normal direction of polar cur 
rents charged with ice, where no disturbing causes have inter 
vened. In order to account for the phenomenon, we have to sup 
pose that Canada was submerged at the time when the rocks 
were polished and striated by the grating of the ice on the ancient 
sea-bottom ; and that this was actually the case, is proved by in 
dependent evidence, namely, the occurrence of marine shells of 
recent species at various heights above the level of the sea in 
the region drained by the St. Lawrence. f Professor Hitchcock 
has shown that, in Massachusetts, there is another system of 
striai and grooves running from N.N.E. to S.S.W. ; the bould 
ers and transported blocks of the same region having taken a cor 
responding course, doubtless, in consequence of the floating ice 
bergs having, in that case, been made by winds or currents, or 
the shape of the land and sea-bottom, to deviate from the normal 
direction. 

Many of the icebergs annually drifted into southern latitudes 
in the Atlantic, are covered with seals, which are thus brought 
into very uncongenial climates, and probably are never able to 
make their way back again. They are often seen playing about 
the rocks on the shores of Massachusetts in summer, so that they 
seem able, for a time at least, to accommodate themselves to con 
siderable heat. 

Early on the morning of the 1 5th of September, the captain 

* Sec "Lyoll s Travels in North America, vol. ii, p. 135. 
t Ibid. vol. h. p, 143. 



CHAP. I.] ENGINE-ROOM OF A STEAMER. 19 



got sight of land, consisting of the hills near St. John s, New 
foundland, about forty miles distant. When we came on deck, 
we were running rapidly in smooth water along the shore, within 
four miles of Trespassey Bay. The atmosphere was bright, and 
we had a clear view of the rocky coast, which reminded me of 
some of the most sterile, cold, and treeless parts of Scotland. 
Not even a shrub appeared to vary the uniform covering of green 
turf; yet we were in a latitude corresponding to the South of 
France. 

In a large steam-ship like the Britannia, there are three very 
distinct societies, whose employments during the voyage are sin 
gularly contrasted. There are the sailors, all of whom were 
fully occupied under their officers, for a time at least, during the 
gale, furling the sails and attending to the ordinary duties of a 
sailing ship. Then there is the saloon, where gentlemen and 
well-dressed ladies are seen lounging and reading books, or talk 
ing, or playing backgammon, and enjoying, except during a hur 
ricane, the luxuries arid expensive fare of a large hotel. Tn 
another spacious room, which I had the curiosity to visit after 
the storm, is a large corps of enginemen and firemen, with sooty 
faces and soiled clothes, pale with heat, heaping up coals on the 
great furnaces, or regulating the machinery. On visiting the 
large engine-room, we were filled with admiration at seeing the 
complicated apparatus, and the ease with which it moved, having 
never once stopped for a minute when traversing 3000 miles of 
ocean, although the vessel had been .pitching and rolling, and 
sometimes quivering, as she was forced by the power of the steam 
against the opposing waves, and although the ship had sometimes 
heeled at a very high angle, especially when struck suddenly by 
the squall of the 14th. The engine is so placed near the center 
of the ship, that during a storm the piston is never inclined at a 
higher angle than twelve degrees, which does not derange the 
freedom of its motion. The Britannia, a ship of 1200 tons, has 
four large boilers ; the engines having a 44-0 horse power. 
When she left Liverpool she had 550 tons of cuals in her, and 
burned from thirty to forty tons a day, her speed augmenting 
sensibly toward the end of the voyage, as she grew lighter ; 



20 REVOLUTIONS OF ENGINE. [CHA.P. I. 

but, on the other hand, the vibration caused by the machinery 
increasing also, much to the discomfort of the passengers. 

Among the wonders of the engine-room, no object made so 
lively an impression on my mind as a small dial, called the 
Indicator, where a hand, like that of a clock, moving round in a 
circle, registers the number of revolutions made by the wheels of 
the engine during the whole voyage ; this hand or index being 
attached to one of the moving shafts, and made to advance 
slightly by every stroke. We were going at the time at the 
rate of ten and a half miles an hour, and the paddle-wheels 
were revolving fifteen and a half times a minute ; but during the 
gale they had only made six or seven revolutions, the engineer, 
to avoid too great a strain on the machinery, having then burned 
much less coal, and going no more than half speed. Our short 
est day s sail, during the whole voyage, was 114 miles. I 
observed, on our arrival at Boston, that the number of revolu 
tions registered by the Indicator was 275,122, the ship having 
run 2946 miles in fourteen days and twenty-two hours ; the 
distance from Liverpool to Halifax being 2550 miles, and from 
thence to Boston 396. For the sake of comparing this result 
with former voyages of the Britannia, I made the following 
extract from the Log Book of the chief engineer : 

Number of Length of 

Revolutions Voyage. 

of the Engines. Days. Hours. 

Outward Voyage, May. 1845 .... 273,328 .... 14 12 

Homeward do. June, " .... 253,073 .... 11 8 

Outward do. July, " .... 282,409 .... 18 13 

Homeward do. August, " .... 292,122 .... 14 2 

It is remarkable how nearly the number of strokes made by 
the engine in our present voyage agrees with those recorded in 
the voyage of last May, which it will be seen was of the sarn,e 
length, with the exception of a few hours, the longer voyage 
exhibiting a slight excess in the number of revolutions. In all 
the four trips, the difference between the highest and lowest 
numbers, amounts to no more than a seventh or eighth of the 
whole. It is like the regular pulsation of the heart, beating a 
given number of times in a minute ; the pulse quickening during 



CHAP. I.] COOLIES IN THE WEST INDIES. 21 

excitement and more rapid motion, and being slower when in 
comparative rest, yet on the whole preserving a remarkable 
uniformity of action. Nor can any one in full health and vigor 
be more unconscious of the rapid contractions and dilatations of 
the heart, than are nearly all the inmates of the steam-ship of 
the complicated works and movements of the machinery, on the 
accuracy of which their progress and safety depends. 

In the course of the last twelve months, the steamers on this 
line have sometimes taken as much as seventeen, and even 
twenty-one days, to make their passage against head winds by 
Halifax, to Boston ; but the comparative advantage of steam 
power is never more evident than at the period of the most 
tedious voyages, the liners having required seventy days or more 
to cross in corresponding seasons. 

During the passage we had some animated discussions in the 
saloon on the grand experiment now making by the British 
government, of importing Coolies, or Hindoo emigrants, from the 
Deccan into the West Indies, to make up for the deiiciency of 
Negro labor consequent on the emancipation of the slaves. We 
had on board a Liverpool merchant, who had a large contract 
for conveying these Coolies across the ocean, and who told us 
that more than forty ships would be employed this year (1845) 
in carrying each 300 Hindoo laborers to Jamaica, at the cost of 
lG per head, and that he should sell the casks, which con 
tained the water for their drink, for the sugar trade in the West 
Indies. The New Englanders on board wished to know how 
far this proceeding differed from a new slave trade. It was 
explained to them that the emigrants were starving in their own 
country ; that the act was a voluntary one on their part ; and 
that, after a short term of years, the government was bound to 
give them a free passage back to their native country. Of this 
privilege many, after saving a sum of money, had actually 
availed themselves. It was also alleged that they made good 
agricultural laborers in a tropical climate. The Americans 
replied, that to introduce into any colony two distinct races, 
having different languages and religions, such as Negroes and 
Hindoos, is a curse of the greatest magnitude, and of the most 



22 COOLIES IN THE WEST INDIES. [CHAP. I. 



lasting kind, as experience had proved throughout the American 
continent. 

A Barbadoes planter, who was present, declared his opinion 
that in his island the emancipation of the negroes had been suc 
cessful ; the population, about 120,000, being dense, arid a large 
proportion of them having white blood in their veins, with many 
of the wants of civilized men, and a strong wish to educate their 
children. The Americans, however, drew from him the admis 
sion, that in proportion as the colored people were rising in so 
ciety, the whites, whose aristocratic feelings and tastes were 
wounded by the increased importance of the inferior race, were 
leaving Barbadoes, the richest of them retreating to England, 
and the poor seeking their fortunes in the United States. It was 
also conceded, that in the larger islands, such as Jamaica, which 
the Americans compared to their Southern States, the negroes 
have retreated to unoccupied lands and squatted, and could not 
be induced to labor, and were therefore retrograding in civiliza 
tion ; so that the experience of more than ten years would be 
required before the Americans could feel warranted in imitating 
the example of England, even if they had the means of indemni 
fying the southern planters. 

We landed at Halifax on the 17th of September, and spent 
some hours there very agreeably, much refreshed by a walk on 
terra firma, and glad to call on some friends in the town. I 
was surprised to find that some of our fellow passengers, bound 
for Montreal, intended to go on with us to Boston, instead of 
stopping here ; so great are the facilities now enjoyed of traveling 
from New England to Canada, passing via Boston by railway to 
Albany, and thence by steam-boats through Lakes George and 
Champlain to Montreal. 

The chief subject of conversation, during the remaining two 
days of our voyage, was the death of Judge Story, the eminent 
jurist, whose works and decisions have been often cited as of high 
authority by English judges. The news of this unexpected event 
reached us at Halifax, and was evidently a matter of deep con 
cern to his fellow citizens, by whom he had been much loved and 
admired. After retiring from the bench of the Supreme Court 



CHAP. I.] JUDGE STORY. 03 

at Washington, Story had been placed at the head of the Law 
School in Harvard University, which he had soon raised to celeb 
rity from small beginnings, drawing students to his lectures from 
every state of the Union. 

I afterward read, in the newspapers of Boston, several funeral 
orations pronounced in his honor, some from the pulpit, by preach 
ers of his own denomination (he was president of the Unitarian 
Association), which praised him for his pure, scriptural, and lib 
eral Christianity, and represented him as an earnest defender of 
the faith, one who had given to its evidences that accurate inves 
tigation which his reflecting mind and professional habits demand 
ed. "What he found to be true, he was never ashamed or afraid 
to declare. He valued the Gospel and felt his own need of its 
restraining and consoling power, alike in temptation and grief," 
&c. 

But eloquent eulogies were not wanting from ministers of some 
of the other churches, usually called in New England, by way 
of distinction from the Unitarian, " orthodox," some of which 
displayed at once the intensity and liberality of sectarian feeling 
in this country. They did homage to his talents and the upright 
ness of his conduct, and they dealt with his theological opinions in 
the spirit of Dry den s beautiful lines : 

" The soul of Arcite went where heathens go, 
Who better live than we, though less they know." 

I will extract, from one of the most favorable of these effusions, 
the following passage : 

" Judge Story was a Christian who professed a firm belief in 
the Bible as a revelation from God. He was a Unitarian ; but 
if he reposed in the divine mercy through the mediation of 
Christ, and if he came with the temper of a child to the Scrip 
tures, I have no doubt he has been received of Him to whom, in 
his last words, he committed himself in prayer ; and, had he been 
more orthodox in his creed without the Christian spirit and the 
Christian life, his orthodoxy would not have saved him." 

Sept. i9. Early in the morning of the fifteenth day from 
our leaving Liverpool, we came in sight of the lighthouse of Cape 



24 SEVERE FROST AT BOSTON. [CHAP. I. 

Anne, and a small and gayly painted green schooner, in full sail, 
and scudding rapidly through the water, brought us a pilot. In 
a few hours the long line of coast became more and more distinct, 
till Salem, Nahant, Lynn, the harbor of Boston and its islands, 
and at last the dome -of the State House, crowning the highest 
eminence, came full into view. To us the most novel feature in 
the architectural aspect of the city, was the Bunker Hill Monu 
ment, which had been erected since 1842 ; the form of which, 
as it resembles an Egyptian obelisk, and possibly because I had 
seen that form imitated in some of our tall factory chimneys, gave 
me no pleasure. 

After the cloudy and stormy weather we had encountered in 
the Atlantic, and the ice and fogs seen near the great banks, we 
were delighted with the clear atmosphere and bright sunshine of 
Boston, and heard with surprise of the intense heat of the sum 
mer, of which many persons had lately died, especially in New 
York. The extremes, indeed, of heat and cold in this country, 
are truly remarkable. Looking into the windows of a print 
shop, I saw an engraving of our good ship, the Britannia, which 
we had just quitted, represented as in the act of forcing her way 
through the ice of Boston harbor in the winter of 1844 a truly 
arctic scene. A fellow passenger, a merchant from New York, 
where they are jealous of the monopoly hitherto enjoyed by their 
New England rival, of a direct and regular stearn communica 
tion with Europe, remarked to me that if the people of Boston 
had been wise, they would never have encouraged the publication 
of this print, as it was a clear proof that the British government 
should rather have selected New York, where the sea never 
freezes, as the fittest port for the mail packets. I had heard 
much during the voyage of this strange adventure of the Britan 
nia in the ice. Last winter it appears there had been a frost of 
unusual intensity, such as had not been known for more than half 
a century, which caused the sea to be frozen over in the harbor 
of Boston, although the water is as salt there as in mid-ocean. 
Moreover, the tide runs there at the rate of four or five miles an 
hour, rising twelve feet, and causing the whole body of the ice to 
be uplifted arid let down again to that amount twice every twen- 



CHAP. I.] SEVERE FROST AT BOSTON. 25 

ty-four hours. Notwithstanding this movement, the surface re 
mained even and unbroken, except along the shore, where it 
cracked. 

Had the continuance of this frost been anticipated, it would 
have been easy to keep open a passage ; but on the 1st of Feb 
ruary, when the Britannia was appointed to sail, it was found 
that the ice was seven feet thick in the wharf, and two feet 
thick for a distance of seven miles out ; so that wagons and carts 
were conveying cotton and other freights from the shore to the 
edge of the ice, where ships were taking in their cargoes. No 
sooner was it understood that the mail was imprisoned, than the 
public spirit of the whole city was roused, and a large sum of 
money instantly subscribed for cutting a canal, seven miles long 
and 100 feet wide, through the ice. They began the operation 
by making two straight furrows, seven inches deep, with an ice 
plough drawn by horses, and then sawed the ice into square 
sheets, each 100 feet in diameter. When these were detached, 
they were made to slide, by. means of iron hooks and ropes fixed 
to them, under the great body of the ice, one edge being first 
depressed, and the ropes being pulled by a team of horses, and 
occasionally by a body of fifty men. On the 3d of February, 
only two days after her time, the steamer sailed out, breaking 
through a newly-formed sheet of ice, two inches thick, her bows 
being fortified with iron to protect her copper sheeting. She 
burst through the ice at the rate of seven miles an hour without 
much damage to her paddles ; but before she was in clear water, 
all her guard of iron had been torn off. An eye-witness of the 
scene told me that tents had been pitched on the ice, then cov 
ered by a slight fall of snow, and a concourse of people followed 
and cheered for the first mile, some in sleighs, others in sailing 
Doats fitted up with long blades of iron, like skates, by means of 
which they are urged rapidly along by their sails, not only before 
the wind, but even with a side wind, tacking and beating to 
windward as if they were in the water. 

The Britannia, released from her bonds, reached Liverpool in 
Ifteen days, so that no alarm had been occasioned by the delay; 
,nd when the British Post-Office department offered to defray 
VOL. i. B 



26 CUSTOM-HOUSE OFFICERS. [CHAP. 1. 

the expense of the ice-channel, the citizens of Boston declined to 
be reimbursed. 

We were not detained more than an hour in the Custom 
house, although the number of our packages was great. In that 
hour the newspapers which had come out with us had been soj 
rapidly distributed, that our carriage was assailed in the streets 
by a host of vociferous boys, calling out, " Fifteen days later 
from Europe" " The Times and Punch just received by the 
Britannia." In the course of my travels in the United States I 
heard American politicians complaining of the frequent change 
of officials, high and low, as often as a new party comes into 
power. In spite of this practice, however, the Custom-house 
officers, greatly to the comfort of the public, belong to a higher 
grade of society than those at Liverpool and our principal ports. 
I asked a New England friend, who was well acquainted with 
the " Old Country," whether the subordinates here are more 
highly paid ? " By no means," he replied. " The difference, 
then," said I, " must be owing to the better education given to 
all in your public schools?" "Perhaps, in some degree," he 
rejoined ; " but far more to the peculiarity of our institutions. 
Hecent examples are not wanting of men who have passed in a 
few years from the chief place in one of our great Custom-houses 
to a seat in the Cabinet or an appointment as embassador to a 
first-rate European power ; but, what is far more to the point, 
men who are unsuccessful at the bar or the church, often accept 
inferior stations in the Custom-house and other public offices 
without loss of social position." This explanation led me to 
reflect how much the British public might gain if a multitude 
of the smaller places in the public service at home, now slighted 
by aristocratic prejudices as ungenteel, were filled by those gentle 
men who, after being highly educated at Eton and other public 
schools, lead now a pastoral life in Australia, or spend their best 
days in exile far from their kindred and native land, as soldiers 
or sailors, wilhin the tropics. 



CHAPTER II. 

Boston. Horticultural Show in Faneuil Hall. Review of Militia. Peace 
Association. Excursion to the White Mountains. Railway Traveling. 
Portsmouth, New Hampshire. Geology, Fossils in Drift. Submarine 
Forest. Wild Plants ; Asters, Solidagos, Poison Ivy. Swallows. 
Glacial Grooves. Rocfcs transported by Antarctic Ice. Body of a Whale 
discovered by an American Trader in an Iceberg. 

GREAT progress has been made in beautifying the city of 
Boston by new public buildings in the three years since we were 
last here. Several of these are constructed of granite, in a hand 
some style of architecture. The site of the town is almost an 
island, which has been united to the main land by long mounds, 
which are beginning to radiate in all directions, except the east, 
like the spokes of a wheel. Railway trains are seen continually 
flying to and fro along these narrow causeways at all hours of 
the day. 

On the evening of our arrival we went to a horticultural show 
of fruit and flowers in Faneuil Hall, where we found a large 
assembly of both sexes enjoying a " temperance feast," a band of 
music in the gallery, and the table spread with cakes, fruit, ices, 
tea, milk, and whey. I was glad to observe, what I am told, 
how r ever, is an innovation here, that the ladies, instead of merely 
looking on from a gallery to see the gentlemen eat, were sitting 
at table in the body of the hall, and listening to some of the first 
orators of the land, Daniel Webster, R. C. Winthrop, and our 
friend and late fellow-voyager in the Britannia, Edward Everett, 
whose reception, on his return from his embassy to England, was 
most enthusiastic. He said, " he had been so lately rocking on 
the Atlantic, whose lullaby was not always of the gentlest, that 
he was hardly fit for a rocking in < the old cradle of Liberty ; 
and felt almost unconsciously inclined to catch at the table to 
steady himself, expecting to see the flowers and the fruit fetch 
away in some lee-lurch. Even the pillars of old Faneuil Hal!, 



28 REVIEW OF MILITIA. [CHAP. II. 

which are not often found out of the true plumb-line, seemed to 
reel over his head." 

Allusion was here made to this Hall having been the place of 
large popular meetings before 1775, where American patriotism 
was first roused to make a stand against the claims of the mother- 
country to impose taxes without consent of the provincial legis 
lature. In later days, the building being under the control of 
the city authorities, and the Whigs being usually in the ascendant 
here, the moderate party have almost always obtained possession 
of the Hall. 

Sept. 23. From the windows of a friend s house, opening on 
the Common, we have a full view of what is called the " Fall 
Parade," or autumnal review of the Boston militia, cavalry and 
infantry, which has lasted all day, ending with a sham fight and 
much firing of cannon. Not that there is any excess of military 
fervor in this State, as in some others at the present moment ; 
on the contrary, a numerous and increasing Peace Association is 
distributing, gratis, many thousand copies of a, recent Fourth-of- 
July oration against war and military establishments, delivered 
by Mr. Charles Sumner. I was asked by a young friend here, 
in full uniform, whether I did not think " Independence-day" (an 
anniversary when all who have a regimental costume are accus 
tomed to wear it), a most inappropriate time for such an effusion, 
in which non-resistance principles bordering on Quakerism had 
been avowed; the orator asking, among other questions, "What 
is the use of the militia of the United States ?" and going as far 
as Channing in pronouncing war to be unchristian. 

I remembered having once admired the present Bishop of St. 
Asaph for choosing a certain day, set apart by the English 
Church for commemorating the " conspiracy, malicious practices, 
and Popish tyranny of the Romanists," for preaching a sermon 
on religious toleration ; and I therefore felt some hesitation in 
condemning the opportunity seized upon by an enthusiast of the 
peace party for propagating his views. 

" There is a soul of goodness in things evil 
Would men observingly distill it out." 

So long as the War of Independence lasted, I can understand 



CHAP. II.] PEACE ASSOCIATION. 29 

the policy of annually reading out to the assembled multitude the 
celebrated " Declaration," setting forth the injuries inflicted by 
Great Britain, her usurpations previous to the year 1776, "her 
design to reduce the Americans to a state of absolute dependence 
by quartering armed troops upon the people refusing to make 
the judges independent of the crown imposing taxes without 
consent of the colonies depriving them of trial by jury some 
times suspending their legislatures waging war against the 
colonies, arid transporting to their shores large armies of foreign 
mercenaries to complete the work of death, desolation, and 
tyranny already begun, with circumstances of cruelty and perfidy 
scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages exciting domestic 
insurrections bringing on the inhabitants of the frontiers the 
merciless Indian savages, whose known rule of warfare is the 
destruction of all ages, sexes, and conditions," &c., &c. 

All this recital may have been expedient when the great 
struggle for liberty and national existence was still pending ; but 
what effect can it have now, but to keep alive bad feelings, and 
perpetuate the memory of what should nearly be forgotten ? In 
many of the newer States the majority of the entire population 
have either themselves come out from the British Isles as new 
settlers, or are the children or grandchildren of men who emi 
grated since the " Declaration" was drawn up. If, therefore, 
they pour out in schools, or at Fourth-of-July meetings, declama 
tory and warlike speeches against the English oppressors of 
America, their words are uttered by parricidal lips, for they are 
the hereditary representatives, not of the aggrieved party, but of 
the aggressors. 

To many the Peace Associations appear to aim at objects as 
Utopian and hopeless as did the Temperance Societies to the 
generation which is now passing away. The cessation of war 
seems as unattainable as did the total abstinence from intoxicating 
liquors. But we have seen a great moral reform brought about, 
in many populous districts, mainly by combined efforts of well- 
organized societies to discourage intemperance, and we may hope 
that the hostilities of civilized nations may be mitigated at least 
by similar exertions. " Iri the harbor of Boston," says Mr. 



30 ENVIRONS OF BOSTON. [CHAP. II. 

Sumner, " the Ohio, a ship of the line, of ninety guns, is now 
swinging idly at her moorings. She costs as much annually to 
maintain her in service, in salaries, wages, and provisions, as four 
Harvard Universities." He might have gone on to calculate 
how many primary schools might be maintained by the disband 
ing of single regiments, or the paying off of single ships, of those 
vast standing armies and navies now kept up in so many coun 
tries in Europe. How much ignorance, bigotry, and savage 
barbarism in the lower classes might be prevented by employing 
in education a small part of the revenues required to maintain 
this state of armed peace ! 

Sept. 22. At this season the wealthier inhabitants of Boston 
are absent at watering-places in the hills, where there are mine 
ral springs, or at the sea-side. Some of them in their country 
villas, where we visited several friends in the neighborhood. The 
environs of Boston are very agreeable ; woods and hills, and bare 
rocks, and small lakes, and estuaries running far into the land, 
and lanes with hedges, and abundance of wild flowers. The 
extreme heat of summer does not allow of the green meadows 
and verdant lawns of England, but there are some well-kept 
gardens here a costly luxury where the wages of labor are so 
high. 

Sept. 24. I had determined before the autumn was over to 
make an excursion to the White Mountains of New Hampshire, 
which, with the exception of those in part of the Alleghany 
range in North Carolina, are the loftiest east of the Mississippi. 
Accordingly, I set off with my wife on the railway for Ports 
mouth, fifty-four miles north of Boston, which we reached in two 
hours and three quarters, having stopped at several intervening 
places, and going usually at the rate of twenty miles an hour. 
There were about eighty passengers in the train, forty of whom 
were in the same carriage as ourselves. " The car," in shape 
like a long omnibus, has a passage down the middle, sometimes 
called " the aisle," on the back part of which the seats are ranged 
transversely to the length of the apartment, which is high enough 
to allow a tall man to walk in it with his Jiat on. Each seat 
holds two persons, and is well-cushioned and furnished with a 



CHAP. II.] RAILWAY TRAVELING. 31 

wooden back ingeniously contrived, so as to turn and permit the 
traveler to face either way, as he may choose to converse with 
any acquaintance who may be sitting- before or behind him. 
The long row of windows on each side affords a good view of 
the country, of which more is thus seen than on our English 
railroads. The trains, moreover, pass frequently through the 
streets of villages and towns, many of which have sprung up 
since the construction of the railway. The conductor passes 
freely through the passage in the center, and from one car to 
another, examining tickets and receiving payment, so as to pre 
vent any delay at the stations. 

If we desire to form an estimate of the relative accommoda 
tion, advantages, comforts, and cost of the journey in one of these 
railways as compared with those of England, we must begin by 
supposing all our first, second, and third-class passengers thrown 
into one set of carriages, and we shall then be astonished at the 
ease and style with which the millions travel in the United 
States. The charge for the distance of fifty-four miles, from 
Boston to Portsmouth, was 1^ dollar each, or 6s. 4:d. English, 
which was just half \vhat we had paid three weeks before for 
first-class places on our journey from London to Liverpool 
(21. 10s. for 210 miles), the speed being in both cases the same. 
Here there is the want of privacy enjoyed in an English first- 
class carriage, and the seats, though excellent, are less luxurious. 
On the other hand, the power of standing upright when tired of 
the sitting posture is not to be despised, especially on a long 
journey, and the open view right and left from a whole line of 
windows is no small gain. But when we come to the British 
second and third-class vehicles, cushionless, dark, and if it happen 
to rain, sometimes closed up with wooden shutters, and contrast 
them with the cars of Massachusetts, and still more the average 
appearance, dress, and manners of the inmates, the wide differ 
ence is indeed remarkable; at the same time, the price which 
the humblest class here can afford to pay proves how much 
higher must be the standard of wages than with us. 

On starting, we had first to cross the harbor of Boston in a 
large ferry-boat, where, to economize time, there is a bar- with 



32 PORTSMOUTH, NEW HAMPSHIRE. [CHAP. II, 

refreshments, so that you may breakfast ; or, if you please, buy 
newspapers, or pamphlets, or novels. We then flew over rails, 
supported on long lines of wooden piles, following the coast, and 
having often the sea on one side, and fresh-water lakes, several 
miles long, or salt marshes, on the other. In some of the 
marshes we saw large haycocks on piles, waiting till the winter, 
when, the mud and water being firmly frozen, the crop can be 
carried in. We were soon at Lynn, a village of shoemakers, 
exporting shoes to distant parts of the Union ; and next went 
through the center of the town of Salem, partly in a tunnel in 
the main street ; then proceeded to Ipswich, leaving on our left 
Wenham Lake, and seeing from the road the wooden houses in 
which great stores of ice are preserved. In some of the low 
grounds I saw peat cut, and laid out to dry for fuel. We 
crossed the river Merrimack near its mouth, on a bridge of great 
length, supported by piles, and then entered New Hampshire, 
soon coming to the first town of that state, called Portsmouth, 
which has a population of 8000 souls, and was once the resi 
dence of the colonial governor. Here I made a short stay, pass 
ing the evening at the house of Mr. J. L. Hayes, to whom we 
had letters of introduction, where we found a gay party assem 
bled, and dancing. 

Next morning I set out on an excursion with Mr. Hayes, to 
explore the geological features of the neighborhood, which agree 
with those of the eastern coast generally throughout Massachu 
setts, and a great part of Maine a low region of granitic rocks, 
overspread with heaps of sand and gravel, or with clay, and 
here and there an erratic or huge block of stone, transported 
from a distance, and always from the north. Lakes and ponds 
numerous, as in the country of similar geological composition in 
the south of Norway and Sweden. Here, also, as in Scandina 
via, the overlying patches of clay and gravel often contain marine 
fossil shells of species still living in the Arctic Seas, and belong 
ing to the genera Saxicava, Astarte, Cardium, Nucula, and 
others, the same which occur in what we call the northern drift 
of Ireland and Scotland. Some of the concretions of fine clay, 
more or less calcareous, met with in New Hampshire, in this 



CHAP. II.] GEOLOGY. 

" drift" on the Saco river, thirty miles to the north of Ports 
mouth, contain the entire skeletons of a fossil fish of the same 
species as one now living in the Northern Seas, called the cape- 
Ian (Mallotus villosus), about the size of a sprat, and sold abun 
dantly in the London markets, salted and dried like herrings. I 
obtained some of these fossils, which, like the associated shells, 
show that a colder climate than that now prevailing in this re 
gion was established in what is termed "the glacial period." 
Mr. Hayes took me to Kittery, and other localities, where these 
marine organic remains abound in the superficial deposits. Some 
of the shells are met with in the town of Portsmouth itself, in 
digging the foundation of houses on the south bank of the river 
Piscataqua. This was the most southern spot (lat. 43 6 N.) 
to which I yet had traced the fossil fauna of the boulder period, 
retaining here, as in Canada, its peculiar northern characters, 
consisting of a profusion of individuals, but a small number of 
species ; and a great many of those now abounding in the neigh 
boring sea being entirely absent. It is only farther to the south, 
and near the extreme southern limit of the drift, or boulder clay, 
as at Brooklyn, in Long Island, for example, that a mixture of 
more southern species of shells begin to appear, just as Professor 
E. Forbes has detected, in the drift of the south of Ireland, the 
meeting of a Mediterranean and Arctic fauna. 

Every where around Portsmouth I observed that superficial 
polish in the rocks, and those long, straight, grooves or furrows, 
which I before alluded to (p. 18), as having been imprinted by 
icebergs on the ancient floor of the ocean. By the inland posi 
tion of these fossil shells of recent species, the geologist can prove 
that, at times comparatively modern in the earth s history, the 
larger part of New England and Canada lay for ages beneath 
the waters of the sea, Lake Champlain and the valley of the 
St. Lawrence being then gulfs, and the White Mountains an 
island.* But it is a curious fact that we also discover along this 
same eastern coast signs no less unequivocal of partial subsidence 
of land at a period still more recent. The evidence consists of 
swamps, now submerged at low water, containing the roots and 
* See my "Travels in N. America, 1841-2," vol. ii. p. 142. 



34 SUBMARINE FOREST. [CHAP. II. 

upright stools of the white cedar ( Cupressus thyoides), showing 
that an ancient forest must once have extended farther seaward. 
One of these swamps we passed yesterday at Hampton, on the 
way from Boston to Portsmouth ; and Mr. Hayes gave me speci 
mens of the submarine wood in as fresh a state as any occurring 
a few yards deep in a British peat-bog. 

That some of these repositories of buried trees, though geolo 
gically of the most modern date, may really be of high antiquity, 
considered with reference to the history of man, I have no doubt ; 
and geologists may, by repeated observations, ascertain the min 
imum of time required for their formation previously to their sub 
mergence. Some extensive cedar-swamps, for example, of the 
same class occur on the coast near Cape May, in the southern 
extremity of the State of New Jersey, on the east side of Dela 
ware Bay, filled with trees to an unknown depth ; and it is a 
constant business to probe the soft mud of the swamp with poles 
for the purpose of discovering the timber. When a log is found, 
the mud is cleared off, and the log sawed up into proper lengths 
for shingles or boards. The stumps of trees, from four to five 
feet, and occasionally six feet in diameter, are found standing 
with their roots in the place in which they grew, and the trunks 
of aged cedars are met with in every possible position, some of 
them lying horizontally under the roots of the upright stumps. 
Dr. Bresley, of Dennis Creek, counted 1080 rings of annual 
growth between the center and outside of a large stump six feet 
in diameter, and under it lay a prostrate tree, which had fallen 
and been buried before the tree to which the stump belonged first 
sprouted. This lower trunk was five hundred years old, so that 
upward of fifteen centuries were thus determined, beyond the 
shadow of a doubt, as the age of one small portion of a bog, the 
depth of which is as yet unknown. 

Mr. Hayes drove me in his carriage through woods of fir on 
both banks of the Piscataqua, where the ground was covered 
with that fragrant shrub, the candleberry (Myrica cerifem), the 
wax of which, derived from its shining black berries, is used for 
making candles. The odor of its leaves resembles that of our 
bog-myrtle (Myrica gale). The barberry, also (Berberis vul- 



CHAP. II.] WILD PLANTS. SWALLOWS. 35 

garis), although not an indigenous plant, is very abundant and 
ornamental in the woods here. It has overrun, in modern times, 
the eastern shores of New England, and made its way many 
miles inland, to the great annoyance of the agriculturists. Some 
naturalists wonder how it can spread so fast, as the American 
birds refuse, like the European ones, to feed on. its red berries : 
but if it be true that cattle, sheep, and goats occasionally browse 
on this shrub, there is no mystery about the mode of its migration, 
for the seeds may be sown in their dung. The aromatic shrub 
called sweet fern (Comptonia asplenifolia), forms nearly as large 
a proportion of the undergrowth here as does the real fern (Pteris) 
in some of our English forests. I have seen this part of North 
America laid down in some botanical maps as the region of asters 
and solidagos ; and certainly the variety and abundance of golden 
rods and asters is at this season very striking, although a white 
everlasting ( GnafaMuin) is almost equally conspicuous. Among 
other shrubs, I saw the poison-ivy (Rkus radicans), a species of 
sumach, growing on rocks and walls. It has no effect on some 
people, but the slightest touch causes an eruption on the skin of 
others. A New England botanist once told me that, by way 
of experiment, he rubbed his arm with the leaves, and they gave 
rise to a painful swelling, which was long in subsiding. 

In Mr. Hayes s garden at Portsmouth were some of the smaller 
white-bodied swallows or martins (Hirundo viridis), protected 
from their enemy, the larger martin (Hirundo purpurea), by 
having small holes made for them in flower-pots, which the 
others could not pass through. The larger kind, or house-martin, 
is encouraged every where, small wooden boxes being made for 
them on roofs or on the tops of poles, resembling pigeon-houses, 
which may often be seen on the top of a sign-post before a New 
England inn. They are useful in chasing away birds of prey 
from the poultry-yard ; and I once saw a few of them attacking 
a large hawk. But I suspect they are chiefly favored for mere 
amusement sake, arid welcomed, like our swallows, as the mes 
sengers of spring, on their annual return from the south. It is 
pleasing to hear them chattering with each other, and to mark 
their elegant forms and bluish-black plumage, or to watch them 



36 GLACIAL GROOVES. [CHAP. II 

on the wing 1 , floating gently in the air, or darting rapidly after 
insects. Thousands of these birds, with their young, died in 
their nests in the spring of 1836, during a storm of cold rain, 
which lasted two weeks, and destroyed the insects throughout 
the states of New York and New England. The smaller species 
(Hifundo vi/ridis) then regained possession of their old haunts, 
occupying the deserted houses of the more powerful species, which, 
like the house-sparrow in Europe, has followed the residence of 
man. 

The sun was very powerful at noon ; but the severity of the 
cold here in winter is so great, that a singular effect is produced 
in the Piscataqua when the thermometer sinks to 15 below zero. 
The tide pours into the estuary a large body of salt water par 
taking of the warmer temperature of the gulf stream, and this 
water, coming into the colder atmosphere, smokes like a thermal 
spring, giving rise to dense fogs. 

I had been desirous of making the acquaintance of Mr. Hayes, 
in consequence of having read, before I left England, an excellent 
paper published by him in the Boston Journal of Natural History, 
for 1844, on the Antarctic Icebergs, considered as explanatory 
of the transportation of rocky masses, and of those polished rocks 
and glacial grooves and strise before alluded to. He had derived 
his information from experienced men engaged in the southern 
whale fisheries, principally merchants of New Bedford, Massa 
chusetts, and Stonington, Rhode Island. On looking over his 
original MS. notes, I found he had omitted to print some parti 
culars of the evidence, which I consider of no small interest as 
throwing light on a class of geological appearances hitherto 
thought least reconcilable with the ordinary course of nature. 
As to the carriage of huge fragments of rock for many hundreds 
of miles, from one region to another, such transportation was 
formerly appealed to by writers now living as among the marvels 
of the olden time, resembling the feats of the fabulous ages, and 
as much transcending the powers of nature in these degenerate 
days, as the stone hurled by Hector against the Grecian gate, 
exceeded in weight and size what could now be raised from the 
ground by two of the strongest of living men (oloi vvv (3poroi). 



CHAP. II.] ORGANIC REMAINS IN ICE. 37 

But after reading the accounts given by Sir James Ross and Captain 
Wilkes, of the transfer of erratics by ice, from one point to another 
of the southern seas, these traveled boulders begin to be regarded 
quite as vulgar phenomena, or matters of every-day occurrence. 

There still remain, however, among the wonders of the polar 
regions, some geological monuments which appear sufficiently 
anomalous when we seek to explain them by modern analogies. 
I refer to the preservation in ice of the carcasses of extinct species 
of quadrupeds in Siberia ; not only the rhinoceros originally dis 
covered, with part of its flesh, by Pallas, and the mammoth 
afterward met with on the Lena by Adams, but still more 
recently the elephant dug up by Midderidorf, September, 1846, 
which retained even the bulb of the eye in a perfect state, and 
which is now to be seen in the museum at Moscow.^ 

In part of the unpublished evidence collected by Mr. Hayes, 
are statements which may perhaps aid us in elucidating this ob 
scure subject ; at all events they are not undeserving of notice, 
were it only to prove that nature is still at work in the icy regions 
enveloping a store of organic bodies in ice, which, after a series 
of geographical and climatal changes, and the extermination of 
some of the existing cetacea, might strike the investigator at some 
remote period of the future as being fully as marvelous as any 
monuments of the past hitherto discovered. The first extract, 
which I make, with Mr. Hayes permission, is from the evidence 
of Captain Benjamin Pendleton, of Stonington, who, from his 
knowledge of the South Shetland fisheries, was chosen by the 
American government to accompany the late exploring expedition to 
the Antarctic seas. He had cruised in 1820 and 1822 for GOO 
miles along the lofty ice cliffs bounding the great southern conti 
nent. He says, that in 1821 , when he wished to bury a seaman 
in one of the South Shetland islands, several parties of twelve 
men each, were set to dig a grave in the blue sand and gravel ; 
but after penetrating in nearly a hundred places through six or 
eight inches of sand, they came down every where upon solid 
blue ice. At last he determined to have a hole cut in the ice, 
of which the island principally consisted, and the body of the man 
* See "Principles of Geology," by the Author, 7th ed. 1847, p. 83. 



38 WHALE DISCOVERED IN AN ICEBERG. [CHAP. II. 

was placed in it. In 1822, Captain Barnham dug out the body 
from the ice, and found the clothes and flesh perfectly fresh as 
when they were buried. 

So far this narrative may be said merely to confirm and to 
bear out another published by Captain Kendall, of our navy, in 
the London Geographical Journal, 1830 (pp. 65, 66), where he 
relates that the soil of Deception Island, one of the South Shet- 
lands, consists of ice and volcanic ashes interstratified, and he 
discovered there the body of a foreign sailor, which had long 
been buried, with the flesh and all the features perfectly pre 
served. Mr. Darwin, commenting on that fact, has observed, 
that as the icy soil of Deception Island is situated between lat. 
62 and 63 S., it is nearer the equator by about 100 miles than 
the locality where Pallas first found the frozen rhinoceros of Si 
beria, in lat. 64 N.* 

But Captain Pendleton goes on to relate, that while he was 
in Deception Island an iceberg was detached from a cliff of ice 
800 feet high. The piece which fell off was from 60 to 100 feet 
deep, and from 1500 to 3000 feet in length. At an elevation of 
about 280 feet above the level of the sea, part of a whale was 
seen remaining inclosed in the ice-cliff, the head and anterior 
parts having broken off about the flippers and fallen down with 
the detached mass of ice. The species was what the whalers 
call the " Sulphur-bottom," resembling the fin-back. Captain 
Pendleton contrived to get out the portion which had fallen, and 
obtained from it eight or ten barrels of oil. The birds for a long 
time fed upon the entrails. This fact was known to Captain 
Beck and others. Captain William Pendleton, another whaler 
of experience, also informs Mr. Hayes, that skeletons of whales 
had been met with in the South Shetlaiids, when he visited 
them, 300 feet above the level of the sea. Thomas Ash also 
saw, on " Ragged Island" beach, the skeleton and some of the 
soft parts of a whale many feet above the reach of the highest 
tides. Captain William Beck, master of a whaling ship, has 
seen whales bones and carcasses sixty or seventy feet above the 
sea-level, and a mile and a half from the water. 
* Darwin s Journal, 2d ed. p. 249. 



CHAP. II.] ICEBERGS. 39 

To explain how the bodies and skeletons of these inhabitants 
of the deep, whether found entombed or not in ice, were carried 
up to considerable heights above the level of the sea, appeared to 
me at first more difficult than to account for their having been 
included in solid ice. A few months after my visit to Ports 
mouth I saw Captain Wilkes, of the United States Exploring 
Expedition, and called his attention to the problem. He 
remarked, that the open sea sometimes freezes round the Sand 
wich Islands, so that ships can not approach within 100 miles 
of the shore. In like manner, in Antarctic regions, the ocean 
often freezes over the base of a cliff formed of barrier ice. In 
all these cases, the sheet of ice, however continuous, does not 
adhere to the land or the barrier, because the rise and fall of the 
tide, however slight, causes a rent, permitting the whole mass to 
move up and down. The snow, drifting off the land in vast 
quantities during winter, falls over the cliffs upon the frozen 
surface of the sea, until its weight is such that it causes the 
whole mass to sink ; and unless the winds and currents happen 
to float it off, it may go on subsiding till it acquires a great 
thickness, and may at last touch the bottom. Before this hap 
pens, however, it usually gets adrift, and, before it has done 
melting, tumbles over or capsizes more than once. 

On my return to England, in 1846, I described the same 
phenomena to my friend Dr. Joseph Hooker, and subsequently 
to Sir James Ross, and they both of them, without hearing 
Captain Wilkes s theory, suggested the same explanation, having 
observed that a great sheet of ice had formed in the sea by the 
freezing of melted snow on the southern or polar side of every 
Antarctic island. If the carcass of a dead whale be thrown up 
on this ice, it must soon be buried under other snow drifted from 
the land, and will at length be inclosed in the lower part of an. 
iceberg, formed in the manner before described. The frequent 
overturning or reversal of position of these great masses, arises 
from the temperature of the water at the depth of 1000 or 1500 
feet, to which they frequently descend, being much warmer than 
the incumbent air or more superficial water. When the inferior 
or submerged portions melt, the center of gravity is soon changed 



40 ICEBERGS. [CHAP. II. 

and a magnificent example is recorded by Sir James Ross of the 
capsizing of a great island of ice near Possession Island, in lat. 
71 56 S. What had previously been the bottom came up 
and rose 100 feet above the surface of the sea, and the whole of 
the new top and eastern side were seen to be covered with earth 
and stones. A party landed on it, and a slight .rocking motion 
was still perceptible, such as no waves or swell of the sea, even 
in a storm, are ever capable of imparting to such large icebergs.^ 
The lower down the carcass of the whale is buried in the original 
berg, the higher up will it be raised above the level of the sea 
when the same berg has turned over. 

# Sir J. Ross s Voyage to Southern Seas, vol. i. pp. 195, 196. 



CHAPTER III. 

Portland in Maine. Kennebeo River. Timber Trade. Fossil Shells at 
Gardiner. Augusta, the Capital of Maine. Legal Profession : Advo 
cates and Attorneys. Equality of Sects. Religious Toleration. Cal- 
vinistic Theology. Day of Doom. 

Sept. 25, 1845. HERE we are at mid-day fK-ing along at 
the rate of twenty-five and occasionally thirty miles an hour, on 
our way to Portland, the chief city of Maine. It was only yes 
terday afternoon that we left Boston, and in less than three 
hours we performed what would have been formerly reckoned a 
good day s journey of forty-five miles, had seen at Portsmouth 
some collections of natural history, and afterward gone to a ball. 
In the forenoon of this day I have made geological excursions 011 
both banks of the Piscataqua, arid before dark shall have sailed 
far up the Kennebec. It is an agreeable novelty to a naturalist 
to combine the speed of a railway and the luxury of good inns 
with the sight of the native forest the advantages of civilization 
with the beauty of unreclaimed nature no hedges, few plowed 
fields, the wild plants, trees, birds, and animals undisturbed. 

Cheap as are the fares, these railroads, I am told, yield high 
profits, because the land through which they run costs nothing. 
When we had traversed a distance of about sixty miles, the cars 
glided along some rails over the wharf at Portland, and we almost 
stepped from our seats on to the deck of the Huntress steamer, 
which was ready to convey us to the mouth of the Kennebec river. 

After threading a cluster of rocky islands adorned with fir and 
birch in the beautiful Bay of Casco, we came to the Sound, and 
for a short space were in the open sea, with no view but that of 
a distant coast. As there was nothing to see, we were glad to 
be invited to dinner, and were conducted to the gentlemen s 
cabin, a sort of sunk story, to which the ladies, or the women of 
every degree, were, according to the usual etiquette, taken down 
first, and carefully seated at the table by the captain, before the 



42 NEW ENGLAND TRAVELING. [CHAP. III. 

gentlemen were admitted. Above this apartment where we 
dined was the ladies cabin, and above that the upper deck, 
where we sat to enjoy the prospect as we approached the mouth 
of the Kennebec. In the forepart of the vessel, on this upper 
deck, is a small room, having windows on all sides, where the 
man at the helm is stationed ; riot at the stern, as in our boats, 
which is considered by the Americans as a great improvement 
on the old system, as the steersman s view can not be intercepted, 
and the passengers are never requested to step on one side to 
enable him to^ see his way. Directions to the engineer, instead 
of being transmitted by voice through an intermediate messenger, 
are given directly by one or more loud strokes on a bell. The 
fuel used is anthracite, the absence of oxygen being compensated 
by a strong current of air kept up by what resembles a winnow- 
ing-machine, and does the work of a pair of bellows. 

After sailing up the Kennebec about fifteen miles we came to 
Bath, a town of 5000 souls, chiefly engaged in ship-building, a 
branch of industry in which the State of Maine ranks first in 
the Union ; the materials consisting of white oak and pine, the 
growth of native forests. Large logs of timber squared, and 
each marked with the owner s name, are often cast into the 
river, sometimes far above Augusta, and come floating down 100 
miles to this place. In w r inter many of them get frozen into the 
ice and imprisoned for six or seven months, until the late spring 
releases them, and then not a few of them are carried far out 
into the Atlantic, where they have been picked up, with the 
owner s name still telling the place of their origin. The water 
is salt as far as Bath, above which it is fresh and freezes over, so 
as to allow sleighs and skaters to cross it in winter, although the 
influence of the tide extends as far up as Augusta, about forty 
miles above Bath. I am informed that the whole body of the 
ice rises and falls, cracking along the edges where it is weakest. 
Over the fissures planks are placed to serve as a bridge, or snow 
is thrown in, which freezes, and affords a passage to the central 
ice. The Kennebec, besides being enlivened by the " lumber 
trade," is at this season whitened with the sails of vessels laden 
with hay, which has been compressed into small bulk by the 



CHAP. III.] THE KENNEBEC. 43 

power of steam. Many of these merchantmen are destined for 
New York, where the unusual heat and drought of the summer 
has caused a scanty crop of grass, but hundreds are bound to the 
distant ports of Mobile and New Orleans ; so that the horses of 
Alabama and Louisiana are made to graze on the sweet pastures 
of Maine, instead of the coarser and ranker herbage of the south 
ern prairies. In a few months these northern-built ships will 
bring back bales of cotton for factories newly established by Bos 
ton capitalists, and worked on this river both by water power 
and steam. Such are the happy consequences of the annexation 
of Louisiana to the United States. But for that event, the fa 
vorite theories of political economy in New England, and the duty 
of protecting native industry, would have interposed many a 
custom-house and high tariff bet\v r een Maine and the valley of 
the Mississippi. 

As we passed Bath a large eagle, with black wings and a 
white body, was seen soaring over our heads ; and, a few miles 
above, where the salt and fresh water meet, seals were seen 
sporting close to the steamer. The Kermebec is said to abound 
in salmon. We admired the great variety of trees on its banks ; 
two kinds of birch with larger leaves than our British species, 
several oaks arid pines, the hemlock with foliage like a yew-tree, 
and the silver-fir, and two species of maple, the sugar or rock 
maple (Acer saccharinuni), and the white (A. dasycarpum), 
both of which yield sugar. To these two trees the beauty and 
brilliancy of the autumnal tints of the American forests are due, 
the rock maple turning red, purple and scarlet, and the white, 
first yellow, and then red. 

We were conveyed in the Huntress to Gardiner, the head of 
steam- boat navigation here, sixty-eight miles distant from Port 
land, where we visited the country house of Mr. Gardiner, whose 
family gave its name to the settlement. It is built in the style 
of an English country seat, and surrounded by a park. At Mr. 
Allen s I examined, with much interest, a collection of fossil 
shells and Crustacea, made by Mrs. Allen from the drift or " gla 
cial" deposits of the same age as those of Portsmouth, already 
described. Among other remains I recognized the tooth of a 



44 FOSSIL REMAINS. [CHAP. III. 

walrus, similar to one procured by me in Martha s Vineyard,* 
and other teeth, since determined for me by Professor Owen as 
belonging to the buffalo or American bison. These are, I be 
lieve, the first examples of land quadrupeds discovered in beds of 
this age in the United States. The accompanying shells consist 
ed of the common mussel (Hfytilus edulis), Saxciava rugosa, 
]\Iya arenaria, Pecten Islandicus, and species of the genera 
Astartc, Nucula, &c. The horizontal beds of clay and sand 
which contain these remains of northern species, and which 
imply that the whole region was beneath the sea at no distant 
period, impart to the scenery of the country bordering the Kerme- 
bec its leading features. The deposit of clay and sand is 170 
feet thick in some places, and numerous valleys 70 feet deep are 
hollowed out of it by every small stream. At Augusta I saw 
this modern tertiary formation, 100 feet thick, resting on a ledge 
of mica schist, the shells being easily obtained from an under 
mined cliff of clay. Tn some places, as at Gardiner, conical hil 
locks, chiefly of gravel, about fifty feet high, and compared here, 
on account of the regularity of their form, to Indian mounds^ 
stand isolated near the river. I conceive them to owe their 
shape to what the geologists term " denudation," or the action 
of waves and currents, which, as the country was rising gradu- 
al]y out of the sea, removed the surrounding softer clay arid left 
these masses undestroyed. They would offer resistance to the 
force of moving water by the great weight and size of their com 
ponent materials ; for in them we find not only pebbles, but 
many large boulders of granite and other rocks. 

Mr. Allen drove us in his carriage to Augusta, six miles from 
Gardiner, and 200 miles N.E. of Boston, where we visited the 
State House, handsomely built in the Grecian style, with a por 
tico and large columns, the stone used being the white granite of 
this country. The rooms for the two houses of the legislature 
are very convenient. I was shown the library by the governor, 
who called my attention to some books and maps on geology, and 
talked of a plan for resuming the geological survey of the State, 
not yet completed. 

* See " Travels," vol. i. p. 256. 



CHAP. III.] LEGAL PROFESSION. 45 

Sept. 27. Returned by the Huntress steamer to Portland, 
after sailing at the rate of fourteen miles an hour. On board 
were some lawyers, to one of whom, a judge in the State of 
Maine, Mr. Gardiner had introduced me. The profession of the 
law is, of all others in the United States, that which attracts to 
it the greatest number of able and highly educated men, not only 
for its own sake, but because it is a great school for the training 
up of politicians. The competition of so many practitioners 
cheapens fees, and, although this is said to promote litigation, it 
has at least the great advantage of placing the poor man on a 
more equal footing with the rich, as none but the latter can 
attempt to assert their rights in countries where the cost of a 
successful law-suit may be ruinous. Practically, there is much 
the same subdivision of labor in the legal profession here as in 
England ; for a man of eminence enters into partnership with 
some one or more of the younger or less talented lawyers, who 
play the part assigned with us to junior counsel and attorneys. 
There are, however, no two grades here corresponding to barris 
ter and attorney, from the inferior of which alone practitioners 
can pass in the regular course of promotion to the higher. Every 
lawyer in the United States may plead in court, and address a 
jury ; and, if he is successful, may be raised to the bench : but 
he must qualify as counselor, in order to be entitled to plead in 
the Supreme Courts, where cases are heard involving points at 
issue between the tribunals of independent states. The line 
drawn between barrister and attorney in Great Britain, which 
never existed even in colonial times in Massachusetts, could only 
be tolerated in a country where the aristocratic element is ex 
ceedingly predominant. In the English Church, where seats in 
the House of Lords are held by the bishops, we see how the rank 
of a whole profession rnay be elevated by making high distinc 
tions conferred only on a few, open to all. That, in like man 
ner, the highest honors of the bar and bench might be open 
without diriment to the most numerous class of legal practition 
ers in Great Britain, seems to be proved by the fact, that occa 
sionally some attorneys of talent, by quitting their original lino 
of practice and starting anew, can attain, like the present Chief 



46 EQUALITY OF SECTS. [CHAP. III. 

Justice of the Common Pleas, to places of the first dignity. In 
Canada, under British rule, it is the custom to grant licenses to 
the same individual to practice indifferently in all the courts as 
advocate, solicitor, attorney, and proctor. When we consider 
the confidential nature of the business transacted by English at 
torneys, the extent of property committed to their charge, the 
manner in which they are consulted in family affairs of the ut 
most delicacy, as in the framing of marriage contracts and wills, 
and observe, moreover, how the management of elections falls 
into their hands, we may well question the policy of creating an 
artificial line of demarkation between them and the advocates, 
marked enough to depress their social rank, and to deter many 
y^ung men of good families, who can best afford to obtain a lib 
eral education, from entering the most profitable, and, in reality, 
the most important branch of the profession. 

I have mentioned the Supreme Courts ; in these, in each state, 
cases are heard involving points at issue between two independent 
jurisdictions ; and in order to preserve uniformity in the interpret 
ation of many different codes, as in the statutes passed from time 
to time by state legislatures, the previous decisions of courts of 
law are referred to, and the authority of judges of high repute in 
any part of the Union, and even in Great Britain, frequently 
cited. As points of international law are perpetually arising 
between so many jurisdictions, the Supreme Courts afford a fine 
field for the exercise of legal talent, and for forming jurists oi 
enlarged views. 

Portland, with 15,000 inhabitants, is the principal city of 
Maine ; gay and cheerful, with neat white houses, shaded by 
avenues of trees on each side of the wide streets, the bright sunny 
air unsullied, as usual in New England, by coal smoke. There 
are churches here of every religious denomination : Congregation- 
alists, Baptists, Methodists, Free-will Baptists, Universalists, 
Unitarians, Episcopalians, Roman Catholics, and Quakers, al] 
living harmoniously together. The late governor oPthe state 
was a Unitarian ; and, as if to prove the perfect toleration of 
churches the most opposed to each other, they have recently had 
a Honuui Catholic governor 



CHAP. III.] RELIGIOUS TOLERATION. 47 

On Sunday we accompanied the family of a lawyer, to whom 
we had brought letters, to a Unitarian church. There was 
nothing doctrinal in the sermon, and, among other indications of 
the altered and softened feelings of the sects which have sprung 
from the old Puritan stock, I remarked a gilt cross placed over 
the altar. The officiating minister told me that this step had 
been taken with the consent of the congregation, though not with 
out the opposition of some of his elders. The early Puritans re 
garded this symbol as they did pictures and images, as the badges 
of superstition, the relics of the idolatrous religion so lately re 
nounced by them ; and it is curious to read, in the annals of the 
first colonists at Salem, how, in 1634, the followers of Roger 
Williams, the Brownist, went so far as to cut that "popish em 
blem," the red cross, out of the royal standard, as one which the 
train bands ought no longer to follow.^ 

During my first visit to the New England States, I was 
greatly at a loss to comprehend by what means so large a pop 
ulation had been brought to unite great earnestness of religious 
feeling with so much real toleration. In seeking for the cause, we 
must go farther back than the common schools, or at least the 
present improved state of popular education ; for we are still met 
with the question, How could such schools be maintained by the 
state, or by compulsory assessments, on so liberal a footing, in 
spite of the fanaticism and sectarian prejudices of the vulgar ? 
When we call to mind the religious enthusiasm of the early Pu 
ritans, and how at first they merely exchanged a servile obedience 
to tradition, and the authority of the Church, for an equally blind 
scripturalism, or implicit faith in the letter of every part of the 
Bible, acting as if they believed that God, by some miraculous 
process, had dictated all the Hebrew words of the Old, and all 
the Greek of the New Testament ; nay, the illiterate among 
them cherishing the same superstitious veneration ibr every sylla 
ble of the English translation how these religionists, who did 
riot hesitate to condemn several citizens to be publicly whipped 
for denying that the Jewish code was obligatory on Christians as 
a rule of life, arid who were fully persuaded that they alone were the 
# Graham s History of United Stales, vol. i. p. 227. 



48 CALVINISTIC THEOLOGY. [CHAP. III. 

chosen people of God, should bequeath to their immediate posterity 
such a philosophical spirit as must precede the organization by the 
whole people of a system of secular education acceptable to all, 
and accompanied by the social and political equality, of religious 
sects such as no other civilized community has yet achieved 
this certainly is a problem well worthy of the study of every 
reflecting mind. To attribute this national characteristic to the 
voluntary system, would be an anachronism, as that is of com 
paratively modern date in New England ; besides that the de 
pendence of the ministers on their flocks, by transferring ecclesi 
astical power to the multitude, only gives to their bigotry, if they 
be ignorant, a more dangerous sway. So, also, of universal suf 
frage ; by investing the million with political power, it renders 
the average amount of their enlightenment the measure of the 
liberty enjoyed by those who entertain religious opinions disap 
proved of by the majority. Of the natural effects of such power, 
and the homage paid to it by the higher classes, even where the 
political institutions are only partially democratic, we have 
abundant exemplification in Europe, where the educated of the 
laity and clergy, in. spite of their comparative independence of 
the popular will, defer outwardly to many theological notions of 
the vulgar with which they have often no real sympathy. 

To account for the toleration prevailing in New England and 
the states chiefly peopled from thence, we must refer to a com 
bination of many favorable circumstances, some of them of ancient 
date, and derived from the times of the first Puritan settlers. To 
these I shall have many opportunities of alluding in the sequel ; 
but I shall mention now a more modern cause, the effect of which 
was brought vividly before my mind, in conversations with sev 
eral lawyers of Maine, New Hampshire, and Massachusetts, 
whom I fell in with on this tour. I mean the reaction against 
the extreme Calvinism of the church first established in this part 
of America, a movement which has had a powerful tendency to 
subdue and mitigate sectarian bitterness. In order to give me 
some -idea of the length to which the old Calvinistic doctrines 
were instilled into the infant mind, one of my companions pre 
sented me with a curious poem, called the " Day of Doom," 



CHAP. III.] DAY OF DOOM." 49 

formerly used as a school book in New England, and which 
elderly persons known to him had been required, some seventy 
years ago, to get by rote as children. This task must have occu 
pied no small portion of their time, as this string of doggrel 
rhymes makes up no less than 224 stanzas of eight lines each. 
They were written by Michael Wigglesworth, A.M., teacher of 
the church of Maiden, New England, and profess to give a poet 
ical description of the Last Judgment. A great array of Scrip 
ture texts, from, the Old and New Testament, is cited throughout 
in the margin as warranty for the orthodoxy of every dogma. 

Were such a composition now submitted to any committee of 
school managers or teachers in New England, they would not 
only reject it, but the most orthodox among them would shrewdly 
suspect it to be a " weak invention of the enemy," designed to 
caricature, or give undue prominence to, precisely those tenets of 
the dominant Calvinism which the moderate party object to, as 
outraging human reason and as derogatory to the moral attri 
butes of the Supreme Being. Such, however, were not the feel 
ings of the celebrated Cotton Mather, in the year 1705, when he 
preached a funeral sermon on the author, which I find prefixed 
to my copy of the sixth edition, printed in 1715. On this occa 
sion he not only eulogizes Wigglesworth, but affirms that the 
poem itself contains " plain truths drest up in a plain meter ;" 
and further prophesies, that " as the { Day of Doom had been 
often reprinted in both Englands, it will last till the Day itself 
shall arrive." Some extracts from this document will aid the 
reader to estimate the wonderful revolution in popular opinion 
brought about in one or two generations, by which the harsher 
and sterner features of the old Calvinistic creed have been nearly 
eradicated. Its professors, indeed, may still contend as stoutly 
as ever for the old formularies of their hereditary faith, as they 
might fight for any other party banner ; but their fanatical de 
votion to its dogmas, and their contempt for all other Christian 
churches, has happily softened down or disappeared. 

The poem opens with the arraignment of all " the quick and 
dead," who are summoned before the throne of God, and, having 
each pleaded at the bar, are answered by their Judge. Some 

VOL, I. *C 



50 " DAY OF DOOM." [CHAP. III. 

of them declare that the Scriptures are " so dark, that they have 
puzzled the wisest men ;" others that, being " heathens," and 
having never had " the Avritten Word preached to them," they 
are entitled to pardon ; in reply to which, the metaphysical sub 
tleties of the doctrines of election and grace are fully propound 
ed. The next class of offenders might awaken the sympathies 
of any heart not protected by a breastplate of theological dog 
matism : 

" Then to the bar all they drew near 

Who died in infancy, 
And never had, or good or bad, 
Effected personally," &c. 

These infants remonstrate against the hardship of having 
Adam s guilt laid to their charge : 

"Not we, but he, ate of the tree 
Whose fruit was interdicted ; 
Yet on us all, of his sad fall, 
The punishment s inflicted." 

The Judge replies, that none can suffer " for what they never 
did :" - 

(171.) "But what you call old Adam s fall, 

And only his trespass, 
You call amiss to call it his, 
Both his and yours it was. 

(172.) "He was designed, of all mankind. 

To be a public head ; 
A common root, whence all should shoot, 
And stood in all their stead. 

" He stood and fell, did ill and well 

Not for himself alone, 
But for you all, who now his fall 

And trespass would disown. 
(173.) " If he he had stood, then all his brood 

Had been established," &c. 
(174.) " Would you have grieved to have received 

Though Adam so much good?" &c. 
" Since then to share in his welfare 
You would have been content, 
You may with reason, share in his treason, 
And in his punishm^ : " 



CHAP. III.] " DAY OF DOOM." 51 

A great body of Scripture texts are here introduced in confirm 
ation ; but the children are told, even including those " who from 
the womb unto the tomb were straightway carried," that they 
are to have " the easiest room in hell :" 

(181.) "The glorious King, thus answering, 
They cease, and plead no longer, 
Their consciences must needs confess 
His reasons are the stronger." 

The pains of hell and the constant renovation of strength to 
enable the " sinful wight" to bear an eternity of torment, are 
then dilated upon at such length, and so minutely, and a picture 
so harrowing to the soul is drawn, as to remind us of the excel 
lent observations on this head of a modern New England divine. 
"It is not wonderful," he says, " that this means of subjugating 
the mind should be freely used and dreadfully perverted, when 
we consider that no talent is required to inspire fear, and that 
coarse minds and hard hearts are signally gifted for this work of 
torture." "It is an instrument of tremendous power," he adds, 
" enabling a Protestant minister, whilst disclaiming papal pre 
tensions, to build up a spiritual despotism, and to beget in those 
committed to his guidance a passive, servile state of mind, too 
agitated for deliberate and vigorous thought."^ 

That the pious minister of Maiden, however, had no desire to 
usurp any undue influence over his panic-stricken hearers, is very 
probable, and that he was only indulging in the usual strain of 
the preachers of his time, when he told of the " yelling of the 
damned, as they were burnt eternally in the company of devils," 
and went on to describe how 

" God s vengeance feeds the flame 
With piles of wood and brimstone flood, 
That none can quench the same." 

We next learn that the peace and calm blessedness of the 
saints elect, who are received into heaven, is not permitted to be 
disturbed by compassion for the damned ; mothers and fathers 
feeling no pity for their lost children : 

* Channing s Works, London, voL iii. p. 263, 



52 "DAY OF DOOM." [CHAP. III. 

" The godly wife conceives no grief, 

Nor can she shed a tear. 
For the sad fate of her dear mate 
When she his doom doth hear." 

The great distinction between the spirit of the times when 
these verses were written and the present age, appears to be this, 
that a paramount importance was then attached to those doctrinal 
points in which the leading sects differed from each other, whereas 
now Christianity is more generally considered to consist essen 
tially in believing and obeying those scriptural precepts on which 
all churches agree. 



CHAPTER IV. 

Journey from Portland to the White Mountains. Plants. Churches, 
School-houses. Temperance Hotel. Intelligence of New Englanders. 
Climate, Consumption. Conway. Division of Property. Every Man 
his own Tenant. A\\tumnal Tints. Bears hybernating. Willey Slide. 
Theory of Scratches and Grooves on Rocks. Scenery. Waterfalls 
and Ravines. The Notch. Forest Trees and Mountain Plants. 
Fabyan s Hotel. Echo. 

Sept. 28, 1845. LEAVING Portland and the sea-coast, we 
now struck inland in a westerly direction toward the White 
Mountains, having hired a carriage which carried us to Standish. 
We passed at first over a low, featureless country, but enlivened 
by the brilliant autumnal coloring of the foliage, especially the 
bright red, purple, and yellow tints of the maple. The leaves 
of these trees and of the scrub oak had been made to change 
color by the late frost of the 10th of this month. On the borders 
of the road, on each side, mixed with the fragrant " sweet fern," 
we saw abundance of the Spircea tomentosa, its spike of purplish 
flowers now nearly faded. The name of " hard hack" was given 
to it by the first settlers, because the stalk turned the edge of 
the mower s scythe. There were also golden rods, everlastings, 
and asters in profusion ; one of the asters being called " frost 
blow," because flowering after the first frost. We also gathered 
on the ground the red fruit of the checkerberry (Gaulteria pro 
cumbent), used in New England to flavor sweetmeats. By the 
side of these indigenous plants was the common English sell-heal 
(Prunella vulgaris), the mullein ( Verbascum tliapsus), and other 
flowers, reminding me of the remark of an American botanist, 
that New England has become the garden of European weeds ; 
so that in some agricultural counties near the coast, such as Essex 
in Massachusetts, the exotics almost outnumber the native plants. 
It is, however, found, that the farther we travel northward, 
toward the region where North America and Europe approach 



54 CHURCHES. SCHOOL-HOUSES. [CHAP. IV 

each other, the proportion of plants specifically common to the 
two continents is constantly on the increase ; whereas in passing 
to the more southern states of the Union, we find almost every 
indigenous species to be distinct from European plants. 

Although the nights are cold, the sun at mid-day is very hot, 
the contrast of temperature in the course of each twenty-four 
hours being great, like that of the summer and winter of this 
climate. 

We journeyed on over very tolerable roads without paying 
turnpikes, one only, I am told, being established in all Maine. 
The expenses of making and repairing the highways are defrayed 
by local taxes, a surveyor being appointed for each district. We 
went through the villages of Gorham, Standish, Baldwin, Hiram, 
and Bloomfield, to Conway, and then began to enter the mount 
ains, the scenery constantly improving as we proceeded. Here 
and there we saw Indian corn cultivated, but the summer of 
Maine and New Hampshire is often too short to bring this grain 
to maturity. 

Usually, in a single village, we saw three, four, or five 
churches, each representing a different denomination ; the Con- 
gregationalists, Baptists, Methodists, and now and then, though 
more rarely, the Unitarians. Occasionally, in some quiet spot 
where two village roads cross, we saw a small, simple building, 
and learned that it was the free or common school provided by 
law, open to all, not accepted as a bounty, but claimed as a right, 
where the children of rich and poor, high and low, and of every 
sect, meet upon perfect equality. It is a received political maxirn 
here, that society is bound to provide education, as well as security 
of life and property, for all its members. 

One evening, as we were drawing near to a straggling village, 
in the twilight, we were recommended by a traveler, whom we 
had met on the road, to take up our quarters at a temperance 
hotel, where, he said, " there would be no loafers lounging and 
drinking drams in the bar-room." We looked out for the sign, 
and soon saw it, surmounted by a martin-house of four stories, 
each diminishing in size from the bottom to the top, but all the 
apartments now empty, the birds having taken flight, warned by 



CHAP. IV.] TEMPERANCE HOTEL. 55 

the late frost. "We had, indeed, been struck with the dearth of 
the feathered tribe in Maine at this season, the greater number 
of birds being migratory. As soon as our carriage stopped at 
the door, we were ushered by the host and his wife into a small 
parlor, where we found a blazing wood fire. It was their private 
sitting-room at times, when they had no guests, and on the table 
were books on a variety of subjects, but most of them of a reli 
gious or serious character, as Bishop Watson s Apology in reply 
to Tom Paine. We saw, also, a treatise on Phrenology, styled 
" The only True Philosophy," and Shakspeare, and the poems 
of Cowper and Walter Scott. In each window were placed two 
chairs, not ready to be occupied, as they would be in most coun 
tries, but placed face to face, or with their fronts touching each 
other, the usual fashion in New England. 

On one of the walls was seen, in a gilt frame, the Declaration 
of Independence, with all the signatures of the subscribers, sur 
rounded by vignettes or portraits of all the ten presidents of the 
United States, from General Washington to Mr. Tyler. On 
another side of the room was a most formidable likeness of 
Daniel Webster, being an engraving published in Connecticut. 
Leaning over the portrait of the great statesman, is represented 
an aged man holding a lantern in his hand, and, lest the mean 
ing of so classical an allusion should be lost, we read below 

" Diogenes his lantern needs no more, 
An honest man is found, the search is o er." 

While supper was preparing, I turned over a heap of news 
papers, of various shades of politics. One of them contained a 
spirited reply to the leading article of an extreme democratic 
journal, which had enlarged on a favorite text of the popular 
party, " The whole of Oregon is ours." In another I saw, in 
large type, " The continent, the whole continent down to the 
isthmus ;" so that, before Texas is yet fairly annexed, the 
imagination of the " more territory" zealots has incorporated all 
Mexico, if not Central America, into the Union. In the obitu 
aries were recorded, as usual, the names of several " revolutionary 
soldiers," aged eighty-five and ninety, and I spent some minutes 



56 PROVINCIAL NEWSPAPERS. [CHAP. IV. 

in wondering why they who fought for republican independence 
had been so frequently rewarded with longevity, till it occurred 
to me that, he who took the field before 1776 could not die a 
juvenile in 1845. Among other electioneering addresses, I read 
the following : " Fellow democrats, the Philistines are upon us, 
the whigs are striving to sow dissension in our ranks, but our 
object must be to place in the senate a sterling democrat," &c. 
Such an appeal to electors who are to fill up a vacancy in the 
more conservative branch of the Congress at Washington, is suf 
ficiently startling to an Englishman. Another article, headed, 
"Henry Clay, President for 1848," seemed a most premature 
anticipation of a future and distant contest, Mr. Polk having just 
been chosen for the next four years as first magistrate, after many 
months of excitement and political turmoil. Yet, upon the whole, 
the provincial newspapers appear to me to abound in useful and 
instructive matter, with many well-selected extracts from modern 
publications, especially travels, abstracts of lectures on temperance 
or literary and scientific subjects, letters on agriculture, or some 
point of political economy or commercial legislation. Even in 
party politics, the cheapness of the innumerable daily and weekly 
papers enables every villager to read what is said on more than 
one side of each question, and this has a tendency to make the 
multitude think for themselves, and become well informed on 
public affairs. 

We happened to be the only strangers in the tavern, and, 
when supper was brought in by the landlord and his wife, they 
sat down beside us, begged us to feel at home, pressed us to eat, 
and evidently considered us more in the light of guests whom 
they must entertain hospitably, than as customers. Our hostess, 
in particular, who had a number of young children and no nurse 
to help her, was willing to put herself to some inconvenience 
rather than run the risk of our feeling lonely. Their manners 
were pleasing, and, when they learned that we were from En 
gland, they asked many questions about the free-kirk movement 
in Scotland, and how far the system of national education there 
differed from that in Prussia, on which the landlord had been 
reading an article in a magazine. They were greatly amused 



CHAP. IV.] INTELLIGENCE OF NEW ENGLANDERS. 57 

when I told them that some of the patriots of their State had 
betrayed to me no slight sensitiveness and indignation about an 
expression imputed to Lord Palmerston in a recent debate on the 
Canadian border-feud, when he spoke of " the wild people of 
Maine." 

They were most curious to learn the names of the rocks and 
plants we had collected, and told us that at the free-school they 
had been taught the elements of geology and botany. They iff- 
forrned us that in these rural districts, many who teach in the 
winter months spend the money they receive for their salary in 
educating themselves in some college during the remainder of 
the year ; so that a clever youth may in this way rise from the 
humblest station to the bar or pulpit, or become a teacher in a 
large town. Farm laborers in the State, besides being boarded 
and found in clothes, receive ten dollars, or two guineas, a month 
wages, out of which they may save and " go west," an expression 
every where equivalent to bettering one s condition. " The pros 
pect of heaven itself," says Cooper, in one of his novels, " would 
have no charms for an American of the back-woods, if he 
thought there was any place farther west." 

I remarked that most of the farmers and laborers had pale 
complexions and a care-worn look. " This was owing partly," 
said the landlord, " to th*6 climate, for many were consumptive, 
and the changes from intense heat to great cold are excessive 
here; and party** to the ambitious, striving character of the 
natives, who <a^e not content to avoid poverty, but expect, and 
not without reason, to end their days in a station far above that 
from which they start." We were struck with the almost en 
tire absence of the negro race in Maine, the winter of this State 
being ill suited to them. The free blacks are in great part 
paupers, and supported by the poor laws. We fell in with a 
few parties of itinerant Indians, roaming about the country like 
our gipsies. 

Resuming our journey, we stopped at an inn where a great 
many mechanics boarded, taking three meals a day at the ordi 
nary. They were well dressed, but their coarse (though clean) 
hands announced their ordinary occupation. After dinner several 

c* 



58 DIVISION OF PROPERTY. [CHAP. IV. 

of them went into the drawing-room, where some " ladies" of 
their own class were playing on a piano-forte ; other mechanics 
were reading newspapers and books, but after a short stay they 
all returned to their work. On looking at the books they had 
laid down, I found that one was D Israeli s " Coningsby," an 
other Burns Poems, and a third an article just reprinted from 
Frazer s Magazine, on "the Policy of Sir Robert Peel." 

" As we passed through Conway, seeing there was but one 
meeting-house, I asked to what denomination it belonged. The 
reply was, "Orthodox." I went on to say that the place seemed 
to be thriving. My informant replied, with evident satisfaction, 
"Yes, and every man here is his own tenant," meaning that they 
all owned the houses and lands they occupied. To be a lessee, in 
deed, of a farm, where acres may be bought so cheap, is a rare 
exception, to the general rule throughout the United States. 
The approach to an equal subdivision of property among children, 
is not the result here of a compulsory law, as in France, but of 
custom ; and I was surprised to find how much the partition is 
modified, according to the individual views of the testator. I was 
assured, indeed, by persons on whose authority I could depend, 
that in nine cases out of ten the small working farmers in New 
England do not leave their property in equal shares to their 
children, as the law would distribute it if they died intestate. 
It is very common, for example, to leave the sons twice as much 
as the daughters, and frequently to give the eldest son the land, 
requiring him to pay small legacies to the others." In the case 
of one of my acquaintances, where the sons had larger shares 
than the daughters, it was provided, that if one of the two 
brothers died, the other should take all his share. As a general 
rule, the larger the estate the greater is the inequality of partition 
among the children. When I inquired into the manner in which 
the twelve or fourteen largest fortunes, such as would rank as 
considerable in England, had been bequeathed in Boston and its 
vicinity, and in New York, I was astonished to learn that none 
of them had been left in equal shares among the children by men 
of English descent, the one and only exception being that of a 
Frenchman. In the more newly settled states, there is less in- 



CHAP. IV.] EVERY MAN HIS OWN TENANT. 59 

equality in the distribution both of real and personal property ; 
but this is doubtless in no small degree connected with the more 
moderate size of the fortunes there. The ideas entertained in 
some of these ruder parts of the country, of the extreme destitu 
tion of the younger children of aristocratic families in Great 
Britain, are often most mistaken and absurd ; though particular 
instances in Scotland, springing out of the old system of entails, 
may have naturally given rise to erroneous generalizations. It 
was evident to me that few, if any, of these critics, had ever re 
garded primogeniture as an integral portion of a great political 
system, wholly different from their own, the merits of which can 
not fairly be tried by a republican standard. 

Both in New England and in the State of New York, I heard 
many complaints of the inadequacy of the capital belonging to 
small landed proprietors to make their acres yield the greatest 
amount of produce with the least expenditure of means. They 
are often so crippled with debt and mortgages, paying high in 
terest, that they can not introduce many improvements in agri 
culture, of which they are by no means ignorant. Nevertheless, 
the farmers here constitute a body of resident yeomen, industrious 
and intelligent ; absenteeism being almost unknown, owing to the 
great difficulty of letting farms, and the owners being spread 
equally over the whole country, to look after the roads and 
village-schools, and to see that there is a post-office even in each 
remote mountain hamlet. The pride and satisfaction felt by men 
who till the land which is their own, is, moreover, no small ad 
vantage, although one which a political economist, treating solely 
of the production of wealth, may regard as lying out of his prov- 
vince. As a make-weight, however, in our estimate of the amount 
of national happiness derived from landed property, it is not to be 
despised; and where "every man is his own tenant," as at Con- 
way, the evils of short leases, of ejectments on political grounds, 
or disputes about poaching and crimes connected with the game- 
laws are unknown. 

After passing Conway, we had fairly entered the mountains 
of New Hampshire, and enjoyed some rambles over the hills, 
delighted with the gound of rushing torrents and the wildness of 



60 FORESTS. BEARS. [CHAP. TV. 

the scenery. I had sometimes remarked in Norway that the 
birch trees are so equally intermixed with dark pines, as to im 
part, by the contrast of colors, a spotted appearance to the woods, 
not always picturesque ; but here I saw the dark green hemlock 
in one place, and the maples, with their brilliant autumnal foliage 
in another, grouped in such masses on the steep slopes of the hills, 
as to produce a most agreeable effect. There were many birch 
trees, with their white bark, and oaks, with red autumnal tints, 
and an undergrowth of kalmia out of flower, but still conspicuous 
by its shining leaves. The sweet fern (Comptonia) no longer 
appeared on this high ground, and was replaced by the true fern, 
called here " brake," being our common English species (Pteris 
aquilind). On the low hills of granite were many huge angular 
fragments of that rock, fifteen, and some of them twenty feet in 
diameter, resting on heaps of sand. They were of a light gray 
color, with large crystals of felspar, and reminded me of the 
granite of Arran in Scotland. As we followed the windings of 
the river Saco, I observed, in the bottom of the valley, alluvial 
terraces, composed of clay, sand, gravel, and boulders, forming 
flats at different elevations, as we see in many parts of Scotland, 
and other mountain valleys in Europe. 

Although we heard much talk of the late frost, there were still 
abundant signs of the sun s power, such as large grasshoppers, 
with red wings, called here shakers, and tortoises ( Testudo picta) 
wandering from one pond to another. In the retired paths many 
squirrels allowed us to pass very near to them without being 
alarmed. The bear once extended, like the beaver, over the 
whole of New England ; but the beaver has been every where 
extirpated, and the bear driven into^the mountains. From these 
retreats they still make annual depredations on the fields of Indian 
corn, and the farmers retaliate, not only by thinning them with 
their rifles, but by taking what some sportsmen would consider 
a very unfair advantage over them. On the first spring-like day, 
Bruin, who has been hybernating for several months in a cave, 
ventures out, before the snow has quite melted, to take a look at 
the country ; then retires again to his hiding place, which the 
hunter discovers by following his foot tracks on the snow, and 



CHAP. IV.] WILLEY SLIDE. 61 

digs him out of his hole. Near Bartlett I was taken to see the 
skeleton of a bear that had been lately killed. The farmers told 
me that the racoons do much damage here, by devouring the In 
dian corn, but the opossum does not extend so far to the north. 

On the second day after leaving Conway we entered a wild 
and narrow mountain pass, with steep declivities on both sides, 
where the hills can not be less than 1000 or 1500 feet in vertical 
height. Here the famous landslip, called the Willey Slide, oc 
curred in August, 1826. The avalanche of earth, stones, and 
trees occurring after heavy rains, was so sudden, that it over 
whelmed all the Willey family, nine in number, who would have 
escaped had they remained in their humble dwelling ; for, just 
above it, the muddy torrent was divided into two branches by a 
projecting rock. The day after the catastrophe a candle was 
found on the table of their deserted room, burnt down to the 
socket, and the Bible lying open beside it. 

I was curious to examine the effects of this and other slides 
of the same date in the White Mountains, to ascertain what effect 
the passage of mud and heavy stones might have had in furrow 
ing the hard surfaces of bared rocks over which they had passed ; 
it having been a matter of controversy among geologists, how far 
those straight rectilinear grooves and scratches before alluded to,* 
might have been the result of glacial action, or whether they can 
be accounted for by assuming that deluges of mud and heavy 
stones have swept over the dry land. A finer opportunity of 
testing the adequacy of the cause last mentioned can not be con 
ceived than is afforded by these hills ; for, in consequence, appar 
ently, of the jointed structure of the rocks and their decomposition 
produced by great variations of temperature (for they are subjected 
to intense summer heat and winter s cold in the course of the 
year), there is always a considerable mass of superficial detritus 
ready to be detached during very heavy rains, even where the 
steep slopes are covered with timber. Such avalanches begin 
from small points, and, after descending a few hundred yards, cut 
into the mountain side a deep trench, which becomes rapidly 
broader and deeper, and they bear down before them the loftiest 
* Ante, p. 18. 



62 SCRATCHES AND GROOVES ON ROCKS. [CHAP. IV. 

trees, and the soil in which they are rooted. Some of these 
masses have slid two or three miles, with an average breadth of 
a quarter of a mile ; and so large are the rocky fragments, that I 
found some of them, which came down in the Willey Slide, to 
measure from fourteen to twenty feet in diameter. I also ascer- 
trined that the steep slopes of bare rock over which they had 
passed, were inclined, in some instances, at angles of twenty to 
thirty degrees with the horizon. After clambering up more than 
400 feet above the level of the Saco, on its right bank, I reached 
a space of naked rock, fifteen feet square, over which my guide, 
the elder Crawford, told me that the whole contents of the Willey 
Slide had swept in 1826 ; which was indeed evident, for it lay 
in the direct line of the great trench cut through the forest above 
and below. 

There is a small cataract at the spot, where a dyke of basalt 
and greenstone, four or five feet wide, traverses the granite, all 
the rocks being smoothed on the surface, and marked with some 
irregular and short scratches and grooves ; but not such as re 
semble in continuity, straightness, or parallelism, those produced 
by a glacier, where hard stones, which grate along the bottom, 
have been firmly fixed in a heavy mass of ice, so that they can 
not be deflected from a rectilinear course. 

I am aware that glaciers and icebergs are not the only means 
by which the grooving and polishing of the faces of rocks may 
be caused ; for similar effects may arise on the sides of fissures 
where stony masses have been rent asunder, and moved upward 
and downward, or made to vibrate during earthquakes, so that 
the opposite walls are rubbed against each other. But we can 
not attribute to this cause the superficial markings now commonly 
referred to glacial action in Europe and North America ; and 
what I saw at the Willey Slide, and other places in the White 
Mountains, convinced me that a semi-fluid mass of mud and 
stones must always have too much freedom of motion, and is too 
easily turned aside by every obstacle and inequality in the shape 
of the rocky floor, to enable it to sculpture out long and straight 
furrows. 

From the Willey Slide we continued our way along the bot- 



CHAP. IV.] FOREST TREES. 63 

torn of the narrow valley of the Saco, listening with pleasure to 
the river as it foamed and roared over its stony bed, and admir 
ing two water-falls, broken into sheets of white foam in their de 
scent. The scene became more grand as we entered the defile 
called the Notch, where, although the sun was high, the lofty 
crags threw dark shadows across our path. On either hand were 
wild and nearly perpendicular precipices, the road, on the side 
overhanging the Saco, being usually protected by parapets of 
stone or timber. A steep ascent led us up to a kind of pass or 
water-shed, where there was an inn kept by one of the Crawford 
family, well known in this region, which reminded me of some 
of those hotels perched in similar wild situations in the Alps, as 
on the Simplon and Grimsel. We learned that snow had fallen 
here in the second week of September, and the higher hills had 
been whitened for a time ; but they are now again uncovered. 
Already the elevation has produced a marked change in the veg 
etation the hemlock, the spruce, the balm of Gilead fir (Pinus 
bahamea), and the white pine, beginning to form, with the birch, 
a large proportion of the forest trees. The white pine, called in 
England the Weymouth pine (Pinus strobus), is the most mag 
nificent in size. It sometimes attains a diameter of five feet, and 
a height of 150 feet, both here and in other parts of New Hamp 
shire and Maine ; but it is very rare to meet with such trees 
now, the finest having been burnt down in the great fires which 
have every where devastated the woods. I observed the boughs 
of the spruce hung with a graceful white lichen, called Old 
Man s Beard (Usnea barbata), a European species. The com 
mon fern (Pteris aquilina), now covers the moist ground under 
the dark shade of the woods, and all the rotting trunks of fallen 
trees are matted over with a beautiful green carpet of moss, 
formed almost entirely of the feathery leaves of one of the most 
elegant of the tribe, also occurring in Scotland (Hypnum Crista 
castremis). Several kinds of club moss (Lycopodium], which, 
like the Hypnum, were in full fructification, form also a con 
spicuous part of the herbage ; especially one species, standing 
erect like a miniature tree, whence its name, L. dendroideum, 
from six to eight inches high. 



64 MOUNTAIN PLANTS. ECHO. [CHAP. IV. 

Oct. 5. Penetrating still further into the mountains, we es 
tablished ourselves in pleasant quarters for several days at Fa- 
byan s Hotel, thirty-two miles from Conway, waiting for fine 
weather to ascend Mount Washington. Whenever the rain 
ceased for a few hours we explored the lower hills, and were for 
tunate enough to have, as a companion in our walks, one of the 
ablest botanists in America, Mr. William Oakes,^ of Ipswich, 
Massachusetts, who is preparing for publication a fine work on 
the Flora of the White Mountains. In one of our excursions 
with him to see the falls of the river Amoonosuc, he showed us 
several places where the Linncea borealis was growing, now in 
fruit. I had seen this plant in flower in Nova Scotia in July, 
1842, but was not prepared to find it extending so much farther 
southward, having first known it as characteristic of Norway, 
and of great Alpine heights in Europe. But I was still more 
surprised when I learned, from Mr. Oakes, that it descends even 
into the wooded plains of New Hampshire, under favor of a long 
winter and of summer fogs, near the sea. What is most singu 
lar, between Manchester and Cape Anne, lat 42 30 N., it in 
habits the same swamp with the Magnolia glauca. The arctic 
Linncea, trailing along the ground and protected from the sun 
by a magnolia, affords a curious example of the meeting of two 
plants of genera characteristic of very different latitudes, each on 
the extreme limits of its northern or southern range. 

One evening, during our stay here, we enjoyed listening to the 
finest mountain echo I ever heard. Our host, Fabyan, played a 
few clear notes on a horn, which were distinctly repeated five 
times by the echo, in softened and melodious tones. The third 
repetition, although coming of course from a greater distance, 
was louder than the two fi.rst, which had a beautiful effect, and 
may be caused either by the concave form of the rocks being 
more favorable to the reflection of sound, or from the place where 
we stood being, in reference to that distant spot, more exactly in 
the focus of the ellipse. 

In the elevated plain at the foot of the mountains at Fabyan s 

* Since writing the above, I have heard, with deep regret, of the death 
of this amiable and accomplished naturalist. 



CHAP. IV.] THE GIANT S GRAVE. 65 

there is a long superficial ridge of gravel, sand, and boulders, 
having the same appearance as those mounds which are termed 
" osar" in Sweden. It is a conspicuous object on the plain, and. 
is called the Giant s Grave ; but in general such geological ap 
pearances as are usually referred to the glacial or " drift" period 
are rare in these mountains ; and I looked in vain for glacial 
furrows and striae on a broad surface of smooth granite recently 
exposed on the banks of the Saco, in a pit where gravel had been 
taken out for the repair of the road. How far the rapid decom 
position of the granite rocks, owing to the vast range of annual 
temperature, may have destroyed, in this high region, any mark 
ings originally imprinted on their surface, deserves consideration. 



CHAPTER V. 

Ascent of Mount "Washington. Mr. Oakes. Zones of Distinct Vegetation. 
Belt of Dwarf Firs. Bald Region and Arctic Flora on Summit. View 
from Summit. Migration of Plants from Arctic Regions. Change of 
Climate since Glacial Period. Granitic Rocks of White Mountains. 
Franconia Notch. Revival at Bethlehem. Millerite Movement. The 
Tabernacle at Boston. Mormons. Remarks on New England Fanati 
cism. 

Oct. 7, 1845. AT length, with a fair promise of brighter 
weather, we started at eight o clock in the morning for the sum 
mit of Mount Washington. Its old Indian name of Agiocochook 
has been dropped, as too difficult for Anglo-Saxon ears or memo 
ries. Its summit is 6225 feet above the level of the sea ; and 
we were congratulated on the prospect of finding it, at so late a 
season, entirely free from snow. Our party consisted of nine, all 
mounted on well-trained horses Mr. Oakes, a gentleman and 
his wife, tourists from Maine, a young New England artist, my 
self, my wife, and three guides. 

A ride of seven miles brought us to the foot of the mountain, 
and we then began to thread the dark mazes of the forest, through 
narrow winding paths, often crossing and re-crossing the bed of 
the same torrent, and fording its waters, which occupied, in spite 
of the late rains, a small part of their channel. 

The first, or lowest zone of the mountain, extending from its 
base to the height of about 2000 feet, and 4000 feet above the 
level of the sea, is clothed with a great variety of wood. Besides 
the hemlock, spruce, Weymouth, and other pines before men 
tioned, there is the beech (Fagus ferrugined], three kinds of 
birch, the black, the yellow, and the white (Betula lenta, B. 
lutea, and B. papyracea) ; also the rock or sugar-maple (Acer sac- 
cJiarinum), and the red maple (A. rubrum}, exhibiting autumnal 
tints of every color, from orange to pale yellow, and from scarlet 
to purple. The undergrowth was composed in part of a Guelder- 



CHAP V.] VEGETATION. DWARF FIRS. 67 

rose (Viburnum lantanoides], the Mexican laurustinus, and the 
service-tree (Sorbus americana), with Acer montanum and Acer 
sPriatwn. On the ground we saw the beautiful dwarf dogwood 
(Cornus canadensis), still in flower, also the fruit of the averin, 
or cloud-berry, here called mulberry (Rubits chamcemorus), well 
known on the Grampians, and the wood-sorrel (Oxalis acetosella), 
in great quantity, with Gaultheria hispidula. There were 
many large prostrate trees in various stages of decay, and out of 
their trunks young fir-saplings, which had taken root on the bark, 
were seen growing erect. 

We put up very few birds as we rode along, for the woods 
are much deserted at this season. A small lapwing, with a 
note resembling the English species, flew up from some marshy 
ground ; and we saw a blue jay and a brown woodpecker among 
the trees, and occasionally a small bird like a tomtit (Pants 
atrocapillus). I picked up one land-shell only (Helix tliyoides), 
and was surprised at the scarcity of air-breathing testacea here 
and elsewhere in New England, where there is so vigorous a 
vegetation and so much summer heat. The absence of lime in 
the granitic rocks is the chief cause ; but even in the calcareous 
districts these shells are by no means as plentiful as in correspond 
ing latitudes in Europe. 

When we had passed through this lowest belt of wood the 
clouds cleared away, so that, on looking back to the westward, 
we had a fine view of the mountains of Vermont and the Camel s 
Hump, and were the more struck with the magnificent extent of 
the prospect, as it had not opened upon us gradually during our 
ascent. We then began to enter the second region, or zone of 
evergreens, consisting of the black spruce and the Pinus balsa- 
mea, which were at first mixed with other forest trees, all 
dwarfed in height, till at length, after we had ascended a few 
hundred feet, these two kinds of firs monopolized the entire 
ground. They are extremely dense, rising to about the height 
of a man s head, having evidently been prevented by the cold 
winds from continuing their upward growth beyond the level at 
which they are protected by the snow. All their vigor seems 
to have been exerted in throwing out numerous strong horizontal 



68 BALD REGION. [CHAP. V. 

or pendent branches, each tree covering a considerable area, ane 
being closely interwoven with others, so that they surround the 
mountain with a formidable hedge about a quarter of a mrlo 
broad. The innumerable dead boughs, which, after growing fox 
a time, during a series of milder seasons, to a greater height, 
have then been killed by the keen blast, present a singular ap 
pearance. They are forked and leafless, and look like the antlers 
of an enormous herd of deer or elk. This thicket opposed a 
serious obstacle to those who first ascended the mountain thirty 
years ago. Dr. Francis Boott, among others, whose description 
of his ascent in 1816, given to me in London several years 
before, made me resolve one day to visit the scene, was com 
pelled, with his companion, Dr. Bigelow, to climb over the tops 
and walk on the branches of these trees, until they came to the 
bald region. A traveler now passes so rapidly through the open 
pathway cut through this belt of firs, that he is in danger, while 
admiring the distant view, of overlooking its peculiarities. The 
trees become gradually lower and lower as you ascend, till at 
length they trail along the ground only two or three inches high ; 
and I actually observed, at the upper margin of this zone, that 
the spruce was topped in its average height by the common rein 
deer moss (Lichen range ferinus). According to Dr. Bigelow,^ 
the upper edge of the belt of dwarf firs is at the height of 4443 
feet above the sea. After crossing it we emerged into the bald 
region, devoid of wood, and had still to climb 1800 feet higher, 
before arriving at the summit. Here our long cavalcade was 
seen zigzagging its way in single file up a steep declivity of 
naked rock, consisting of gneiss and mica schist, but principally 
the latter rock intermixed with much white quartz. The masses 
of quartz are so generally overgrown with that bright-colored 
yellowish-green lichen, so common on the Scotch mountains 
(Lichen geographicus), that the whole surface acquires a cor 
responding tint, visible from a great distance. This highest 
region is characterized by an assemblage of Alpine or Arctic 
plants, now no longer in flower, and by a variety of mosses and 

* See his excellent account of an ascent of Mount Washington in 1816, 
Boston Medical Journal, vol. v. p. 321. 



CHAP. V.] ARCTIC FLORA. 69 

lichens specifically identical with those of Northern Europe. 
Among these, we saw on the rocks the Parmelia centrifuga, a 
lichen common in Sweden, but not yet met with in Great Britain, 
of a greenish-white color, which, commencing its growth from a 
point, gradually spreads on all sides, and deserts the central space. 
It then assumes an annular form, and its reddish-brown shields 
of fructification, scattered over the margin, remind one, though 
on a miniature scale, of those " fairy rings" on our English lawns, 
which appear to be unknown in America, and where fungi, or 
mushrooms are seen growing in a circle. 

The flora of the uppermost region of Mount Washington con 
sists of species which are natives of the cold climate of Labrador, 
Lapland, Greenland, and Siberia ; and are impatient, says Bige- 
low, of drought, as well as of both extremes of heat and cold ; 
they are therefore not at all fitted to flourish in the ordinary 
climate of New England. But they are preserved here, during 
winter, from injury, by a great depth of snow, and the air in 
summer never attains, at this elevation, too high a temperature, 
while the ground below is always cool. When the snow melts, 
they shoot up instantly with vigor proportioned to the length of 
time they have been dormant, rapidly unfold their flowers, and 
mature their fruits, and run through the whole course of their 
vegetation in a few weeks, irrigated by clouds and mist. 

Among other Alpine plants, we gathered on the summit 
Menziesia cerulea, and Rhododendron laponicum, both out of 
flower ; and not far below, Azalea procumbens. Mr. Oakes 
pointed out to me, in a rent several hundred feet above the lower 
margin of the bald region, a spruce fir growing in the cleft of a 
rock, where it was sheltered from the winds, clearly showing 
that the sudden cessation of the trees does not arise from mere 
intensity of cold. We found no snow on the summit, but the 
air was piercing, and for a time we were enveloped in a cloud 
of dense white fog, which, sailing past us, suddenly disclosed a 
most brilliant picture. On the slope of the mountain below us, 
were seen woods warmly colored with their autumnal tints, and 
lighted up by a bright sun ; and in the distance a vast plain, 
stretching eastward to Portland, with many silver lakes, and 



70 MIGRATION OF PLANTS. [CHAP. V 

beyond these the ocean and blue sky. It was like a vision seen in 
the clouds, and we were occasionally reminded of " the dissolving 
views," when the landscape slowly faded away, and then, in a 
few minutes, as the fog dispersed, regained its strength as gradual 
ly, till every feature became again clear and well defined. 

We at length returned to the hotel in the dusk of the evening, 
much delighted with our excursion, although too fatiguing for a 
lady, my wife having been twelve hours on horseback. If an 
inn should be built at the foot of the mountain, the exploit will 
be comparatively an easy one, and in a few years a railway from 
Boston, only 150 miles distant (100 miles of it being already 
completed), will enable any citizen to escape from the summer 
heat, and, having slept the first night at this inn, enjoy, the next 
morning, if he is a lover of botany, the sight of a variety of rare 
and beautiful Arctic plants in full flower, besides beholding a suc 
cession of distinct zones of vegetation, scarcely surpassed on the 
flanks of Mount Etna or the Pyrenees. 

If we attempt to speculate on the manner in which the pecu 
liar species of plants now established on the highest summits of 
the White Mountains, were enabled to reach those isolated spots, 
while none of them are met with in the lower lands around, or 
for a great distance to the north, we shall find ourselves engaged 
in trying to solve a philosophical problem, which requires the 
aid, not of botany alone, but of geology, or a knowledge of the 
geographical changes which immediately preceded the present 
state of the earth s surface. We have to explain how an Arctic 
flora, consisting of plants specifically identical with those which 
now inhabit lands bordering the sea in the extreme north of 
America, Europe, and Asia, could get to the top of Mount 
Washington. Now geology teaches us that the species living 
at present on the earth are older than many parts of our existing 
continents ; that is to say, they were created before a large part 
of the existing mountains, valleys, plains, lakes, rivers, and seas 
were formed. That such must be the case in regard to the 
island of Sicily, I announced my conviction in 1833, after first 
returning from that country.* And a similar conclusion is no 
* Principles of Geology, 1st edition, vol. iii. chap. 9. 



CHAP. V.] MIGRATION OF PLANTS. 71 

less obvious to any naturalist who has studied the structure of 
North America, and observed the wide area occupied by the 
modern or glacial deposits before alluded to,* in which marine 
fossil shells of living but northern species are entombed. It is 
clear that a great portion of Canada, and the country surround 
ing the great lakes, was submerged beneath the ocean when 
recent species of mollusca flourished, of which the fossil remains 
occur more than 500 feet above the level of the sea near Mon 
treal. I have already stated that Lake Champlain was a gulf 
of the sea at that period, that large areas in Maine were under 
water, and, I may add, that the White Mountains must then 
have constituted an island, or group of islands. Yet, as this 
period is so modern in the earth s history as to belong to the 
epoch of the existing marine fauna, it is fair to infer that the 
Arctic flora now contemporary with man was then also estab 
lished on the globe. 

A careful study of the present distribution of animals and 
plants over the globe, has led nearly all the best naturalists to 
the opinion that each species had its origin in a single birth-place, 
and spread gradually from its original center, to all accessible 
spots fit for its habitation, by means of the powers of migration 
given to it from the first. If we adopt this view, or the doctrine 
of " specific centers," there is no difficulty in comprehending how 
the crypto gamous plants of Siberia, Lapland, Greenland, andj 
Labrador scaled the heights of Mount Washington, because the 
sporules of the fungi, lichens, and mosses may be wafted through 
the air for indefinite distances, like smoke ; and, in fact, heavier 
particles are actually known to have been carried for thousands 
of miles by the wind. But the cause of the occurrence of Arctic 
plants of the phcenogamous class on the top of the New Hamp 
shire mountains, specifically identical with those of remote Polar 
regions, is by no means so obvious. They could not, in the 
present condition of the earth, effect a passage over the inter 
vening low lands, because the extreme heat of summer and cold 
of winter would be fatal to them. Even if they were brought 
from the northern parts of Asia, Europe, and America, and 
# Ante, p. 33. 



72 CHANGE OF CLIMATE. [CHAP. V. 

thousands of them planted round the foot of Mount Washington, 
they would never be able, in any number of years, to make their 
way to its summit. We must suppose, therefore, that originally 
they extended their range in the same way as the flowering 
plants now inhabiting Arctic and Antarctic lands disseminate 
themselves. The innumerable islands in the Polar seas are 
tenanted by the sarme species of plants, some of which are con 
veyed as seeds by animals over the ice when the sea is frozen in 
winter, or by birds ; while a still larger number are transported 
by floating icebergs, on which soil containing the seeds of plants 
may be carried in a single year for hundreds of miles. A great 
body of geological evidence has now been brought together, to 
some of which I have adverted in a former chapter ,* to show 
that this machinery for scattering plants, as well as for carrying 
erratic blocks southward, and polishing and grooving the floor of 
the ancient ocean, extended in the western hemisphere to lower 
latitudes than the White Mountains. When these last still 
constituted islands, in a sea jphilled by the melting of floating ice, 
we may assume that they vfrere covered entirely by a flora like 
that now confined to the Uppermost or treeless region of the 
mountains. As the}contin*fet grew by the slow upheaval of the 
land, and the islands gai$p in height, and the climate around 
their base grew milder/pfe Arctic plants would retreat to higher 
and higher zones,, .awd finally occupy an elevated area, which 
probably had been at first, or in the glacial period, always covered 
with perpetual snow. Meanwhile the newly-formed plains around 
the base of the mountain, to which northern species of plants 
could not spread, would be occupied by others migrating from the 
south, and perhaps by many trees, shrubs, and plants then first 
created, and remaining to this day peculiar to North America.! 

The period when the White Mountains ceased to be a group 
of islands, or when, by the emergence of the surrounding low 

* Ante, p. 17. 

t For speculations on analogous botanical and geographical changes in 
Europe, the reader may refer with advantage to an excellent essay by 
Professor Edward Forbes, on the Origin of the British Fauna and Flora, 
Memoirs of Geol. Survey of Great Britain, vol. i. p. 336. 1846. 



CHAP. V.] GRANITE ROCKS 73 

lands, they first became connected with the continent, is, as we 
have seen, of very modern date, geologically speaking. It is, 
in fact, so recent as to belong to the epoch when species now 
contemporaneous with man already inhabited this planet. But 
if we attempt to carry our retrospect still farther into the past, 
and to go back to the date when the rocks themselves of the 
White Mountains originated, we are lost in times of extreme 
antiquity. No light is thrown on this inquiry by embedded 
organic remains, of which the strata of gneiss, mica schist, clay- 
slate, and quartzite are wholly devoid. These masses are 
traversed by numerous veins of granite and greenstone, which 
are therefore newer than the stratified crystalline rocks which 
they intersect ; and the abrupt manner in which these veins 
terminate at the surface attests how much denudation or removal 
by water of solid matter has taken place. Another question of 
a chronological kind may yet deserve attention, namely, the epoch 
of the movements which threw the beds of gneiss and the associ 
ated rocks into their present bent, disturbed, and vertical positions. 
This subject is also involved in considerable obscurity, although 
it seems highly probable that the crystalline strata of New Hamp 
shire acquired their internal arrangement at the same time as the 
fossiliferous beds of the Appalachian or Alleghany chain : and 
we know that they assumed their actual strike and dip sub 
sequently to the origin of the coal measures, which enter so largely 
into the structure of that chain. 

From Fabyan s Inn, at the foot of Mount Washington, wo 
traveled about twenty-five miles westward to Bethlehem, and 
thence southward to the Franconia Notch, a deep and picturesque 
ravine in the mountains of granite. On the way I conversed 
with the driver of our carriage about the village churches, arid, 
being very communicative, he told me he was a Free-will Baptist, 
but had only become a Christian five years ago, when he was 
awakened from a state of indifference by a revival which took 
place near Bethlehem. This meeting, he said, was got up , j.ud 
managed by the Methodists ; but some Baptists, and one ortho 
dox (Independent or Congrcgationalist) minister had assisted, in. 
all sixteen ministers, and for twenty-one days in succession there 

VOL. T. D 



74 REVIVAL AT BETHLEHEM. [CHAP. V. 

had been prayers and preaching incessantly from morning to 
night. I had already seen in a New York paper the following 
advertisement : "A protracted meeting is now in progress at the 

church in Street. There have been a number of 

conversions, and it is hoped the work of grace has but just com 
menced. Preaching every evening : seats free." I was surprised 
to hear of the union of ministers of more than one denomination 
on this occasion, and, on inquiry, was told by a Methodist, that 
110 Episcopalians would join, " because they do not sufficiently 
rely on regeneration and the new man." It appears, indeed, to 
be essential to the efficacy of this species of excitement, that there 
should be a previous belief that each may hope at a particular 
moment " to receive comfort," as they term it, or that their con 
version may be as sudden as was that of St. Paul. A Boston 
friend assured me that when he once attended a revival sermon, 
he heard the preacher describe the symptoms which they might 
expect to experience on the first, second, and third day previous 
to their conversion, just as a medical lecturer might expatiate to 
his pupils on the progress of a well-known disease ; and " the 
complaint," he added, " is indeed a serious one, and very con 
tagious, when the feelings have obtained an entire control over 
the judgment, and the new convert is in the power of the 
preacher. He himself is often worked up to such a pitch of 
enthusiasm, as to have lost all command over his own heated 
imagination." 

It is the great object of the ministers who officiate on these 
occasions to keep up a perpetual excitement ; but while they are 
endeavoring by personal appeals to overcome the apathy of dull, 
slow, and insensible minds, they run the risk of driving others, of 
weaker nerves and a more sensitive temperament, who are sitting 
on " the anxious benches," to the very verge of distraction. 

My friend, the driver, was evidently one of a slow and unexcit- 
able disposition, and had been led for the first time in his life to 
think seriously on religious matters by what he heard at the 
great preaching near Bethlehem ; but it is admitted, and deplored 
by the advocates of revivals, that after the application of such 
violent stimulants there is invariably a leaction, and what the-) 



CHAP. V.j MILLERITE MOVEMENT. 75 

call a flat or dead season. The emotions are so strong as to 
exhaust both the body and mind ; and it is creditable to the New 
England clergy of all sects, that they have in general, of late 
years, almost entirely discontinued such meetings. 

At the Franconia hotel I first heard of the recent fanatical 
movement of the Millerites, or followers of one Miller, who taught 
that the millennium, or final destruction of the world, would 
come to pass last year, or on the 23d day of October, 1844. A 
farmer from the village of Lisbon told me that, in the course of 
the preceding autumn, many of his neighbors would neither reap 
their harvest of Indian corn and potatoes, nor let others take in 
the crop, saying it was tempting Providence to store up grain for 
a season that could never arrive, the great catastrophe being so 
near at hand. These infatuated people, however, exerted them 
selves very diligently to save what remained of their property 
when the non-fulfillment of the prophecy dispelled their delusion. 
In several townships in this and the adjoining States, the parochial 
officers, or " select men," interfered, harvesting the crops at the 
public expense, and requiring the owners, after the 23d October, 
to repay them for the outlay. 

I afterward heard many anecdotes respecting the Millerite 
movement, not a few of my informants speaking with marked 
indulgence of what they regarded simply as a miscalculation of 
a prophecy which must be accomplished at no distant date. In 
the township of Concord, New Hampshire, I was told of an old 
woman, who, on paying her annual rent ibr a house, said, " I guess 
this is the last rent you will get from me." Her landlord re 
marked, " If so, I hope you have got your robes ready ;" alluding 
to the common practice of the faithful to prepare white ascension 
robes, " for going up into heaven." Hearing that there had been 
advertisements from shops in Boston and elsewhere to furnish 
any number of these robes on the shortest notice, I took for grant 
ed that they were meant as a hoax ; but an English bookseller, 
residing at New York, assured me that there was a brisk de 
mand for such articles, even as far south as Philadelphia, and 
that he knew two individuals in New York, who sat up all night 
in their shrouds on the 22d of October. 



76 MILLER1TE MOVEMENT. [CHAP. V. 

A caricature, published at Boston, represented Miller, the 
originator of the movement, ascending to heaven in his robes ; 
but his chaplain, who was suspected of not being an enthusiast, 
but having an eye to the dollars freely thrown into "the Lord s 
Treasury," was weighed down by the money bags, and the devils 
were drawing him in an opposite direction. To keep up the 
excitement, several newspapers and periodicals were published in 
the interest of this sect, and I was told of several Methodist 
preachers who gave themselves up in full sincerity to the delu 
sion. I asked an artisan who sat next me in a railway car in 
Massachusetts, whether he had heard any talk of the millennium 
in his district. " Certainly," he said ; " I remember a tonguey 
jade coming down to our town, and many women, and even 
some smart, likely men, were carried away by her preaching. 
And, when the day was past, Miller explained how they had 
made a miscalculation, and that the end of the world would 
come three days later ; and after that it was declared it would 
happen in the year 1847, which date was the more certain, be 
cause all the previous computations had failed, and that era alone 
remained to satisfy the prophecy." 

In a subsequent part .of our tour, several houses were pointed 
out to us, between Plymouth (Massachusetts) and Boston, the 
owners of which had been reduced from ease to poverty by their 
credulity, having sold their all toward building the Tabernacle, 
in which they were to pray incessantly for six weeks previous to 
their ascension. Among other stories which, whether true or 
not, proved to me how much fraud was imputed to some of the 
leaders, I was told of a young girl who, having no money, was 
advised to sell her necklace, which had been presented to her by 
her betrothed. The jeweler, seeing that she was much affected 
at parting with her treasure, and discovering the object of the 
sale, showed her some silver forks and spoons, on which he was 
about to engrave the initials of the very minister whose dupe she 
was, and those of the lady he was about to marry on a fixed day 
after the fated 23d of October. 

The Tabernacle, above alluded to, was planned for the accom 
modation of between 2000 and 3000 persons, who were to meet, 



CHAP. V.] THE TABERNACLE AT BOSTOiN. 77 

pray, and "go up" at Boston; but, as it was intended merely 
for a temporary purpose, the fabric Avould have been very slight 
and insecure, had not the magistrates, fearing that it might fall 
into the street and kill some of the passers-by, interposed in 
good time, and required the architect to erect a substantial edi 
fice. When the society of the Millerites was bankrupt, this 
Tabernacle was sold and fitted up as a theater ; and there, in the 
course of the winter, we had the pleasure of seeing Mr. and Mrs. 
Kean perform Macbeth. Although under no apprehensions that 
the roof would fall in, yet, as all the seats were stuffed with hay, 
and there was only one door, we had some conversation during 
the performance as to what might be our chance of escape in the 
event of a fire. Only a few months later the whole edifice was 
actually burned to the ground, but fortunately no lives were lost. 
In one of the scenes of Macbeth, where Hecate is represented as 
going up to heaven, and singing, " Now I m furnished for the 
flight Now I fly," &c., some of our party told us they were 
reminded of the extraordinary sight they had witnessed in that 
room on the 23d of October of the previous year, when the walls 
were all covered with Hebrew and Greek texts, and when a 
crowd of devotees were praying in their ascension robes, in hourly 
expectation of the consummation of all things. 

I observed to one of my New England friends, that the num 
ber of Millerite proselytes, and also the fact that the prophet of 
the nineteenth century, Joseph Smith, could reckon at the lowest 
estimate 60,000 followers in the United States, and, according 
to some accounts, 120,000, did not argue much in favor of the 
working of their plan of national education. " As for the Mor 
mons," he replied, "you must bear in mind that they were largely 
recruited from the manufacturing districts of England and Wales, 
and from European emigrants recently arrived. They were drawn 
chiefly from an illiterate class in the western states, where so 
ciety is in its rudest condition. The progress of the Millerites, 
however, although confined to a fraction of the population, re 
flects undoubtedly much discredit on the educational and religious 
training in New England; but since the year 1000, when all 
Christendom believed that the world was to come to an end, 



78 NEW ENGLAND FANATICISM. [CHAP. V. 

there have never been wanting interpreters of prophecy, who 
have confidently assigned some exact date, and one near at hand, 
for the millennium. Your Faber on the Prophecies, and the 
writings of Croly, and even some articles in the Quarterly Re 
view, helped for a time to keep up this spirit here, and make it 
fashionable. But the Millerite movement, like the recent exhi 
bition of the Holy Coat at Treves, has done much to open men s 
minds ; and the exertions made of late to check this fanatical 
movement, have advanced the cause of truth." He then went 
on to describe to me a sermon preached in one of the northeast 
ern townships of Massachusetts, which he named, against the Mil 
lerite opinions, by the minister of the parish, who explained the 
doubts generally entertained by the learned in regard to some of the 
dates of the prophecies of Daniel, entered freely into modern con 
troversies about the verbal inspiration of the Old and New Tes 
tament, and referred to several new works, both of German, 
British, and New England authors, which his congregation had 
never heard of till then. Not a few of them complained that 
they had been so long kept in the dark, that their minister must 
have entertained many of these opinions long before, and that he 
had now revealed them in order to stem the current of a popular 
delusion, and for expediency, rather than from the love of truth. 
" Never," said they, " can we in future put the same confidence 
in him again." 

Other apologists observed to me, that so long as a part of the 
population was very ignorant, even the well-educated would occa 
sionally participate in fanatical movements ; " for religious en 
thusiasm, being very contagious, resembles a famine fever, which 
first attacks those who are starving, but afterward infects some 
of the healthiest and best-fed individuals in the whole communi 
ty." This explanation, plausible and ingenious as it may ap 
pear, is, I believe, a fallacy. If they who have gone through 
school and college, and have been for years in the habit of lis 
tening to preachers, become the victims of popular fanaticism, it 
proves that, however accomplished and learned they may be, 
their reasoning powers have not been cultivated, their under 
standings have not been enlarged, they have not been trained in 



CHAP. V.] NEW ENGLAND FANATICISM. 79 

habits of judging and thinking for themselves ; in fact, they arc 
ill educated. Instead of being told that it is their duty care 
fully to investigate historical evidence for themselves, and to 
cherish an independent frame of mind, they have probably been 
brought up to think that a docile, submissive, and child-like def 
erence to the authority of churchmen is the highest merit of a 
Christian. They have perhaps heard much about the pride of 
philosophy, and how all human learning is a snare. In mat 
ters connected with religion they have been accustomed blinclly 
to resign themselves to the guidance of others, and hence are 
prepared to yield themselves up to the influence of any new pre 
tender to superior sanctity who is a greater enthusiast than 
themselves. 



-_,-, 
( Library. ] 




CHAPTER VI. 

Social Equality. Position of Servants. War with England. Coalition of 
Northern Democrats, and Southern Slave-owners. Ostracism of Wealth. 
Legislators paid. Envy in a Democracy. Politics of the Country 
and the City. Pledges at Elections. Universal Suffrage. Adventure 
in a Stage Coach. Return from the White Mountains. Plymouth in 
New Hampshire. Congregational and Methodist Churches. Theo 
logical Discussions of Fellow-Travelers. Temperance Movement. 
Post-Office Abuses. Lowell Factories. 

Oct. 10, 1845 DURING our stay in the White Mountains, 
we were dining one day at the ordinary of the Franconia hotel, 
when a lawyer from Massachusetts pointed out to me "a lady" 
sitting opposite to us, whom he recognized as the chambermaid 
of an inn in the State of Maine, and he supposed "that her 
companion with whom she was talking might belong to the same 
station." I asked if he thought the waiters, who were as respect 
ful to these guests as to us, were aware of their true position in 
society. " Probably they are so," he replied ; " and, moreover, 
as the season is now almost over in these mountains, I presume 
that these gentlemen, who must have saved money here, will 
very soon indulge in some similar recreation, and make some ex 
cursion themselves." He then entered into conversation with 
the two ladies on a variety of topics, for the sake of drawing 
them out, treating them quite as equals ; and certainly succeeded 
in proving to me that they had been well taught at school, had 
read good books, and could enjoy a tour and admire scenery as 
well as ourselves. "It is no small gratification to them," said 
he, " to sit on terms of equality with the silver fork gentry, 
dressed in their best clothes, as if they were in an orthodox 
meeting-house." I complimented him on carrying out in prac 
tice the American theory of sociul equality. As he had strong 
anti-slavery feelings, and was somewhat of an abolitionist, he 
said, " Yes, but you must not forget they have no dash of negro 



CHAP. VI.] WAR WITH ENGLAND. 81 

blood in their veins." I remarked, that I had always inferred 
from the books of English travelers in the United States, that 
domestic service was held as somewhat of a degradation in New 
England. " I remember the time," he answered, " when such 
an idea was never entertained by any one here ; but servants 
formerly used to live with their master and mistress, and have 
their meals at the same table. Of late years, the custom of 
boarding separately has gained ground, and work in factories is 
now preferred. These are so managed, that the daughters of 
farmers, and sometimes of our ministers, look upon them as most 
respectable places, where in three or four years they may earn a 
small sum toward their dowry, or which may help to pay off a 
mortgage or family debt." 

As, during our stay here, the tone of the newspapers from 
Washington was somewhat bellicose, and we were proposing to 
make a tour of eight months in the southern states, I asked my 
legal companion whether he was really apprehensive of a war 
about Oregon. " No," he said, " there may be big words and 
much blustering, and perhaps, before the storm blows over, a 
war panic ; but there will be no rupture with England, because 
it is against the interest of the slave-owners ; for you know, I 
presume, that we are governed by the South, and our southern 
chivalrv will put their veto on a war of which they would have 
to bear the brunt." "If," said I, " you are ruled by the slave- 
owning states, you may thank yourselves for it, the numerical, 
physical, intellectual, and moral power being on the side of the 
free states. Why do you knock under to them ?" " You may 
well ask that question," he replied ; " and, as a foreigner, may 
riot easily be made to comprehend the political thralldom in 
which we, the majority of northerners, are still held, but which 
can not, I think, last much longer. Hitherto the southern 
planters have had more leisure to devote to politics than our 
small farmers or merchants in the north. They are banded to 
gether as one man in defense of what they call their property 
and institutions. They have a high bearing, which, in Con 
gress, often imposes on northern men much superior to them in 
real talent, knowledge, and strength of character. They are 

D* 



82 OSTRACISM OF WEALTH. [CHAP. VI. 

often eloquent, and have much political tact, and have formed a 
league with the unscrupulous demagogues here, and, by uniting 
with them, rule the country. For example, the mass of our 
population were strongly opposed to the extension of slavery, and 
voted at first against the annexation of Texas, yet they have 
been cajoled into the adoption of that measure." 

" Do the slave-owners," I asked, " give bribes to the chiefs of 
your democratic party ?" " No, our electors have too much 
self-respect and independence to accept of money bribes ; but, by 
ioining with their southern allies, they get what one of their party 
had recently the effrontery to call the spoils of the victor. 
They are promoted to places in the custom-house or post-office, 
or sent on a foreign mission, or made district attorneys, or a 
lawyer may now and then be raised even to the bench of the 
Supreme Court ; not one who is positively incompetent, but a 
man who, but for political services, would never have been se 
lected for the highest honors in his profession." 

I next told my friend that, when traveling in Maine, I had 
asked a gentleman why his neighbor, Mr. A., a rich and well- 
informed man, was not a member of their Legislature, and he 
had replied, " Because he is known to have so much wealth, 
both in land and money, that, if he were to stand, the people 
would not elect him." " Is it then," I inquired, "an avowed 
principle of the democracy, that the rich are to be ostracised ?" 
and I went on to say that, in a club to which I belonged in 
London, we had a servant who, though very poor, had a vote 
as proprietor of a house, all the apartments of which he let out 
to different lodgers. When he was questioned why, at two suc 
cessive elections, he had voted for candidates of exactly opposite 
opinions in politics, he explained by saying, " I make it a rule 
always to vote with my first floor." " I presume that if he 
migrated to New Hampshire or Maine, he would vote with his 
garret, instead of his first floor ?" 

" I have no doubt," said my companion, " that such an elector 
would side with the powers that be ; and as the democracy has 
the upper hand here, as in Maine, he would have paid as servile 
a homage to the dominant party on this side of the Atlantic as 



CHAP. VI.] LEGISLATORS PAID. 33 

he did to the aristocracy of wealth in your country. Do you 
desire to see our people regard wealth as a leading qualification 
for their representatives ?" 

" Surely," said I, " it is au evil that men of good abilities, of 
leisure, and independent station, who have had the best means 
of obtaining a superior education, should be excluded from public 
life by that envy which seems to have so rank a growth in a 
democracy, owing to the vain efforts to realize a theory of equal 
ity. It must be a defect in your system, if there is no useful 
career open to young men of fortune. They are often ruined, I 
hear, for want of suitable employments." 

" There are," he said, " comparatively few of them in the 
United States, where the law of primogeniture no longer pre 
vails ; and if we have good-for-nothing individuals among them, 
it is no more than may be said of your own aristocracy." lie 
then named an example or two of New Englanders, who, having 
inherited considerable property, had yet risen to political distinc 
tion, and several more (four of whom I myself knew), who, 
having made large fortunes by their talents, had been members 
either of the State Legislature of Massachusetts or of Congress. 
He did not, however, deny that it is often good policy, in an 
election, for a rich candidate to affect to be poorer than he is. 
" Every one of our representatives," he added, " whether in the 
State Legislatures or in Congress, receives a certain sum daily 
when on duty, besides more than enough traveling money for 
carrying him to his post and home again. In choosing a dele 
gate, therefore, the people consider themselves as patrons who 
are giving away a place ; and if an opulent man offers himself, 
they are disposed to say, * You have enough already, let us help 
some one as good as you who needs it. " 

During my subsequent stay in New England, I often con 
versed with men of the working classes on the same subject, and 
invariably found that they had made up their mind that it was 
not desirable to choose representatives from the wealthiest class. 
" The rich," they say, " have less sympathy with our opinions 
and feelings ; love their amusements, and go shooting, fishing, 
and traveling ; keep hospitable houses, and are inaccessible when 



84 GENERAL JACKSON S POLICY. [CHAP. VI. 

we want to talk with them, at all hcmrs, and tell them how ice 
wish them to vote" I once asked a party of New England 
tradesmen whether, if Mr. B., already an eminent public man, 
came into a large fortune through his wife, as might soon be ex 
pected, he would stand a worse chance than before of being sent 
to Congress. The question gave rise to a discussion among 
themselves, and at last they assured me that they did not think 
his accession to a fortune would do him any harm. It clearly 
never struck them as possible that it could do him any good, or 
aid his chance of success. 

The chief motive, I apprehend, of preferring a poorer candi 
date, is the desire of reducing the members of their Legislature 
to mere delegates. A rich man would be apt to have an opinion 
of his own, to be unwilling to make a sacrifice of his free agency ; 
he would not always identify himself with the majority of his 
electors, condescend to become, like the wires of the electric 
telegraph, a mere piece of machinery for conveying to the Capitol 
of his State, or to Washington, the behests of the multitude. 
That there is, besides, a vulgar jealousy of superior wealth, 
especially in the less educated districts and newer states, I satis 
fied myself in the course of my tour ; but in regard to envy, we 
must also bear in mind, on the other hand, that they who elevate 
to distinction one of their own class in society, have sometimes 
to achieve a greater victory over that passion than when they 
confer the same favor on one who occupies already, by virtue of 
great riches, a higher position. 

In reference also to pledges exacted from representatives at an 
election, I am bound to mention some spirited letters which I saw 
published by Whig candidates in Massachusetts, who carried their 
election in spite of them. From one of these I quote the follow 
ing words ; "I must decline giving a direct reply to your specific 
questions ; my general conduct and character as a public man, 
must be your guarantee. My votes are on record, my speeches 
are in print ; if they do not inspire confidence, no pledges or dec 
larations of purpose ought to do so." 

It was part of General Jackson s policy, openly avowed by him 
in several of his presidential addresses, to persuade the small 



CHAP. VI.] UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE. 85 

farmers, mechanics, and laborers that they constituted the people, 
were the bone and sinew of the country, the real possessors of the 
national wealth, although in their hands it is subdivided into 
small shares ; and he told them it was their business to make a 
constant effort to maintain their rights against the rich capitalists 
and moneyed corporations, who, by facilities of combining together, 
could usually make their own class interests prevail against a 
more numerous body, and one possessed in the aggregate of greater 
wealth. 

It seems that they were not slow in taking this advice, for 
many merchants complained to me that the small farmers had 
too great an ascendency. No feature, indeed, appeared to me 
more contrasted in the political aspect of America and Great 
Britain than this, that in the United States the democracy derives 
its chief support from the landed interest, while the towns take 
the more conservative side, and are often accused by the landed 
proprietors of being too aristocratic. Every where the ambition 
of accumulating riches without limit is so manifest, as to incline 
me to adopt the opinion expressed to me by several rich Boston 
friends, that wealth has in this country quite as many charms, 
and confers as much distinction and influence, as it ought to do. 
If a rich Englishman came to settle here, he would be disappointed 
on finding that money gave him no facilities in taking a lead in 
politics ; but the affluent natives do not pine for influence which 
they never possessed or expected to derive from their riches. 

The great evil of universal suffrage is the irresistible temptation 
it affords to a needy set of adventurers to make politics a trade, 
and to devote all their time to agitation, electioneering, and flat 
tering the passions of the multitude. The natural aristocracy 
of a republic consists of the most eminent men in the liberal 
professions lawyers, divines, and physicians of note, merchants 
in extensive business, literary and scientific men of celebrity ; and 
men of all these classes are apt to set too high a value on their 
time, to be willing to engage in the strife of elections perpetually 
going on, and in which they expose themselves to much calumny 
and accusations, which, however unfounded, are professionally 
injurious to them. The richer citizens, who might be more in- 



86 ADVENTURE IN A STAGE-COACH. [CHAP. VI. 

dependent of such attacks, love their ease or their books, and from 
indolence often abandon the field to the more ignorant ; but I 
met with many optimists who declared that whenever the country 
is threatened with any great danger or disgrace, there is a right- 
rninded majority whose energies can be roused effectively into 
action. Nevertheless, the sacrifices required on such occasions 
to work upon the popular mind are so great, that the field is in 
danger of being left open, on all ordinary occasions, to the dema 
gogue. 

When I urged these and other objections against the working 
of their republican institutions, I was sometimes told that every 
political system has its inherent vices and defects, that the evil 
will soon be mitigated by the removal of ignorance and the im 
proved education of the many. Sometimes, instead of an argu 
ment, they would ask me whether any of the British colonies are 
more prosperous in commerce, manufactures, or agriculture, or are 
doing as much to promote good schools, as some even of their most 
democratic states, such as New Hampshire and Maine? "Let 
our institutions," they said, "be judged of by their fruits." To 
such an appeal, an Englishman as much struck as I had been 
with the recent progress of things in those very districts, and 
with the general happiness, activity, and contentment of all 
classes, could only respond by echoing the sentiment of the Chan 
cellor Oxenstiern, " Quam parva sapientia mundus gubernatur." 
How great must be the amount of misgovernment in the world 
in general, if a democracy like this can deserve to rank so high 
in the comparative scale ! 

Oct. 10. In the stage coach, between Franconia and Ply 
mouth, in New Hampshire, we were at first the only inside 
passengers ; but about half way we met on the road two men 
and two women, respectably dressed, who might, we thought, have 
come from some of the sea-ports. They made a bargain with the 
driver to give them inside seats at a cheap rate. As we were 
annoyed by the freedom of their manners and conversation, I told 
the coachman, when we stopped to change horses, that we had 
a right to protection against the admission of company at half 
price, and, if they went on further, I must go on the outside with 



CHAP. VI.] RETURN FROM THE WHITE MOUNTAINS. 87 

my wife. He immediately apologized, and went up to the two 
young men and gave them their choice to take their seats behind 
him or be left on the road. To my surprise, they quietly accepted 
the former alternative. The ladies, for the first half mile, were 
mute, then burst out into a fit of laughter, amused at the ludicrous 
position of their companions on the outside, who were sitting in a 
pelting rain. They afterward behaved with decorum, and I 
mention the incident because it was the only unpleasant adven 
ture of the kind which we experienced in the course of all our 
travels in the United States. In general, there is no country 
where a woman could, with so much comfort and security, under 
take a long journey alone. 

As we receded from the mountains, following the banks of the 
river Pemigewasset, the narrow valley widened gradually, till, 
first, a small, grassy, alluvial flat, and, at length, some cultivated 
fields, intervened between the stream and the boundary rocks of 
mica schist and granite. Occasionally the low river-plain was 
separated from the granite by a terrace of sand and gravel. 
Usually many boulders, with a few large detached blocks, some 
of them nine feet in diameter, were strewed over the granite 
rocks. These, as generally throughout New England, break 
out here and there, from beneath their covering of drift, in smooth 
bosses, or rounded, dome-shaped forms, called in the Alps " roches 
moutonnees." The contrast is very picturesque between the 
level and fertile plain and the region of lichen-covered rock, or 
sterile, quartzose sand, partially clothed with the native forest, 
now in its autumnal beauty, and lighted up by a bright sun. 
On the flat ground bordering the river, we passed many wagons 
laden with yellow heads of Indian corn, over which were piled 
many a huge pumpkin of a splendid reddish orange color. These 
vehicles were drawn by oxen, with long horns spreading out 
horizontally. 

We stopped for the night in an inland village on which the 
maritime name of Plymouth has been bestowed. Here we spent 
a Sunday. There were two meeting-houses in the place, one 
Congregational and the other Methodist, which shared between 
them, in nearly equal proportions, the whole population of the 



88 PLYMOUTH, NEW HAMPSHIRE. [CHAP. VI 

township. We went with our landlord first to one, and then, 
in the afternoon, to the other. Each service lasted about seventy 
minutes, and they were so arranged that the first began at hall- 
past ten, and the second ended at two o clock, for the convenience 
of the country people, who came in vehicles of all kinds, many 
of them from great distances. The reading, singing, and preach 
ing would certainly not suffer by comparison with the average 
service in rural districts in churches of the Establishment in 
England. The discourse of the Methodist, delivered fluently 
without notes, and with much earnestness, kept his hearers 
awake ; and once, when my own thoughts were wandering, 
they were suddenly recalled to the pulpit by the startling ques 
tion whether, if some intimate friend, whom we had lost, 
should return to us from the world of spirits, his message would 
produce more effect on our minds than did the raising of Lazarus 
on the Jews of old ? He boldly affirmed that it would not. I 
began to think how small would be the sensation created by a 
miracle performed in the present day in Syria and many Eastern 
countries, especially in Persia, where they believe in the power 
of their own holy men occasionally to raise persons from the dead, 
in comparison to its effect in New England ; and how readily he 
Jews of old believed in departures from the ordinary course of 
nature, by the intervention of evil spirits or the power of magic. 
But I presume the preacher merely meant to say, and no doubt 
his doctrine was true, that a voice or sign from Heaven would 
no more deter men from sinning, than do the clear dictates of 
their consciences, in spite of which they yield to temptation. 

In the evening I walked on a roofed wooden bridge, resem 
bling many in Switzerland, which here spans the Pemigewasset, 
and the keeper of it told me how the whole river is frozen over 
in winter, but the ice being broken by the falls above, does not 
carry away the bridge. He also related how his grandfather, 
who had lived to be an old man, had gone up the river with an 
exploring party among the Indians, and how there was a bloody 
battle at the forks above, where the Indians were defeated, after 
great slaughter on both sides. 

On entering the stage coach the next morning, on our way 



CHAP. VI.] THEOLOGICAL DISCUSSION. 89 

south, we had two inside fellow-travelers with us. One of 
them was a blacksmith of Boston, and the other a glover of 
Plymouth. After conversing on the price of agricultural imple 
ments, they fell into a keen controversy on several biblical ques 
tions. After mentioning instances of great longevity in New 
Hampshire, the glover raised the question, whether the antedi 
luvian patriarchs really lived seven or eight centuries, or wheth 
er, as he supposed, we were to take these passages in a " myth 
ical sense." " For his part, he thought we might, perhaps, in 
terpret them to mean that the family stock, or dynasty, of a par 
ticular patriarch, endured for those long periods." He also went 
on to say, that the Deluge did not cover the highest mountains 
literally, but only figuratively. Against these latitudinarian no 
tions the blacksmith strongly protested, declaring his faith in the 
literal and exact interpretation of the sacred record ; but at the 
same time treating his antagonist as one who had a right to in 
dulge his own opinions. As soon as there was a pause in the 
conversation, I asked them if they approved of a frequent change 
of ministers, such as I found to prevail in New England the 
Methodists remaining only two years, and the Congregationalists 
only four or six at the utmost, in one parish. They seemed 
much surprised to learn from me, that in England we thought a 
permanent relation between the pastor and his flock to be nat 
ural and desirable. Our people, they observed, are fond of va 
riety, and there would always be danger, when they grew tired 
of a preacher, of their running after others of a different sect. 
" Besides," said the blacksmith, " how are they to keep up with 
the reading of the day, and improve their minds, if they remain 
forever in one town ? They have first their parish duties, then 
they are expected to write two new sermons every week, usually 
referring to some matters of interest of the day ; but if they have 
a call to a new parish, they not only gain new ideas, but much 
leisure, for they may then preach over again their old sermons." 
He then told me that he had not visited New Hampshire for 
ten years, and was much struck with the reform which, in that 
interval, the temperance movement had worked in the hotels and 
habits of the people. Mr. Mason, an eminent lawyer of Boston, 



90 POST-OFFICE ABUSES. [CHAP. VI 

since dead, with whom I afterward spoke on the same subject, 
informed me that much stronger measures had been taken in 
Massachusetts, where the Legislature first passed a law, that no 
rum or ardent spirits should be sold without a license, and then 
the magistrates in many townships resolved that within their 
limits no licenses should be granted. " A most arbitrary pro 
ceeding," he said, " and perhaps unconstitutional ; for the Fed 
eral Government levies a duty on the importation of spirits, arid 
this is a blow struck at their revenue. But you can have no 
idea," he added, " how excess in drinking ruins the health in this 
climate. I have just been reading the life of Lord Eldon, and 
find that he was able, when in full work, to take with impunity 
a bottle of port a day, which would kill any sedentary New 
Englander in three years." 

We left the stage when we reached the present terminus of 
the Boston railway at Concord, and, anxious for letters from 
England, went immediately to the post-office, where they told us 
that the post-bag had been sent by mistake to Concord in Mas 
sachusetts, the letters of that township having been forwarded to 
this place. Such blunders are attributable to two causes, for 
both of which the practical good sense of the American people 
will, it is hoped, soon find a cure. Synonymous appellations 
might be modified by additions of north and south, east and west, 
&c. ; and the General Post-office might publish a directory, and 
prohibit the future multiplication of the same names in a coun 
try where not only new towns, but new states are every day start 
ing into existence. The other evil is a political one ; the prac 
tice first, I am told, carried out unscrupulously during the pres 
identship of General Jackson, of regarding all placemen, down to 
subordinate officials, such as the village post-master, as a body 
of electioneering agents, who must support the Federal Govern 
ment. They who happen, therefore, to be of opposite opinions, 
must turn out as often as there is a change of ministry. On 
more than one occasion I have known the stage make a circuit 
of several miles in Massachusetts, to convey the mail to the 
postmaster s residence, because, forsooth, in the said village, all 
the houses which lay in the direct road belonging to trustworthy 



CHAP. VI.] LOWELL FACTORIES. 91 

men, were those of Whigs. In short, the mail, like the cabinet 
at Washington, had to go out of its way to hunt up a respectable 
democrat, and he, when found, has to learn, a new craft. By 
leaving such places to the patronage of each state, this class of 
abuses would be much lessened. 

Oct. 14. Next morning we received all our letters from 
England, only a fortnight old, and had time to travel seventy- 
five miles by railway to Boston before dark. When I took out 
the tickets they told me we had no time to lose, saying, "Be as 
spry as you can," meaning " quick," " active." From the cars 
we saw the Merrimack at the rapids, foaming over the granite 
rocks ; and, when I reflected on the extent of barren country 
all round us, and saw many spaces covered with loose, moving 
sands, like the dunes on the coast, I could not help admiring the 
enterprise and industry which has created so much wealth in 
this wilderness. We were told of the sudden increase of the 
new town of Manchester, and passed Lowell, only twenty-five 
years old, with its population of 2 0,000 inhabitants, and its 
twenty-four churches and religious societies. Some of the man 
ufacturing companies here have given notice that they will em 
ploy no one who does not attend divine worship, and whose char 
acter is not strictly moral. Most of the 9000 factory girls of 
this place, concerning whom so much has been written, ought 
not to be compared to those of England, as they only remain five 
or six years in this occupation, and are taken in general from a 
higher class in society. Bishop Potter, in his work entitled 
" The School," tells us (p. 119) " that in the Boott factory there 
were about 950 young women employed for five and a half years, 
and that only one case was known of an illegitimate birth, and 
then the mother was an Irish emigrant." 

I was informed by a fellow-traveler that the joint-stock com 
panies of Lowell have a capital of more than two millions ster 
ling invested. "Such corporations," he said, "are too aristo 
cratic for our ideas, and can combine to keep down the price of 
wages." But one of the managers, in reply, assured me that 
the competition of rival factories is great, and the work-people 
pass freely from one company to another, being only required to 



92 LOWELL FACTORIES. [CHAP. VI. 

sign an agreement to give a fortnight s notice to quit. He also 
maintained that, on the contrary, they are truly democratic insti 
tutions, the shares being as low as 500 dollars, and often held 
by the operatives, as some of them were by his own domestic 
servants. By this system the work-people are prevented from 
looking on the master manufacturers as belonging to a distinct 
class, having different interests from their own. The holders of 
small shares have all the advantages of partners, but are not 
answerable for the debts of the establishment beyond their de 
posits. They can examine all the accounts annually, when there 
is a public statement of their affairs. 

An English overseer told me that he and other foremen were 
receiving here, and in other New England mills, two dollars and 
two and a half dollars a day (8s. 6d. and 10s. 6d.), 



CHAPTER VII. 

Plymouth, Massachusetts. Plymouth Beach. Marine Shells. Quicksand. 
Names of Pilgrim Fathers. Forefathers Day. Pilgrim Relics. 
Their Authenticity considered. Decoy Pond. A Barn Traveling. 
Excursion to Salem. Museum. Warrants for Execution of Witches. 
Causes of the Persecution. Conversation with Colored Abolitionists. 
Comparative Capacity of White and Negro Races. Half Breeds and 
Hybrid Intellects. 

Oct. 15, 1845. AFTER spending a day in Boston, we set 
out by stage for Plymouth, Massachusetts, thirty-eight miles in 
a southwest direction, for I wished to see the spot where the 
Pilgrim Fathers landed, and where the first colony was founded 
in New England. In the suburbs of Boston we went through 
gome fine streets called the South Cove, the houses built on piles, 
where I had seen a marsh only three years ago. It Avas a bright 
day. and, as we skirted the noble bay, tho deep blue sea was seen 
enlivened with the white sails of vessels laden with granite from 
the quarries of Quincy, a village through which we soon after 
ward passed. 

When we had journeyed eighteen miles into the country I 
was told we were in Adams-street, and afterward, when in a 
winding lane with trees on each side, and without a house in 
sight, that we were in Washington-street. But nothing could 
surprise me again after having been told one day in New Hamp 
shire, when seated on a rock in the midst of the wild woods, far 
from any dwelling, that I was in the exact center of the town. 

; God made the country, and man mado the town," 
sang the poet Cowper : and I can well imagine how the village 
pupils must be puzzled until the meaning of this verse has been 
expounded to them by the schoolmaster. 

On the whole, the scenery of the low granitic- region bordering 
the Atlantic in New England preserves a uniform character over 
a wide space, and is without striking features ; yet occasionally 
the landscape is most agreeable. At one time we skirted a 



94 PLYMOUTH BEACH. [CHAP. VII. 

swamp bordered by red cedars ; at another a small lake, then 
hills of barren sand, then a wood where the sumach and oak, 
with red and yellow fading leaves, were mixed with pines ; then 
suddenly a bare rock of granite or gneiss rises up, with one side 
quite perpendicular, fifteen or twenty-five feet high, and covered 
on its summit with birch, fir, and oak. 

We admired the fine avenues of drooping elms in the streets 
of Plymouth as we entered, and went to a small old-fashioned 
inn called the Pilgrim House, where I hired a carriage, in which 
the landlord drove us at once to see the bay and visit Plymouth 
beach. This singular bar of sand, three miles long, runs across 
part of the bay directly opposite the town, and, two miles distant 
from it, serving as a breakwater to the port ; in spite of which the 
sea has been making great inroads, and might have swept away all 
the wharves but for this protection. As the bar was fast wasting 
away, the Federal Government employed engineers to erect a wood 
en framework, secured with piles, a mile long, which has been filled 
with stones, and which has caused an accu mulation of sand to take 
place. This beach reminded me of the bar of Hurst Castle, in Hamp 
shire ; and in both cases a stream enters the bay where the beach 
joins the land. It is well known that the Plymouth bar was a 
narrow neck of land eighty years ago ; and one of the inhabitants 
told me that when a boy he had gathered nuts, wild grapes, and 
plums there. Even fifty years ago some stumps of trees were 
still remaining, whereas nothing now can be seen but a swamp, 
a sea-beach, and some shoals adjoining them. Here I spent an 
hour with my wife collecting shells, and we found eighteen species, 
twelve peculiar to America, and six common to Europe ; namely, 
Buccinum undatum, Purpura lapillus, Mya arenaria, Cyp- 
rina islandica, Modiola papuana, and Mytilus edulis, all spe 
cies which have a high northern range, and which, the geologist 
will remark, are found fossil in the drift or glacial deposits both 
of North America and Europe, and have doubtless continued to 
inhabit both hemispheres from that era. South of Cape Cod the 
mollusca are so different from the assemblage inhabiting the sea 
north of that cape, that we may consider it as the limit of two 
provinces of marine testacea. 



CHAP. VIL] MARINE SHELLS. QUICKSAND. 95 

The most conspicuous shell scattered over the smooth sands 
was the large and ponderous Mactra solidissima, some specimens 
of which were six inches and a half in their greatest length, and 
much larger and heavier than any British bivalve. The broad 
and deep muscular impression in the interior of each valve is 
indicative of a great power of clasping ; and I was assured by a 
good zoologist of Boston that this mollusk has been known to 
close upon the coot, or velvet duck (Fuligula fusca), and the 
blue-winged teal (Anas discorsj, when they have been feeding 
on them, holding these feathered enemies so fast by the beak or 
claw, that the tide has come up and drowned them. 

After we had been some time engaged in collecting shells, we 
turned round and saw the horses of our vehicle sinking in a 
quicksand, plunging violently, and evidently in the greatest terror. 
For a few minutes our landlord, the driver, expected that they 
and the carriage and himself would have been swallowed up ; 
but he succeeded at last in quieting them, and after they had 
rested for some time, though still trembling, they had strength 
enough to turn round, and by many plunges to get back again to 
a firm part of the beach. 

The wind was bitterly cold, and we learned that on the even 
ing before the sea had been frozen over near the shore ; yet it 
was two months later when, on the 22d of December, 1620, 
now called Forefathers Day, the Pilgrims, consisting of 101 
souls, landed here from the Mayflower. No wonder that half 
of them perished from the severity of the first winter. They 
who escaped seem, as if in compensation, to have been rewarded 
with unusual longevity. We saw in the grave-yard the tombs 
of not a few whose ages ranged from seventy-nine to ninety-nine 
years. The names inscribed on their monuments are very char 
acteristic of Puritan times, with a somewhat grotesque mixture 
of other very familiar ones, as Jerusha, Sally, Adoniram, Consider, 
Seth, Experience, Dorcas, Polly, Eunice, Eliphalet, Mercy, &c. 
The New Englanders laugh at the people of the " Old Colony" 
for remaining in a primitive state, and are hoping that the rail 
road from Boston, now nearly complete, may soon teach them to 
go a-head, But they who visit the town for the sake of old 



06 PILGRIM FATHERS. RELICS. [CHAP. VII. 

associations, will not complain of the antique style of many of 
the buildings, and the low rooms with paneled walls, and huge 
wooden beams projecting from the ceilings, such as I never saw 
elsewhere in America. Some houses built of brick brought from 
Holland, notwithstanding the abundance of brick-earth in the 
neighborhood, were pointed out to us in Leyden-street, so called 
from the last town in Europe where the pilgrims sojourned after 
they had been driven out of their native country by religious 
persecution. In some private houses we were interested in 
many venerated heir-looms, kept as relics of the first settlers, 
and among others an antique chair of carved wood, which came 
over in the Mayflower, and still retains the marks of the staples 
which fixed it to the floor of the cabin. This, together with a 
seal of Governor Winslow, was shown me by an elderly lady, 
Mrs. Haywood, daughter of a Winslow and a White, and who 
received them from her grandmother. In a public building, 
called Pilgrim Hall, we saw other memorials of the same kind ; 
as, for example, a chest or cabinet, which had belonged to Pere 
grine White, the first child born in the colony, and which came 
to him from his mother, and had been preserved to the fifth 
generation in the same family, when it was presented by them 
to the Museum. By the side of it was a pewter dish, also given 
by the White family. In the same collection, they have a chair 
brought over in the Mayflower, and the helmet of King Philip, 
the Indian chief, with whom the first settlers had many a des 
perate fight. 

A huge fragment of granite, a boulder which lay sunk in the 
beach, has always been traditionally declared to have been the 
exact spot which the feet of the Pilgrims first trod when they 
landed here ; and part of this same rock still remains on the 
wharf, while another portion has been removed to the center of 
the town, and inclosed within an iron railing, on which the 
names of forty-two of the Pilgrim Fathers are inscribed. They 
who can not sympathize warmly with the New Englanders for 
cherishing these precious relics, are not to be envied, and it is a 
praiseworthy custom to celebrate an annual festival, not only 
here, but in places several thousand miles distant. Often at 



CHAP. VII.] PEREGRINE WHITE. 97 

New Orleans, and in other remote parts of the Union, we hear 
of settlers from the North meeting on the 22d of December to 
commemorate the birth-day of New England ; and when they 
speak fondly of their native hills and valleys, and recall their 
early recollections, they are drawing closer the ties which bind 
together a variety of independent States into one great confeder 
ation. 

Colonel Perkins, of Boston, well known for his munificence, 
especially in founding the Asylum for the Blind, informed me, 
in 1846, that there was but one link wanting in the chain of 
personal communication between him and Peregrine White, the 
first white child born in Massachusetts, a few days after the 
Pilgrims landed. White lived to an advanced age, and was 
known to a man of the name of Cobb, whom Colonel Perkins 
visited, in 1807, with some friends who yet survive. Cobb died 
in 1808, the year after Colonel Perkins saw him. He was then 
blind ; but his memory fresh for every thing which had happened 
in his manhood. He had served as a soldier at the taking of 
Louisbourg in Cape Breton, in 1745, and remembered when 
there were many Indians near Plymouth. The inhabitants 
occasionally fired a cannon near the town to frighten them, and 
to this cannon the Indians gave the name of " Old Speakum." 

When we consider the grandeur of the results w 7 hich have 
been realized in the interval of 225 years, since the Mayflower 
sailed into Plymouth harbor how in that period a nation of 
twenty millions of souls has sprung into existence and peopled a 
vast continent, and covered it with cities, and churches, schools, 
colleges, and railroads, and filled its rivers and ports with steam 
boats and shipping we regard the Pilgrim relics with that kind 
of veneration which trivial objects usually derive from high an 
tiquity alone. For we measure time not by the number of arith 
metical figures representing years or centuries, but by the import 
ance of a long series of events, which strike the imagination. 
When I expressed these sentiments to a Boston friend, he asked 
me, " Why, then, may we not believe in the relics of the early 
Christians displayed at Rome, which they say the mother of 
Constantine brought home from the Holy Land only three cen- 
VOL. i. E 



98 AUTHENTICITY OF RELICS. [CHAP. VII. 

turies after Christ such, for example, as the true cross, the cradle 
in which the infant Jesus lay, the clothes in which he was wrap 
ped up, and the table on which the last Supper was laid ? The 
Puritans also believed, as do their descendants, that they were 
suffering in the cause of religious truth, and this feeling may have 
imparted additional sanctity to all memorials of their exile and 
adventures ; yet how incomparably greater must have been the 
veneration felt by the early Christians for all that belonged to 
their divine teacher !" These observations led me to dwell on 
the relative authenticity of the relics in the two cases the clear 
ness of the historical evidence in the one, its worthlessness in the 
other. It has been truly said that the strength of every chain 
of historical testimony, like that of a chain of brass or iron, must 
be measured by the force of its weakest link. The earliest links 
in every traditional tale are usually the weakest ; but in the case 
of the sacred objects said to have been obtained by Queen Helena, 
there are more links absolutely wanting, or a greater chasm of 
years without any records whatever, than the whole period which 
separates our times from those of the Pilgrim Fathers. The 
credulity of Helena, the notorious impostures of the monks of her 
age, the fact that three centuries elapsed before it was pretended 
that the true cross had been preserved, and another century be 
fore it was proved to be genuine by miracles, and a still further 
lapse of time before all doubt was set at rest by the resuscitation 
of a dead person the extravagance of supposing that the Chris 
tians, when they escaped with difficulty from Jerusalem, just be 
fore the siege, should have carried with them in their flight so 
cumbersome a piece of furniture as the table, have all been well 
exposed.^ But in regard to the genuineness of all the Pilgrim 
treasures shown me at Plymouth and elsewhere I indulged entire 
faith, until one day ray confidence was disturbed in the Museum 
at Salem. A piece of furniture which came over in the May 
flower was pointed out to me, and the antiquary who was my 
guide remarked, that as the wood of the true cross, scattered over 
Christendom, has been said to be plentiful enough to build a man- 
of-war, so it might be doubted whether a ship of the line would 
* Second Travels of an Irish Gentleman, 1833, vol. ii. p. 186 



CHAP. VII.] DECOY POND. 99 

contain all the heavy articles which freighted the Mayflower in 
her first voyage, although she was a vessel of only 180 tons. I 
immediately recollected a large heavy table, which I had seen in 
1842, in the rooms of the Historical Society at Boston, which 
they told me had come over in the Mayflower, and my attention 
had been called to the marks of the staples which fixed it to the 
cabin floor. I accordingly returned to that Museum, and found 
there the sword of Elder Brewster, as well as that with which 
Colonel Church cut off King Philip s ear, and the gun with which 
that formidable Indian warrior was shot. The heavy table, too, 
was there, measuring two feet six inches in height, six feet in 
length, and five feet in breadth, and I asked Mr. Savage, the 
President of the Society, how they obtained it. It had certainly 
belonged, he said, to Governor Carver, but reasonable doubts 
were entertained whether it had ever been brought to New En 
gland in the Mayflower, especially in the month of December, 
1620; "for you are aware," he added, "that the Mayflower 
made several voyages, and at each trip imported many valuables 
of this kind." In an instant, more than half my romance about 
the Pilgrim relics was dispelled. They lost half the charms with 
which my implicit faith had invested them, for I began to con 
sider how many of the chairs and tables I had gazed upon with 
so much interest, might have been "made to order," by cabinet 
makers in the old country, and sent out to the new colonists. 
Byron has said 

^r There s not a joy this world can give like that it takes away ;" 

and some may think the same of certain lines of historical re 
search. I must, however, declare my firm belief that some of 
the articles shown me at Plymouth are true and genuine relics 
of the olden time treasures which really accompanied the heroic 
band who first landed on the beach of Plymouth Bay, and which 
deserve to be handed down with reverential care to posterity. 

On our way back from Plymouth to Boston, we passed near 
the village of East Weymouth, by a decoy pond, where eight 
wild geese, called Canada geese, had been shot since the morn 
ing. Swimming in the middle of a sheet of water was a tame 



100 EXCURSION TO SALEM. [CHAP. VII. 

goose, having one leg tied by a string to a small leaden weight ; 
and near it were a row of wooden imitations of geese, the sight 
of which, and the cries of the tame goose, attract the wild birds. 
As soon as they fly down they are shot by sportsmen of a true 
New England stamp, not like the Indian hunters, impatient of 
a sedentary life or steady labor, but industrious cobblers, each sit 
ting all day at his own door, with his loaded gun lying by his 
side, his hands occupied in stitching " russet brogans" or boots 
for the southern negroes, to be sold at the rate of twenty cents, or 
tenpence a pair. After working an hour or two, he seizes his 
gun, and down comes a goose, which may fetch in the Boston 
market, in full season, two and a half dollars the value of a 
dozen pair of brogans. 

As we approached the capital, we met a large wooden barn 
drawn by twenty-four oxen. It was placed on rollers, which 
were continually shifted from behind forward, as fast as the barn 
passed over them. The removal of this large building had be 
come necessary, because it stood directly in the way of the new 
railway from Boston to Plymouth, which is to be opened in a few 
weeks. A fellow-traveler told us of a wooden meeting-house in 
Hadley, which had been transferred in like manner to a more 
populous part of the township. " In English steeple-chases," 
said he, " the church itself, I believe, does not take part ?" 

Nov. 6. Made an excursion to the seaport of Salem, about 
fourteen miles to the N.E. of Boston, a place of 17,000 inhab 
itants, f 

Dr. Wheatland, a young physician, to whom I had gone 
without letters of introduction, politely showed us over the 
Museum of Natural History, of which he was curator; and 
over another full of articles illustrative of the arts, manners, and 
customs of the East Indies, China, and Japan ; for this city is a 
great resort of retired merchants and sea-captains. In both col 
lections there are a variety of objects which may appear, on a 
hasty view, to form a heterogeneous and unmeaning jurnble, but 
which are really curious and valuable. Such repositories ought 
to accompany public libraries in every large city, for they aflord 
a kind of instruction which can not be obtained from books. To 



CHAP. VIL] MUSEUM. 101 

public lectures, which are much encouraged here, and are effective 
means of stimulating the minds of all classes, especially the mid 
dle and lower, they furnish essential aid. Among other specimens 
of natural history, too large to be conveniently accommodated in 
any private house, I was glad of an opportunity of examining the 
great jaw-bones arid teeth of the Squalus serridens, from the 
South Seas, which reminded me, by their serrated outline, of the 
teeth of the fossil Zeuglodon, hereafter to be mentioned. I was 
well pleased to observe that the shells of the neighboring coast 
had not been neglected, for people are often as ignorant of the 
natural history of the region they inhabit, especially of the lakes, 
rivers, and the sea, as of the flora and fauna of the antipodes. 
Many curious log-books of the early sea-captains of this port, who 
ventured in extreme ignorance of geography on distant voyages, 
are preserved here, and attest the daring spirit of those hardy 
navigators. Some of them sailed to India by the Cape, without 
a single chart or map, except that small one of the world, on 
Mercator s projection, contained in Guthrie s Geography. They 
used no sextants, but, working their dead-reckoning with chalk 
on a plank, guessed at the sun s position with their hand at noon. 
They had usually no capital, but started with a few beads and 
trinkets, and in exchange for these trifles often obtained the skins 
of sea-otters in the Oregon territory, each worth no less than 100 
dollars. They also obtained sandal-wood in the Sandwich Islands, 
and bartered these and other articles in China for tea. On such 
slender means, and so lately as after the separation of the colonies 
from England, at a time when there was not a single American 
ship of war in the Indian or Chinese seas to protect their com 
merce, did many merchants of Boston and Salem lay the founda 
tions of the princely fortunes they now enjoy. 

In the course of the day we visited the court-house at Salem, 
where they keep the warrants issued by the judges to the high- 
sheriff in the years 1692 and 1693, for the execution of witches 
condemned to death. Here we read the depositions of witnesses, 
attesting such facts as that heifers and horses had died, and that 
cats had been taken ill, and that a man had been pierced by a 
knitting-needle to the depth of four inches, the wound healing 



102 EXECUTION OF WITCHES. [CHAP. VII. 

the instant the witch had been taken up. A bottle is preserved, 
which had been handed in to the Court at the time of the trial, 
full of pins, with which young women had been tormented. Some 
of the girls, from whose bodies these pins had been extracted, 
afterward confessed to a conspiracy. In the evening we walked 
to the place called Gallows Hill, in the suburbs of the city, where 
no less than nineteen persons were hanged as witches in the 
course of fifteen months. 

It is impossible not to shudder when we reflect that these 
victims of a dark superstition were tried, so late as the year 1692, 
by intelligent men, by judges who, though they may have been 
less learned, are reputed to have been as upright as Sir Matthew 
Hale, who, in England, condemned a witch to death in 1665. 
The prisoners were also under the protection of a jury, and the 
forms of law, copied from the British courts, so favorable to the 
accused in capital offenses. We learn from history that an 
epidemic resembling epilepsy raged at the time in Massachusetts, 
and, being attributed to witchcraft, solemn fasts and meetings for 
extraordinary prayers were appointed, to implore Heaven to avert 
that evil, thereby consecrating and confirming the popular belief 
in its alleged cause. As the punishment of the guilty was thought 
to be a certain remedy for the disorder, the morbid imagination 
of the patient prompted him to suspect some individual to be the 
author of his sufferings, arid his evidence that he had seen spectral 
apparitions of witches inflicting torments on him was received as 
conclusive. One hundred and fifty persons were in prison await 
ing trial, and two hundred others had been presented to the 
magistrate, when the delusion was dissipated by charges being 
brought against the wife of the Governor Phipps, and some of 
the nearest relatives of Mather, an influential divine. It was 
then found that by far the greater number of atrocities had been 
prompted by fear ; for during this short reign of terror the popular 
mind was in so disordered a state, that almost every one had to 
choose between being an accuser or a victim, and from this motive 
many afterward confessed that they had brought charges against 
the innocent.* The last executions for witchcraft in England 
* See " Graham s History," vol. i. ch. v. p. 392. 



CHAP. VII.] CAUSES OF THE PERSECUTION. 103 

were as late as 1716 ; but still later, in 1766, the Seceders in 
Scotland published an act of their associate Presbytery, denounc 
ing that memorable act of the English parliament which repealed 
all the penal statutes against witchcraft. 

The equal reverence paid by the Puritans and Scotch Seceders 
to the Jewish and Christian Scriptures (if, indeed, they did not 
hold the Old Testament in greater veneration than the New), 
was the chief cause of the superstition which led to these judicial 
murders. They had, indeed, in common with other Protestant 
sects, rejected the miracles ascribed to the Christian saints of the 
middle ages, because they were not supported by sufficient his 
torical testimony. They had stood forward in the face of cruel 
persecutions courageously to vindicate the right of private judg 
ment ; arid they held it to be not only the privilege, but the duty, 
of every Christian, layman or ecclesiastic, to exercise his reason, 
and not yield himself up blindly to the authority of an earthly 
teacher. Yet if any one dared, in 1692, to call in question the 
existence of the witchcraft, he was stigmatized as an infidel, and 
refuted by the story of the Witch of Endor evoking the ghost of 
the dead Samuel. Against the recurrence of such dreadful 
crimes as those perpetrated in the years 160293, society is now 
secured, not by judges and juries of a more conscientious charac 
ter or deeper sense of religious responsibility, but by the general 
spread of knowledge, or that more enlightened public opinion, 
which can never exist in the same perfection in the minds of the 
initiated few, so long as the multitude with whom they must be 
in contact are kept in darkness. 

On our return from Salem to Boston, we found the seats im 
mediately before us in the railway car occupied by two colored 
men, who were laughing and talking familiarly with two negro 
women, apparently servant maids. The women left us at th^ 
first station, and we then entered into conversation with the 
men who, perceiving by our accent, that we were foreign 
ers, were curious to know what we thought of their country. 
Hearing that it was our intention to winter in the south, the 
elder traveler " hoped we should not be tainted there." My 
wife, supposing he alluded to the yellow fever, said, We shall 



101 COLORED ABOLITIONISTS. [CHAP. VII 

be there in the cool season." He replied, "I was thinking of the 
moral atmosphere of the southern states." His pronunciation and 
expression were so entirely those of a well-educated white man, that 
we were surprised, and, talking freely with him and his companion, 
learnt that the elder, who was very black, but not quite a full negro, 
was from Delaware, and had been educated at an " abolition college" 
in Ohio. The younger, who was still darker, had been a slave in 
Kentucky, and had run away. They were traveling to collect 
funds for a school for runaway negroes, near Detroit, and expressed 
great satisfaction that at Salem they had found " the colored and 
white children all taught together in the same school, this not 
being the case in Boston." I told them that I had just seen a 
white landholder from Barbadoes, who had assured me that 
emancipation had answered w r ell in that island ; that there was 
a colored man in the legislature, another in the executive council, 
arid several in the magistracy, and that much progress had been 
made in the general education of the blacks. The Delawarian 
remarked that this was cheering news, because the recent bad 
success of his race in Hayti had been used as an argument by 
the southern planters against their natural capacity for civiliza 
tion. He then descanted on the relative liberality of feeling to 
ward colored men in the various free states, and was very severe 
on Indiana, Illinois, and Ohio. I expressed surprise in regard to 
Ohio ; but the KLentuckian affirmed that the law there afforded no 
real equality of protection to the black man, as he could not give 
evidence in courts of law, but must procure a white man as a 
witness. There had been a scuffle, he said, lately between a man 
of color and a white at Dayton, and, on the white being killed, 
the mob had risen and pulled down the houses of all the other 
black people. He went on narrating stories of planters shooting 
their slaves, and other tales of Kentucky, the accuracy of which 
my subsequent visit to that state gave me good reason to question. 
But I could not help being amused with the patriotism of this 
man ; for, however unenviable he may have found his condition 
as a slave, he was still a thorough Kentuckian, and ready to 
maintain that in climate, soil, and every other quality, that state 
was immeasurably superior to the rest of the Union, especially 



CHAP. VII.] WHITE AND NEGRO RACES. 105 

to Ohio, emancipation alone being wanting to demonstrate this 
fact to the world. 

This adventure confirmed me in the opinion I had previously 
formed, that if the colored men had fair play, and were carefully 
educated, they might soon be safely intrusted with equality of 
civil and political rights. Whatever may be their present infe 
riority as a race, some of them have already shown superior 
abilities to a great many of the dominant whites. Whether, in 
the course of many generations, after the intense prejudices in 
dulged against them have abated, they would come up to the 
intellectual standard of Europeans, is a question which time 
alone can decide. It has been affirmed by some anatomists that 
the brain of an adult negro resembles that of a white child ; and 
Tiedemann, judging by the capacity of the cranium, found the 
brains of some of our uncivilized British ancestors not more de 
veloped than the average sized negro s brain. He says, " there 
is undoubtedly a very close connection between the absolute size 
of the brain, and the intellectual powers and functions of the 
mind." After a long series of observations and measurements, 
he refutes the idea that the brain of a negro has more resem 
blance to that of the orang-outang than the European brain.* 1 

Mr. Owen, having some years ago made a post-mortem exam 
ination at St. Bartholomew s Hospital of the brain of an adult 
Irish laborer, found that it did not weigh more than the average 
brain of a youth from the educated classes of the age of fourteen ; 
and he tells me, in a letter on this subject, that he is not aware 
" of any modification of form or size in the negro s brain that 
would support an inference that the Ethiopian race would not 
profit by the same influences favoring mental and moral im 
provement, which have tended to elevate the primitively barbar 
ous white races of men." 

The separation of the colored children in the Boston schools, 
before alluded to, arose, as I afterward learned, not from an in 
dulgence in anti-negro feelings, but because they find they can 
in this way bring on both races faster. Up to the age of four 
teen the black children advance as fast as the whites ; but after 
* Phil. Trans. London, 1836, p. 497. 



106 HALF BREEDS. [CHAP. VII. 

that age, unless there be an admixture of white blood, it becomes 
in most instances extremely difficult to carry them forward. 
That the half breeds should be intermediate between the two 
parent stocks, and that the colored race should therefore gain in 
mental capacity in proportion as it approximates in physical 
organization to the whites, seems natural ; and yet it is a won 
derful fact, psychologically considered, that we should be able to 
trace the phenomena of hybridity even into the world of intellect 
and reason. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Pretended Fossil Sea Serpent, or Zeuglodon, from Alabama. Recent 
Appearance of a Sea Serpent in Gulf of St. Lawrence. In Norway, in 
1845. Near Cape Ann, Massachusetts, 1817. American Descriptions. 
Conjectures as to Nature of the Animal. Sea Snake stranded in the 
Orkneys proved to be a Shark. Dr. Barclay s Memoir. Sir Everard 
Home s Opinion. Sea Serpent of Hebrides, 1808. Reasons for con 
cluding that Pontopiddan s Sea Snake was a basking Shark. Capt. 
M Quhae s Sea Serpent. 

DURING the first part of my stay in Boston, October, 1845, 
we one day saw the walls in the principal streets covered with 
placards, in which the words SEA SERPENT ALIVE figured con 
spicuously. On approaching near enough to read the smaller 
type of this advertisement, I found that Mr. Koch was about to 
exhibit to the Bostonians the fossil skeleton of " that colossal and 
terrible reptile the sea serpent, which, ivhen alive, measured 
thirty feet in circumference." The public were also informed 
that this hydrarchos, or water king, was the leviathan of the 
Book of Job, chapter xli. I shall have occasion in the sequel, 
when describing rny expedition in Alabama to the exact site 
from whence these fossil remains were disinterred by Mr. Koch, 
of showing that they belong to the zeuglodon, first made out by 
Mr. Owen to be an extinct cetacean of truly vast dimensions, 
and which I ascertained to be referable geologically to the 
Eocene period. 

In the opinion of the best comparative anatomists, there is no 
reason to believe that this fossil whale bore any resemblance in 
form, when alive, to a snake, although the bones of the vertebral 
column, having been made to form a continuous series, more than 
100 feet in length, by the union of vertebrae derived from more 
than one individual, were ingeniously arranged by Mr. Koch in 
a serpentine form, so as to convey the impression that motion 
was produced by vertical flexures of the body. 

At the very time when I had every day to give an answer to 



108 SEA SERPENT IN GULF OF ST. LAWRENCE. [CHAP. VIII. 

the question whether I really believed the great fossil skeleton 
from Alabama to be that of the sea serpent formerly seen on the 
coast near Boston, I received news of the reappearance of the 
same serpent, in a letter from my friend Mr. J. W. Dawson, of 
Pictou, in Nova Scotia. This geologist, with whom I explored 
Nova Scotia in 1842, said he was collecting evidence for me of 
the appearance, in the month of August, 1845, at Merigomish, 
in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, of a marine monster, about 100 
feet long, seen by two intelligent observers, nearly aground in 
calm water, within 200 feet of the beach, where it remained in 
sight about half an hour, and then got off with difficulty. One 
of the witnesses went up a bank in order to look down upon it. 
They said it sometimes raised its head (which resembled that of 
a seal) partially out of the water. Along its back were a num 
ber of humps or protuberances, which, in the opinion of the ob 
server on the beach, were true humps, while the other thought 
they were produced by vertical flexures of the body. Between 
the head and the first protuberance there was a straight part of 
the back of considerable length, and this part was generally 
above water. The color appeared black, and the skin had a 
rough appearance. The animal was seen to bend its body 
almost into a circle, and again to unbend it with rapidity. It 
was slender in proportion to its length. After it had disappeared 
in deep water, its wake was visible for some time. There were 
no indications of paddles seen. Some other persons who saw it 
compared the creature to a long string of fishing-net buoys 
moving rapidly about. In the course of the summer, the fisher 
men on the eastern shore of Prince Edward s Island, in the Gulf 
of St. Lawrence, had been terrified by this sea monster, and the 
year before, October, 1844, a similar creature swam slowly past 
the pier at Arisaig, near the east end of Nova Scotia, and, there 
being only a slight breeze at the time, was attentively observed 
by Mr. Barry, a millwright of Pictou, who told Mr. Dawson he 
was within 120 feet of it, and estimated its length at sixty feet, 
and the thickness of its body at three feet. It had humps on 
the back, which seemed too small and close together to be bends 
of the body. 



CHAP. VIII.] NORWEGIAN SEA SERPENT. 109 

The body appeared also to move in long undulations, includ 
ing many of the smaller humps. In consequence of this motion 
the head and tail were sometimes both out of sight and some 
times both above water, as represented in the annexed outline, 
given from memory. 




Drawing from memory of a sea serpent seen at Arisaig, Nova Scotia, Oct. 1844. 

The head, a, was rounded and obtuse in front, and was never 
elevated more than a foot above the surface. The tail was 
pointed, appearing like half of a mackerel s tail. The color of 
the part seen was black. 

It was suggested by Mr. Dawson that a swell in the sea 
might give the deceptive appearance of an undulating movement, 
as it is well known " that a stick held horizontally at the surface 
of water when there is a ripple seems to have an uneven outline." 
But Mr. Barry replied that he observed the animal very atten 
tively, having read accounts of the sea serpent, and feels confi 
dent that the undulations were not those of the water. 

This reappearance of the monster, commonly called the sea 
serpent, was not confined to the Gulf of St. Lawrence ; for, two 
months after I left Boston, a letter from one Captain Lawson 
went the round of the American papers, dated February, 1846, 
giving a description of a marine creature seen by him from his 
schooner, when off the coast of Virginia, between Capes Henry 
and Charles body about 100 feet long, with pointed projections 
(query, dorsal fins ?) on the back ; head small in proportion to 
its length. 

Precisely in the same years, in July, 1845, and August, 1846, 
contemporaneous, and evidently independent accounts were col 
lected iii Norway, and published in their papers, of a marine 
animal, of " a rare and singular kind," seen by fishermen and 
others, the evidence being taken down by clergymen, surgeons, 
and lawyers, whose names are given, and some of whom de- 



110 NORWEGIAN SEA SERPENT. [CHAP. VIII. 

clared that they can now no longer doubt that there lives in 
their seas some monster, which has given rise to the tales pub 
lished by Pontopiddan, Bishop of Bergen, in his Natural History 
of Norway (1752), who gave an engraving, which the living wit 
nesses declare to be very like what they saw. 

Fig. 2. 



_ ..._.. .*^L 




Pontoppidan s figure of the Norwegian sea serpent, published 1752. 

These appearances were witnessed in 1845, near Christian- 
sand, and at Molde, and in the parish of Sund, the animal enter 
ing fiords in hot weather, when the sea was calm. The length 
of the creature was from sixty to one hundred feet ; color dark, 
body smooth, and in thickness, like that of a stout man ; swim 
ming swiftly with serpentine movement, both horizontally and 
up and down, raising its blunted head occasionally above the 
water ; its eyes bright, but these not perceived by some witnesses ; 
its undulating course like that of an eel ; its body lay on the sea 
like a number of " large kegs," the water much agitated by its 
rapid movements, and the waves broke on the shore as when a 
steam-boat is passing. From the back of the head a mane like 
that of a horse commenced, which waved backward and forward 
in the water. Archdeacon Deinboll says, that " the eye-witnesses, 
whose testimony he collected, were not so seized with fear as to 
impair their powers of observation ; and one of them, when 
within musket shot, had fired at the monster, and is certain the 
shots hit him in the head, after which he dived, but came up 
again immediately." 

In reading over these recent statements, drawn up by observers 
on both sides of the Atlantic, it is impossible not to be struck 
with their numerous points of agreement, both with each other 
and with those recorded by the New Englanders between the 
years 1815 and 1825, when the sea serpent repeatedly visited 
the coast of North America. There is even a coincidence in 



CHAP. VIII.] AMERICAN DESCRIPTIONS. Ill 

most of the contradictions of those who have attempted to describe 
what they saw of the color, form, and motion of the animal. At 
each of these periods the creature was seen by some persons who 
were on the shore, and who could take a leisurely survey of it, 
without their imaginations being disturbed by apprehensions of 
personal danger. On the other hand, the consternation of the 
fishermen in Norway, the Hebrides, and America, who have 
encountered this monster, is such, that we are entitled to ask the 
question Is it possible they can have seen nothing more than 
an ordinary whale or shark, or a shoal of porpoises, or some other 
known cetacean or fish ? 

So great a sensation was created by the appearance of a huge 
animal, in August, 1817, and for several successive years in the 
harbor of Gloucester, Massachusetts, near Cape Ann, that the 
Linnsean Society of Boston appointed a committee to collect 
evidence on the subject. T am well acquainted with two of the 
three gentlemen, Dr. Bigelow and Mr. F. C. Gray, who drew up 
the report, which gives in detail the depositions of numerous wit 
nesses who saw the creature on shore or at sea, some of them 
from a distance of only ten yards. " The monster," they say, 
" was from eighty to ninety feet long, his head usually carried 
about two feet above water ; of a dark brown color ; the body 
with thirty or more protuberances, compared by some to four- 
gallon kegs, by others to a string of buoys, and called by several 
persons bunches on the back ; motion very rapid, faster than 
those of a whale, swimming a mile in three minutes, and some 
times more, leaving a wake behind him ; chasing mackerel, her 
rings, and other fish, which were seen jumping out of the water, 
fifty at a time, as he approached. He only came to the surface 
of the sea in calm and bright weather. A skillful gunner fired 
at him from a boat, and, having taken good aim, felt sure he 
must have hit him on the head ; the creature turned toward him, 
then dived under the boat, and reappeared a hundred yards on 
the other side." 

Just as they were concluding their report, an unlucky accident 
raised a laugh at the expense of the Linnsean Committee, and 
enabled the incredulous to turn the whole matter into ridicule. 



112 AMERICAN DESCRIPTIONS. [CHAP. VIII. 

It happened that a common New England species of land snake 
( Coluber constrictor}, full grown, and about three feet long, which 
must have been swept out to sea, was cast ashore, and brought 
to the committee. It had a series of humps on its back, caused 
by the individual happening to have a diseased spine a fact 
which can no longer be disputed, for I have seen the identical 
specimen, which is still preserved in spirits in the Museum of 
New Haven. As many of the deponents declared this snake to 
be an exact miniature of the great monster, the Committee con 
cluded that it might be its young, and, giving a figure of it, 
conferred upon it the high-sounding appellation of Scoliophys 
AtloMicus, the generic name being derived from the Greek 
OKokiog, scolios, flexible, and o<2l>f, ophis, snake. 

In addition to these published statements, Colonel Perkins, of 
Boston, had the kindness to lay before me his notes, made in 
July, 1817, when he saw the animal. He counted fourteen pro 
jections, six feet apart, on the back, which he imagined to be 
vertical flexures of the body when in motion ; but he also saw 
the body bent horizontally into the figure of the letter S. It 
was of a chocolate brown color, the head flat, and about a foot 
across. A friend of his took a pencil sketch of it, which was 
found to resemble Pontoppidan s figure.* Respecting the length, 
Mr. Mansfield, a friend of the Colonel, was driving a one-horse 
vehicle on a road skirting Gloucester Bay, along the edge of a 
cliff, fifty or sixty feet in perpendicular height, when he saw the 
sea-serpent at the base of the cliff on the white beach, where 
there was not more than six or seven feet water, and, giving the 
reins to his wife, looked down upon the creature, and made up 
his mind that it was ninety feet long. He then took his wife to 
the spot, and asked her to guess its length, and she said it was 
as long as the wharf behind their house, and this measured about 
100 feet. While they were looking down on it, the creature 
appeared to be alarmed, and started off. I asked another Bos- 
tonian, Mr. Cabot, who saw the monster in 1818, whether it 
might not have been a shoal of porpoises followirg each other in 
a line, at the distance of one or two yards, and tumbling over so 
* See "Silliman s Journal," vol. ii. p. 156. 



CHAP. V1IL] AMERICAN DESCRIPTIONS. 113 

as to resemble a string of floating barrels in motion. He said 
that after this explanation had been suggested to him, he was 
one of thirty persons who ran along the beach at Nahant, near 
Boston, when the sea serpent was swimming very near the shore. 
They were all convinced that it was one animal, and they saw 
it raise its head out of the water. He added that there were at 
that time two sea serpents fishing in the Bay at once. 

Among many American narratives of this phenomenon -which 
have been communicated to me, I shall select one given me by 
my friend Mr. William M llvaine of Philadelphia, because it 
seems to attest the fact of the creature having wandered as far 
south as Cape Hatteras, in North Carolina, lat. 35. " Captain 
Johnson, of New Jersey, was sailing, in the year 1806, from the 
West Indies, on the inner edge of the gulf stream, in a deeply 
laden brig, when they were becalmed, and the crew and passen 
gers awe-struck by the sudden apparition of a creature having a 
cylindrical body of great length, and which lifted up its head 
eight feet above the water. After gazing at them for several 
minutes it retreated, making large undulations like a snake." 
The story had been so much discredited that the captain would 
only relate it to intimate friends. 

After the year 1817, every marvelous tale was called in the 
United States a snake story ; and when Colonel Perkins went to 
Washington twenty years ago, and was asked if he had ever 
known a person who had seen the sea serpent, he answered that 
he was one of the unfortunate individuals who saw it himself. I 
confess that when I left America in 1846, I was in a still more 
unfortunate predicament, for I believed in the sea serpent with 
out having seen it. Not that I ever imagined the northern seas 
to be now inhabited by a gigantic ophidian, for this hypothesis 
has always seemed to me in the highest degree improbable, seeing 
that, in the present state of the globe, there is no great develop 
ment of reptile life in temperate or polar regions, whether in the 
northern or southern hemisphere. When we enter high latitudes, 
such as those in which the creature called a sea serpent most 
frequently occurs, we find even the smaller reptilians, such as 
frogs and newts, to grow rare or disappear ; and there are no 



114 SEA MONSTER AT STRONSA. [CHAP. VIII. 

representatives of the hydrophis or true water-snake, nor of tor 
toises, nor of the batrachian or lizard tribes. 

In like manner, in the geological periods, immediately ante 
cedent to that when the present molluscous fauna came into 
existence, there was a similar absence of large reptiles, although 
there were then, as now, in colder latitudes, many huge sharks, 
seals, narwals, and whales. If, however, the creature observed 
in North America and Norway, should really prove to be some 
unknown species of any one of these last-mentioned families of 
vertebrata, I see no impropriety in its retaining the English 
name of sea serpent, just as one of the seals is now called a sea 
elephant, and a small fish of the Mediterranean, a sea horse ; 
while other marine animals are named sea mice and urchins, 
although they have only a fanciful resemblance to hedgehogs or 
mice. 

Some naturalists have argued that, if it were an undescribed 
species, some of its bones must, ere this, have been washed ashc-re ; 
but I question whether we are as yet so well acquainted with all 
the tenants of the great deep as to entitle us to attach much 
weight to this argument from negative evidence ; and I learn 
from good zoologists that there are whales so rare as never to 
have been seen since Sibbald described them in the middle of 
the seventeenth century. There is also a great cetacean, about 
thirty feet long, called Delphinorhyncus micropterus, of which 
only three specimens have ever been met with. One of these 
was thrown ashore forty years ago on the coast of Scotland, and 
the other two stranded on the shores of Belgium and France, and 
identified with the British species by Dr. Melville. 

The doubts, however, which since my return from the United 
States, I have been led to entertain respecting the distinct and 
independent existence of the sea serpent, arise from a strong sus 
picion that it is a known species of sea animal which has % actu 
ally been cast ashore in the Orkneys, and that some of its bones 
are now preserved in our museums, showing it to be of the 
squaline family, and no stranger to some of the zoologists whom 
it has perplexed, nor to many of the seafaring people whom it 
has frightened. In the summer of the year 1808, the fishermen 



CHAP. VIII.] SEA MONSTER AT STRONSA. 115 

of the Hebrides were terrified by a monster of huge size and 
unusual appearance, which created a great sensation in Scotland. 
Three or four months after this apparition, the body of an enor 
mous sea monster was washed ashore (Sept. 1808) on the outer 
reefs at Rothesholm Head in Stronsa, one of the Orkneys, where 
it was first observed while still entire, and its length measured 
by two persons; after which, when somewhat decayed, it was 
swept in by another storm, and stranded on the beach, and there 
examined by others. Mr. Neill, well known as a naturalist, 
who had been on a visit to Stronsa the same year, but had left 
before this occurrence, immediately corresponded with friends on 
the spot, among others with Mr. Laing, the historian, and with 
a lawyer and physician, who collected evidence for him. Their 
affidavits, taken in 1808, respecting the monster, were published 
in the Transactions of the Wernerian Society, of which Mr. 
Neill was secretary, and were accompanied by a drawing of the 
skeleton, obviously ideal and very incorrect, with six legs and a 
long tail curving several times vertically. The man who sketched 
it reached the spot too late, and when scarcely any part of the 
animal remained entire, and the outline is admitted to have been 
taken by him and altered from a figure chalked out upon a table 
by another man who had seen it, while one witness denied its 
resemblance to what he had seen. But a carpenter, whose 
veracity, I am informed by Mr. Neill (in a letter dated 1848), 
may be trusted, had measured the carcass, when still whole, with 
his foot-rule, and found it to be fifty-five long, while a person 
who also measured it when entire, said it was nine fathoms long. 
The bristles of the mane, each fourteen inches in length, and 
described as having been luminous in the dark, were no doubt 
portions of a dorsal fin in a state of decomposition. One said 
that this mane extended from the shoulders to within two feet 
and a half of the tail, another that it reached to the tail : a 
variance which may entitle us to call in question the alleged con 
tinuity of the mane down the whole back. So strong was the 
propensity in Scotland to believe that the Stronsa animal was the 
sea serpent of the Norwegians, that Mr. Neill himself, after draw 
ing up for the Wernerian Society his description of it from the 



116 SIR EVERARD HOME S OPINION. [CHAP. VIII. 

different accounts communicated to him, called it Halsydrus Pon- 
toppidani. 

Parts of the cranium, scapular arch, fin, and vertebral column 
were sent to Dr. Barclay of Edinburgh, who had at that time 
the finest museum of comparative anatomy north of the Tweed, 
and he conceived them to belong to a new and entirely unknown 
monster. 

If the imagination of good zoologists could be so preoccupied 
as to cause them at once to jump to the conclusion that the 
Stronsa animal and the Norwegian sea serpent were one and the 
same, we can not be surprised that the public in general placed 
the most implicit faith in that idea. That they did so, is proved 
by a passage recently published in Beattie s Life of Campbell, 
where the poet writes thus, in a letter dated February 13th, 
1809: 

" Of real life let me see what I have heard for the last fort 
night : first, a snake rny friend Telford received a drawing of it 
has been found thrown on the Orkney Isles ; a sea snake with 
a mane like a horse, four feet thick, and fifty-five feet long. This 
is seriously true. Malcolm Laing, the historian, saw it, and sent 
a drawing of it to my friend."^ 

Now here we see the great inaccuracy of what may be styled 
contemporaneous testimony of a highly educated man, who had 
no motive or disposition to misrepresent facts. From the Wer- 
rierian Transactions and Mr. Neill s letter, I learn distinctly that 
Malcolm Laing never went to the shore of Stronsa to see the 
monster. 

Fortunately, several of the vertebrae were forwarded, in 1809, 
to Sir Everard Home, in London, who at once pronounced them 
to belong to the Squalus maximus, or common basking shark. 
Figures of other portions sent to Edinburgh to Dr. Barclay, were 
also published by him in the Wernerian Transactions, and agree 
very Avell with Home s decision, although it is clear, from Bar 
clay s Memoir, that he was very angry with the English anat 
omist for setting him right, and declaring it to be a shark. It 
was indeed very difficult to believe on any but the most con- 
* Campbell s Life, vol. ii. p. 169, 170. 



CHAP. VIII.] SEA SERPENT OF HEBRIDES. 117 

vincing evidence that a carcass which was fifty-five feet long 
could be referable to a species, the largest known individual of 
which has never exceeded thirty-five or forty feet. But there 
seems no escape from Home s verdict ; for the vertebrae are still 
in the College of Surgeons, where I have seen them, quite entire, 
and so identical with those of the Squalus vnaximus, that Mr. 
Owen is unwilling to imagine they can belong to any other spe 
cies of the same genus. 

Mr. Neill tells me, in his letter, that the basking shark is by 
no means uncommon in the Orkneys, where it is called the hock- 
mar, and a large one was killed in Stromness Harbor in 1804, 
when he was there ; yet it was agreed by all with whom he 
spoke in 1808, that the Stronsa animal was double the length 
of the largest hockrnar ever stranded in their times in Orkney. 

Unfortunately, no one observed the habits and motions of the 
monster before it was cast ashore ; but the Rev. Donald Maclean, 
of Small Isles in the Hebrides, was requested to draw up a state 
ment of what he recollected of the creature which had so much 
alarmed the fishermen in the summer of the same year. Before 
he penned his letter, which was printed as an appendix to Bar 
clay s Memoir in 1809,^ he had clearly been questioned by per 
sons who were under the full persuasion that what he had seen, 
and the Stronsa animal, were identical with Pontoppidan s sea 
serpent. Maclean informs us, that it was about the month of 
June, 1808, when the huge creature in question, which looked 
at a distance like a small rock in the sea, gave chase to his 
boat, and he saw it first from the boat, and afterward from the 
land. 

Its head was broad, of a form somewhat oval ; its neck rather 
smaller. It moved by undulations up and down. When the 
head was above water, its motion was not so quick ; when most 
elevated, it appeared to take a view of distant objects It direct 
ed its " monstrous head," which still continued above water, 
toward the boat, and then plunged violently under water in pur 
suit of them. Afterward, when he saw it from the shore, " it 
moved off with its head above water for about half a mile 
* Wern. Trans. vOl, i. p. 444, 



118 SEA SERPENT OF HEBRIDES. [CHAP. VIII. 

before he lost sight of it. Its length he believed to be from 
seventy to eighty feet." " About the same time the crews of 
thirteen fishing boats, off the island of Canna, were terrified by 
this monster ; and the crew of one boat saw it coming toward 
them, between Rum and Canna, with its head high above 
water."* 

Mr. Maclean adds, evidently in answer to a question put by 
his correspondent, thaft he saw nothing of the mane ; arid adds, 
" when nearest to me it did not raise its head wholly above water, 
so that the neck being under water, I could perceive no shining 
filaments thereon, if it had any." And he also observes : "It 
had 110 fin that I could perceive, and seemed to me to move 
progressively by undulations up and down." Most of my read 
ers are probably satisfied by this time, that if nothing had come 
down to us but oral testimony, or even published accounts with 
out figures respecting the creature seen in the Hebrides in 1808, 
as well as that afterward stranded in Orkney, we should all of 
us have felt sure that both of them were one and the same mon 
ster, and no other than the sea snake of Pontoppidan, or that so 
often seen on the eastern coast of North America. How much 
delusion in this case has been dispelled by the preservation of a 
few bones ! May we not then presume that other sea serpents 
were also sharks ? If so, how are we to reconcile recorded ap 
pearances with this hypothesis ? It was justly remarked by Dr. 
Fleming, in his British Animals, 1828 (p. 174), that Maclean s 
account of a creature, which raised its head above the water and 
viewed distant objects, was opposed to the idea of its being refer 
able to the class of cartilaginous fishes, for no shark lifts its head 
out of the sea as it swims. E may also remark, that the de 
scriptions commonly given, both by the Norwegians and North 
Americans, would agree better with the appearance of a large 
seal with a marie, chased by a shoal of porpoises, than with a shark. 

But when we question the evidence more closely, we must 

make great allowance for the incompetence of observers wholly 

ignorant of zoology. In the first place, we must dismiss from 

our minds the image of a shark as it appears when out of the 

* Wern. Trans, Edinburgh, vol. i. p. 444, 



CHAP. VIII.] 



BASKING SHARK. 



119 



water, or as stuffed in a museum. The annexed figure represents 
the outline of the Squalus maximus, of which when immersed, 
but swimming near the surface, three points only could be seen 
above water at the same time, namely, the prominence of the 
back, with the first dorsal fin, a; secondly, the second dorsal fin, 
b ; and thirdly, the upper lobe of the tail, c. 

Fig. 3. 




Squalus maximus, Basking Shark, or Hockinar. 
a. First dorsal fin ; b. Second dorsal fin ; c. Caudal fin. 

Dr. Melville informed me that he once saw a large species of 
shark, swimming at the rate of ten miles an hour, in Torres 
Strait, off Australia ; and, besides the lateral flexures of the tail, 
which are the principal propelling power, the creature described 
as it advanced a series of vertical undulations, not by the actual 
bending of the body itself, but by the whole animal first rising 
near to the surface and then dipping down again, so that the 
dorsal fin and part of the back were occasionally lifted up to a 
considerable height. Now it strikes me, that if a very huge 
shark was going at the rate of twenty miles an. hour, as stated 
by some of the observers, that portion of the back which emerged 
in front might easily be taken for the head, and the dorsal fin 
behind it for the mane ; and in this manner we may explain the 
three projecting points, a, b, c, fig. 1, p. 109. given in the 
drawing, sketched from memory, by Mr. Barry of Nova Scotia. 
The smaller undulations seen by the same person, intervening be 
tween the three larger, may very well be referred to a series of 
waves raised in the water by a rapid passage through it of so 
bulky a body. Indeed, some of the drawings which I have seen 



120 SEA SNAKE A BASKING SHARK. [CHAP. VI1L 

of the northern sea snake, agree perfectly with the idea of the 
projecting back of a shark followed by a succession of waves, 
diminishing in size as they recede from the dorsal prominence. 

The parts before mentioned as alone visible above water would 
form so small a portion of the whole body, that they might easily 
convey the notion of narrowness as compared to great length ; 
and the assertion of a few witnesses that the dorsal projections 
were pointed, may have arisen from their having taken a more 
accurate look at the shape of the fins, and distinguished them 
better from the intervening waves of the sea. But, according to 
this view, the large eyes seen in the " blunt head" by several 
observers, must have been imaginary, unless in cases where they 
may have really been looking at a seal. It can hardly be doubted 
that some good marksmen, both in Norway and New England, 
who fired at the animal, sent bullets into what they took to be 
the head, and the fact that the wound seems never to have pro 
duced serious injury, although in one case blood flowed freely, 
accords perfectly with the hypothesis that they were firing at the 
dorsal prominence, and not at the head of a shark. The opinion 
of most of the observers that the undulations were coincident with 
the rapid movements of the creature, agrees well with our theory, 
which refers the greater number of the projections to waves of 
the sea. On the other hand, as several of the protuberances are 
real, consisting of three fins and a part of the back, the emergence 
of these parts may explain what other witnesses beheld. Dr. 
Melville has suggested to me, that if the speed were as great as 
stated, and the progressive movement such as he has described,*" 
the three fins would be first submerged, and then re-emerge in 
such rapid succession, that the image of one set would be retained 
on the retina of the eye after another set had become visible, and 
they might be counted over and over again, and multiplied in 
definitely. Although I think this explanation unnecessary in 
most cases, such a confusion of the images seems very possible, 
when we recollect that the fins would be always mingled with 
waves of the sea, which are s-aid, in the Norwegian accounts of 
1845, to have been so great, that they broke on the coast in 
* Ante, p, 119. 



CKAP. VIII.] CAPT. M QUHAE S SEA SERPENT. 121 

calm weather, when the serpent swam by, as if a steamer at full 
speed was passing near the shore. 

I conclude, therefore, that the sea serpent of North America 
and the German Ocean is a shark, probably the Squalus maxl- 
mus, a species which seems, from the measurements taken in 
Orkney in 1808, to attain sometimes, when old, a much larger 
size than had ever been previously imagined. It may be objected 
that this opinion is directly opposed to a great body of evidence 
which has been accumulating for nearly a century, derived partly 
from experienced sea-faring men, and partly from observers on the 
land, some of whom were of the educated class. I answer that 
most of them caught glimpses only of the creature when in rapid 
motion and in its own element, four-fifths or more of the body 
being submerged ; and when, at length, the whole carcass of a 
monster mistaken for a sea snake was stranded, touched, and 
measured, and parts of it sent to the ablest anatomists and zo 
ologists in Scotland, we narrowly escaped having transmitted to 
us, without power of refutation, a tale as marvelous and fabulous 
concerning its form and nature, as was ever charged against Pon- 
toppidan by the most skeptical of his critics.^ 

* After the above was written, a letter appeared in the English news 
papers, by Captain M Quhae, R.N., of the Daedalus frigate, dated Oct. 7, 
1848, giving an account of "the sea serpent" seen by him, Aug. 6, 1848, 
lat. 24 44 S. between the Cape and St. Helena, about 300 miles distant 
from the western coast of Africa ; the length estimated at sixty feet, head 
held four feet above water, with something like the mane of a horse on its 
back which was straight and inflexible. Professor Owen has declared his 
opinion, after seeing the drawing of the animal, sent to the Admiralty by 
Captain M Quhae, " that it may have been the largest of the seal tribe, the 
sea-elephant of the southern whalers, Phoca proboscidea, which sometimes 
attains a length of thirty feet, and individuals of which have been known to 
have been floated by icebergs toward the Cape. This species has coarse 
hair on the upper part of its inflexible trunk which might appear like a mane. 
The chief impelling force would be the deeply immersed terminal fins and 
tail, which would create a long eddy, readily mistakable for an indefinite 
prolongation of the body." 

Mr. Owen s conjecture appears to me very probable ; but, before I heard 
\t, I had made up my mind that the creature seen by Captain M Quhae dif 
fered from the sea serpent of the Norwegians and New Epglanders, from 
whose description it varies materially, especially in the absence, when at full 
speed, of apparent undulations, or dorsal prominences. 
VOL. I. F 



CHAPTER IX 

Boston. No Private Lodgings. Boarding-houses. Hotels. Effects of the 
Climate on Health. Large Fortunes. Style of Living. Servants. 
Carriages. Education of Ladies. Marriages. Professional Incomes. 
Protectionist Doctrines. Peculiarities of Language. Literary Tastes. 
Cost of Living. Alarms of Fire. 

As we intended to pass nearly two months in Boston, we de 
termined to look out for private lodgings, such as might be met 
with in every large town in England, but which we found it 
almost impossible to procure here. It does not answer to keep 
houses, or even suites of apartments to let in a city where house- 
rent is so dear, and well-trained servants so difficult to hire, even 
at high wages. In this country, moreover, the mass of the peo 
ple seem to set less value on the privilege of living in private than 
we English do. Not only strangers and bachelors, but whole 
families, reside in boarding-houses, usually kept by a widow who 
has known better days, and is a good manager, and can teach and 
discipline servants. 

During a former tour, we had found it irksome to submit to 
the rules of a boarding-house for any length of time ; to take every 
meal at a public table, where you are expected to play the agree 
able to companions often uncongenial, and brought together on 
no principle of selection ; to join them in the drawing-room a short 
time before dinner ; to call on them in their rooms, and to listen 
to gossip arid complaints about the petty quarrels which so often 
arise among fellow-boarders, as in a ship during a long voyage. 
The only alternative is to get private rooms in an hotel, which 
I at length succeeded in procuring at the Tremont House, after 
I had failed in negotiating a treaty with several landlords to 
whom I had been recommended. One of these, after showing 
me his apartments, and stating his terms, ended by saying, "Ours 
is a temperance house prayers orthodox." I presume that my 
countenance betrayed the amusement which this last piece of in- 



CHAP* IX.] EXCESSIVE INDUSTRY. 123 

telligence afforded me, for he instantly added, in an under tone, 
" But if you and your lady should not attend prayers, it will not 
be noticed." 

A Bostonian, who had returned from a tour in England and 
Ireland, much struck with the poverty of the lower classes, and 
with the difficulties experienced by those who are struggling to 
rise in the world, remarked to me, " We ought to be happier 
than the English, although we do not look so." There is, in 
fact, a care-worn expression in the countenances of the New 
Englanders, which arises partly from their striving and anxious 
disposition, and their habits of hard work, mental and bodily, 
and partly from the effects of the climate. 

One of their lawyers expressed to me his regret that the mem 
bers of his profession, and their most eminent politicians, physicians, 
and literary men, would not spare themselves, and give up some 
time to relaxation. " They seem determined," he said, " to 

realize the sentiment so finely expressed by Milton 

To scorn delights, and live laborious days. 

Our ancestors had to work fifteen hours out of every twenty-four, 
in order not to starve in the wilderness ; but we persist in strain 
ing every nerve when that necessity has ceased." He then 
reminded me how much more cheerful, plump, and merry the 
young negro children looked in the South, than those of New 
England, who had all the appearance of having been forced in 
their education, and over-crammed at school. 

I suspect, however, that the principal cause of the different 
aspect of the Anglo-Saxon race in England and America is the 
climate. During both our tours through the United States, my 
wife and I enjoyed excellent health, and were delighted with the 
clearness of the atmosphere, the bright sun, and the great num 
ber of cloudless days ; but we were told that, if we staid a 
second year, we should feel less vigorous. Many who have been 
, bom in America, of families settled there for several generations, 
find their health improved by a visit to England, just as if they 
had returned to their native air ; and it may require several 
centuries before a race becomes thoroughly acclimatized. 



124 EFFECTS OF CLIMATE ON HEALTH. [CHAP. IX. 

The great difference of the species of indigenous animals and 
plants in North America, those of the middle and southern states 
being almost all distinct from the European, points to a wide 
diversity of climate, the atmosphere being drier, and there being 
a much greater annual range of the thermometer than in cor 
responding latitudes on the eastern side of the Atlantic. Even 
BO cosmopolite a being as man may demand more than two 
centuries and a quarter before he can entirely accommodate his 
constitution to such altered circumstances, and before the succes 
sive generations of parents can acquire themselves, and transmit 
to their offspring, the new and requisite physiological peculiarities. 

English travelers often ascribe the more delicate health of the 
inhabitants here to their in-door habits and want of exercise. 
But it is natural that they should shrink from exposing them 
selves to the severe frosts and long-continued snows of winter, 
and to the intense heat of the summer s sun. An Englishman 
is usually recognized at once in a party, by a more robust look, 
and greater clearness and ruddiness of complexion ; and it is 
surprising how distinguishable he is even from persons born of 
English parents in the United States. It is also a curious fact, 
which seems generally admitted, that the native Anglo-Austra 
lians bear a considerable resemblance to the Anglo-Americans in 
look and manner of speaking, which is a mystery, for there is 
certainly in that case no analogy between the climates of the 
two countries. 

^The number of persons in Boston who have earned in business, 
or have inherited large fortunes, is very great. The Common, 
a small park, which is by no means the only quarter frequented 
by rich citizens, is surrounded by houses which might form two 
fine squares in London, and the average value of which^in the 
market, might bear a comparison with those in very fashionable 
parts of our metropolis sums of from 4000Z. to 20,000/. ster 
ling having been paid for them. The greater part of these 
buildings are the property of the persons who reside in them ; 
and they are fitted up very elegantly, and often expensively. 
fEntertainments in a sumptuous style are not rare ; but the small 
number of servants in comparison with those kept in England by 



CHAP. IX.] STYLE OF LIVING. SERVANTS. 125 

persons of corresponding income, and the want of an equipage, 
impart to their mode of life an appearance of simplicity which 
is perhaps more the result of necessity than of deference to a 
republican theory of equalitjjj For to keep servants here for 
mere show, would not only be thought absurd, but would be a 
great sacrifice of comfort. To obtain a few efficient ones at any 
price, and to put up with many inconveniences rather than part 
with them allowing them to continue in service after marriage, 
is the practice of not a few of the richest people, who often keep 
no more than four domestics where there would be at least nine 
in London.^ In consequence of this state of things, the ladies are 
more independent of being waited on than those of similar fortune 
in England ; but we are sometimes amused when we hear them 
express envy of the superior advantages enjoyed in Europe, for 
they are under the delusion of supposing that large establish 
ments give no trouble in " the old country." There are, indeed, 
crowds of poor emigrants here, especially from Ireland, eager for 
employment ; but for the most part so coarse, ignorant, and dirty 
in their habits, that they can not gain admittance into genteel 
houses. No mistress here ventures to interfere with the dress of 
a servant maid, and girls wait at table with braided hair, which 
is certainly more becoming to them when young, and are never 
required to conceal with a cap their neatly arranged locks, 
according to the costume approved of by English disciplinarians. 
When raising the dust at their work, in sweeping the floors, 
they cover the head with a handkerchief. The New England 
servants are generally provident, for, besides the intelligence they 
derive from their early school education, they have a reasonable 
hope of bettering their condition, are well paid, and not kept >,,- 
down in the world by a number of poor relations. 

(Many of the wealthiest families keep no carriage, for, as I 
before said, no one affects to live in style, and the trouble of 
engaging a good coachman and groom would be considerable, 
and also because the distances in Boston are small, and the 
facilities of traveling by railway into the country in all directions 
very great. But there are many livery stables, where excellent 
carriages and horses are to be hired with well-dressed drivers. 



126 EDUCATION OF LADIES. [CHAP. IX. 

Some of their vehicles are fitted up with India-rubber tubes, to 
enable those inside to communicate with the coachman without 
letting down the glass, which, during a severe New England 
frost, or a snow storm, must be no unmeaning luxury. 

They who can not afford to live in the metropolis, reside with 
their families at places often twenty-five miles distant, such as 
Ipswich, and go into their shops and counting-houses every morn 
ing, paying 100 dollars (or twenty guineas), for an annual ticket 
on the railway, and being less than an hour at a time on the 
road. 

The usual hours of breakfasting and dining here are much earlier 
than in London ; yet evening parties in the most fashionable 
society do not begin till nine, and often ten o clock, which appears 
a senseless imitation of foreign manners, and calculated, if not 
intended, to draw a line between those who can afford to turn 
night into day. and those who can not. 

In some houses the gentlemen go up after dinner with the 
ladies, as in France, to the drawing-room ; but it is more com 
mon, as in England, to stay a while and talk together. There 
is very little drinking, and I scarcely ever heard any conversation 
in which the women might not have joined with propriety. 
Bachelor dinners are more frequent than in the highest circles 
in London ; but there is beginning to be a change in this respect, 
and certainly the ladies are well able to play their part, for no 
care or expense is spared to give them, not only every female 
accomplishment, but a solid education. The incomes made by 
some men of superior scholarship and general knowledge, who 
devote themselves entirely to the teaching of young ladies, and, 
still more, the station held by these teachers in society, is a char 
acteristic of Boston highly deserving of praise and imitation. 

The influence of cultivated women in elevating and refining 
the tone of society and the national mind, may nowhere be ren 
dered more effective than where a large proportion of the men 
are engaged in mercantile business, and belong to a class who 
have too truly been said " to live in counting-houses that they 
may sleep in palaces." Their wives and daughters have leisure 
to acquire literary and scientific tastes, and to improve their 



CHAP. IX.] MARRIAGES. 127 

understandings, while the fathers, husbands, and brothers are 
summing up accounts, attending to the minute details of business, 
or driving bargains. 

The impress of the strict morals of the Puritan founders of the 
New England commonwealths on the manners of their descend 
ants, is still very marked. Swearing is seldom heard, and duel 
ing has been successfully discountenanced, although they are in 
constant communication with the southern states, where both 
these practices are common, though much less so than formerly. 

The facility of getting on in the world, and marrying young, 
is, upon the whole, most favorable to the morals of the commu 
nity, although it sometimes leads to uncongenial and unhappy 
unions. But, as a set-off to this evil, it should be stated, that 
nowhere is there so much free choice in forming matrimonial 
connections without regard to equality of fortune. It is un 
avoidable that the aristocracy of taste, manners, and education 
should create barriers, which can not be set at naught without 
violence to the feelings ; but we had good opportunities of know 
ing that parents would be thought far more unreasonable here 
than in England, and in some other states of the Union, if they 
discouraged alliances on the mere ground of one of the parties 
being without fortune. 

The most eminent medical men in Boston make, I am told, 
about 9500 dollars (2000/.) a year, and their early career is one 
of hard striving and small profits. The incomes made by the 
first lawyers are much more considerable, and I hear that, when 
a leading practitioner was invited to transfer his business from 
Boston to New York, because he might be employed there by a 
population of 400,000 souls, he declined, saying, that his clients 
were drawn from a population nearly equal in numbers and ave 
rage wealth, although not a fourth part of them were resident in 
the city of Boston. 

Bankruptcies are rarer than in any other mercantile community 
in the Union of equal extent, and, when they do occur, larger 
dividends are paid to the creditor. As most of the rich private 
citizens live within their income, so the State is frugal, and al 
though its credit stands so high that it could borrow largely, it 



128 PROTECTIONIST DOCTRINES. [CHAP. IX 

has contracted very little debt, it being thought advisable to 
leave the execution of almost every kind of public work to pri 
vate enterprise and capital. 

In many of the southern and western states, the commercial 
policy of Massachusetts was represented to me as eminently 
selfish, the great capitalists wishing to monopolize the manufac 
turing trade, and by a high tariff to exclude foreign capitalists, 
so as to grow rich at the expense of other parts of the Union. 
In conversing with the New Englanders, I became satisfied that, 
in spite of the writings of the first political economists in Europe 
and America, and the opinion of Channing, and some other of 
their own distinguished men (not excepting Daniel Webster him 
self in the early part of his career), they have persuaded them 
selves that the doctrines of free trade are not applicable to the 
present state of their country. The facility with which every 
people conscientiously accommodate their speculative opinions to 
their local and individual interests, is sufficiently demonstrated 
by the fact, that each of the other states, and sections of states, 
as they successively embark in the manufacture, whether of cot 
ton, iron, or other articles, become immediately converts to pro 
tectionist views, against which they had previously declaimed. 

There is a general feeling of self-respect pervading all classes 
in the New England states, which enables those who rise in the 
world, whether in political life, or by suddenly making large for 
tunes in trade, if they have true gentility of feeling, to take their 
place in good society easily and naturally. Their power of ac 
commodating themselves to their new position is greatly facilitated 
by the instruction imparted in the free schools to all, however 
humble in station, so that they are rarely in danger of betraying 
their low origin by ungrammatical phrases and faulty pronun 
ciation. 

English critics are in the habit of making no allowance for 
the slightest variations in language, pronunciation, or manners, 
in any people descended from the Anglican stock. In the Ger 
mans or French they may think a deviation from the British 
standard odd or ridiculous, but in an American they set it down 
at once as vulgar ; whereas it may be one of those conventional- 



CHAP. IX.] PECULIARITIES OF LANGUAGE. 129 

isms, respecting which every nation has a right to enforce its own. 
arbitrary rules. The frequent use of the words, " sir" and 
" ma am," in the United States, like " oui, monsieur, oui, ma- 
dame," in France, for the sake of softening the bald and abrupt 
" yes" or "no," would sound to a Frenchman or Italian more 
polite ; and if the Americans were to conform to the present 
English model in such trifles, it might happen that in England 
itself the fashion may soon change. There are also many gen 
uine old classical phrases, which have grown obsolete in the 
parent country, and which the Americans retain, and ought not 
to allow themselves to be laughed out of. The title of Madam 
is sometimes given here, and generally in Charleston (S. Carolina), 
and in the South, to a mother whose son has married, and the 
daughter-in-law is then called Mrs. By this means they avoid 
the inelegant phraseology of old Mrs. A., or the Scotch, Mrs. A. 
senior. Madam, in short, very commonly serves as the equiva 
lent of dowager, as used in English titled families. There are 
also some antique provincialisms handed down from the times of 
the first settlers, which may -well deserve to be kept up, although 
they may be subjects of diversion to English tourists. In one 
of Shirley s plays, written just before the middle of the seven 
teenth century, when the largest emigration took place from Old 
to New England, we find the term, " I guess," for "I think," or 
" I suppose," occurring frequently ; and if we look farther back, 
it is. met with in the " Miller s Tale" and in the " Monk" of 
Chaucer : 

..." For little heaviness 
Is right enough for rauchel folk, I guess." 

And in Spenser s " Faerie Queene" 

"It seemed a second Paradise, I guesse."* 

Among the most common singularities of expression are the 
following : " I should admire to see him" for "I should like to 
see him ;" "I want to know," and " Do tell," both exclamations 
of surprise, answering to our " Dear me." These last, how 
ever, are rarely heard in society above the middling class. Ocea- 

* Canto x. 23. 
F * 



130 LITERARY TASTES. [CHAP. IX. 

sionally I was as much puzzled as if I was reading Tarn o Shanter, 
as, for example, " out of kittel" means " out of order." The word 
" sick" is used in New England in the same sense as it was in 
the time of Shakspeare, or when the liturgy of the Church of 
England was composed. The word " ill," which in Great 
Britain means "not well," signifies in America "very ill." 
They often speak here of a " lovely man," using the adjective in 
a moral sense ; and say of a plain, shriveled old woman, that 
she is " a fine and lovely woman," meaning that her character 
and disposition are amiable. " Clever" is applied to a good- 
natured and good-hearted person who is without talent and 
quickness. At first we had many a good laugh when we dis 
covered that we had been at cross purposes, on comparing notes 
as to our opinions of English and American friends. On one 
occasion I admitted that Mrs. A. might be " a fine and lovely 
woman," but it could only be said of her by candlelight. 

In the literary circles here we meet with several writers who 
are keeping up an active correspondence with distinguished men 
in all parts of Europe, but especially with English authors. 

We are often amused to observe how much the conversation 
turns on what is going on in London. One day I was asked 
whether it were true that the committee for deciding on the 
statues to be set up in the new House of Lords, had voted in 
favor of Richardson, before they could make up their minds 
whether they should honor Pope, Dryderi, Swift, and Fielding; 
and whether Milton was at first black-balled, and how they could 
possibly be disputing about the rival claims of Hume and Robert 
son as historians, while a greater than either of them, Gibbon, 
was left out of the question. They suggested that a tribunal of 
literary Jews might soon be required to pronounce fairly on the 
merits of Christian writers. " Do your countrymen," said one 
of my friends to me, "mean to imitate the spirit of the king of 
Bavaria, who excluded Luther from his Walhalla because he 
was a Protestant, and instead of Shakspeare and Newton could 
endure no representatives of British genius, save the orthodox 
King Alfred and Roger Bacon ?" I was curious, when I got 
home, to learn how much of this gossip about things in the old 



CHAP. IX.] COST OF LIVING. 131 

country was founded on correct information, and was relieved to 
find that the six poets ultimately selected were Chaucer, Spenser, 
Shakspeare, Milton, Dryden, and Pope ; a result which, consid 
ering that a single black ball excluded, did credit to the umpires, 
and would, I am sure, be approved of by a literary jury in 
Massachusetts. I was also glad to learn that in Bavaria, as 
soon as political parties changed, a royal order was issued to 
admit the bust of Luther into the Walhalla. 

The Americans, in general, have more self-possession and self- 
confidence than Englishmen, although this characteristic belongs 
perhaps less to the Bostonians than to the citizens of most of the 
other parts of the Union. On the other hand, the members of 
the great republic are sensitive and touchy about their country, 
a point on which the English are imperturbably indifferent, 
being proud of every thing British, even to a fault, since con 
tempt for the opinion of other nations may be carried so far as to 
diminish the prospect of national improvement. It might be 
better if each of the great branches of the Anglo-Saxon family 
would borrow something from the qualities of the other, if 
John Bull had less mauvais honte, so as to care less for what 
others were thinking of himself individually, and if Jonathan 
cared less for what others are thinking of his country. 

The expense of living in the northern states is, upon the 
whole, decidedly more reasonable than in England, although the 
dress, both of men and women, is somewhat dearer. In Boston, 
also, the rent of houses is very high, but not so in the country. 
Traveling is much cheaper, and so are food, newspapers, and 
books. On comparing the average price of bread during the pre 
sent year with that in England, we find that it is about twenty- 
five per cent, cheaper, beef and mutton ten per cent, cheaper, and 
the price of poultry extremely moderate. Why, in so old a city 
as Boston, the supply of seamstresses, milliners, and dressmakers, 
should be as inadequate to the demand as in some of our newly- 
founded colonies when most progressive, I leave to political 
economists to explain. My wife was desirous of having a dress 
and bonnet made up in a week, but one milliner after another 
declined to undertake the task. It would be a useful lesson to 



132 ALARMS OF FIRE. [CHAP. IX 

those who are accustomed to consider themselves as patrons 
whenever they engage others to do work for them, to learn 
how in reality, if things are in a healthy state, the obligation is 
mutual ; but to discover that the usual relations of the employer 
and employed are entirely reversed, and that the favor is by no 
means conferred by the purchaser, would try the patience of most 
travelers. Friends interceded, but in vain ; till, at last, a repre 
sentation was made to one of these important personages, that my 
wife was about to leave the city on a fixed day, and that being 
a foreigner she ought, out of courtesy, to be assisted ; an appeal 
which was successful, and the work was then undertaken and 
sent home with strict punctuality, neatly made, and every spare 
scrap of the material honestly returned, the charge being about 
equal to that of the first London dressmakers. 

We remarked in some of the country towns of Massachusetts, 
where the income of the family was very moderate, that the 
young ladies indulged in extravagant dressing 40/., for example, 
being paid for a shawl in one instance. Some of the richer class, 
who had returned from passing a year or two in Germany and 
England, had been much struck with the economical habits, in 
dress and in the luxuries of the table, of persons in easy circum 
stances there, and the example had not been lost on them. 

Oct. 2 8 . Night after night the church bells have been tolling 
the alarm of fire, followed by the rattling of the heavy engines 
under the windows of our hotel. When I last resided here 
(1842), I was told that half of these conflagrations were caused 
by incendiaries, partly by boys for the mere love of mischief; but 
no suspicions of this kind are now entertained. Most of the 
buildings are of wood, and it is hoped that the increasing use of 
brick in the private, and of granite in the public, buildings will 
lessen the evil. The combustibility of the wood of the white or 
Weymouth pine {Pinus strobusj, largely employed in houses 
here, is said to exceed that of other kinds of timber. 



CHAPTER X. 

Boston. Blind Asylum and Laura Bridgeman. Respect for Freedom of 
Conscience. Cemetery of Mount Auburn. Channing s Cenotaph. 
Episcopal Churches. Unitarian Congregations. Eminent Preachers. 
Progress of Unitarians why slow. Their Works reprinted in England. 
Nothingarians. Episcopalian Asceticism. Separation of Religion and 
Politics. 

DURING our stay at Boston we visited the Perkins Institution, or 
Asylum for the Blind, and found Laura Bridgman, the girl who 
has been blind, deaf and dumb from infancy, much grown since 
we saw her four years ago. She is now sixteen, and looks very 
intelligent. She was reading when we entered, and we were 
told that formerly, when so engaged and alone, she used to make 
with one hand the signs of all the words which she felt out with 
the other, just as an illiterate beginner speaks aloud each sentence 
as he spells it. But the process of conveying the meaning of the 
words to her mind is now far too rapid for such delay, and the 
hand not occupied in reading remains motionless. We were 
afterward delighted to watch her while she was following the 
conversation of two other dumb children who were using the 
modern single-hand alphabet. She was able to comprehend all 
the ideas they were exchanging, and to overhear, as it were, 
every word they said, by making her fingers play, with fairy 
lightness, over theirs, with so slight a touch, as not in the least 
degree to interfere with the freedom of their motions. We saw 
her afterward talk with Dr. Howe, with great rapidity and 
animation, pointing out accurately the places on a map while he 
gave a lesson in geography. She indulged her curiosity in exam 
ining my wife s dress, and, taking her hand, told her which was 
her wedding ring, and then began to teach her the deaf and dumb 
alphabet. She is always aware whether it is a lady s hand she 
touches, and. is shy toward a stranger of the other sex. As she is 
now in communication with no less than a hundred acquaintances, 
she has grown much more like other children than formerly. 



134 BLIND ASYLUM. [CHAP. X. 

We learnt from Dr. Howe that the task of carrying on her 
education has become more and more arduous, for she is naturally 
clever, and her reflective powers have unavoidably ripened much 
faster than the perceptive ; so that at an age when other children 
would be satisfied to accumulate facts by the use of their eyes, 
her chief curiosity is directed to know the causes of things. In 
reading history, for example, where there is usually a continued 
description of w T ars and battles, she must be told the motives for 
which men slaughter each other, and is so distressed at their 
wickedness, that she can scarcely be induced to pursue the 
study. 

To be able to appreciate justly the judicious treatment of those 
to whose training she owes her wonderful progress, it would be 
necessary to be practically acquainted with the disappointments 
of persons who undertake to teach pupils who are simply blind, 
and not suffering, like Laura, under the double privation of the 
senses of sight arid hearing. 

Great pains had been taken to make one of the boys, whom 
we saw, have a correct idea of a horse , he had got by rote a 
long list of characteristics, and had felt the animal, and the 
mortification of the master may be conceived on discovering that 
after all the child could not be sure whether the creature had 
three, four, or five legs. After a few days intercourse with the 
blind, we no longer marvel that precocious children, who begin 
to read early and get by heart and recite long poems, or become 
knowing by keeping company with grown-up people, are so often 
overtaken or left behind by those who have been neglected, and 
have spent their time at play. For when the truants are sup 
posed to be most idle, they may, in reality, be storing their minds 
with a multitude of facts, to give a detailed description of which 
to a student, in or out of a blind asylum, would fill volumes. 

Dr. Howe told us of a blind Frenchman in the establishment, 
who could guess the age of strangers, by hearing their voices, 
much more accurately than he and others who could see as well 
as talk with them. 

On looking over the annual reports of the trustees, I observed 
that on Sunday the pupils, about a hundred in number, and 



CHAP. X.] CEMETERY OF MOUNT AUBURN. 135 

belonging to various sects, attend public worship in several 
different churches, they themselves, or their parents, choosing 
some particular church. " Many of them," says the report, 
"attend Sabbath schools, and, as care is taken to exclude sect 
arian doctrines from the regular course of instruction, the opinions 
of the pupils respecting doctrinal matters in religion are formed 
upon the basis prescribed by the parents." 

The assurance here given to the public is characteristic of a 
settled purpose, every where displayed by the New Englanders, 
to prevent their charitable bequests, as well as their great educa 
tional establishments, from becoming instruments of proselytizing, 
or serving as bribes, to tempt parents, pupils, or the poor to 
renounce any part of their hereditary creed for the sake of world 
ly advantages. Such conduct, implying great delicacy of feeling 
in matters of conscience, and a profound respect for the sacredness 
of religious obligations, is worthy of the descendants of men who 
went into exile, and braved the wilderness and the Indian tom 
ahawk, rather than conform outwardly to creeds and rituals of 
which they disapproved. 

Oct. 29. Went to Cambridge to visit the cemetery of Mount 
Auburn, where a large extent of wild, unreclaimed, hilly ground, 
covered with oak and pine, has been inclosed for a public burial- 
place. From the highest eminence there is a fine view of the 
surrounding country. Since I was here in 1842, a chapel has 
been erected of granite, in the Gothic style, and in good taste, 
with painted glass from Edinburgh in the windows, and a hand 
some entrance gate. The chapel is to serve as a Westminster 
Abbey, Pantheon, or Walhalla, to contain statues, busts, and 
monuments of distinguished men. A cenotaph has been placed 
in the grounds in honor of Dr. Channing, with an inscription 
written by a friend, in a plain, unambitious style, such as Chan 
ning himself would have wished. I rejoiced to hear that as his 
funeral procession was passing through the streets of Boston, the 
bell of the Roman Catholic chapel was tolled among the rest, 
and I recollected with pleasure the conversations I had had 
with him in 1841. They who witness the impulse given by 
him to the cause of popular education, the increasing liberality of 



136 EPISCOPAL CHURCHES. [CHAP. X 

sentiment in New England on matters of religion, and the great 
popularity of his works, might desire to inscribe on his tomb 

" E en in his ashes live their wonted fires." 

Some of the Episcopal churches in Boston are conducted on 
the high, and others on the low church model ; and the Tracta- 
rian movement has had the effect here, as in England, not of 
establishing uniformity by a strict adherence to one rubric, but 
of producing a much greater variety than formerly in the man 
ner of performing public worship. If, besides striking out the 
Athanasian Creed, the American Episcopal Church had omitted 
the Nicene Creed, as they first proposed in 1785, and had con 
densed and abridged the Thirty-nine Articles to twenty, measures 
from which they were dissuaded by the English hierarchy, from 
whose hands their first bishops required consecration, a schism 
might probably have taken place when the Tractarian movement 
occurred, and they might have separated into two churches far 
more distinct than that of the Drummondites and their opponents, 
or the partisans of the Scotch and English rubric north of the Tweed. 

In the Stone, or King s Chapel, the English liturgy is used, 
with such omissions and alterations as are required to suit the 
opinions of Unitarians, for that chapel was transferred from the 
Anglican to the Unitarian Church by the conversion of the 
minister and majority of the pew-holders. But in almost all the 
other Unitarian churches, the service resembles in form that of 
the established church of Scotland. Before my rst visit to 
Boston, I had been led to believe that the majority of the 
citizens were Unitarians ; whereas I found, on inquiry, that 
although they may exceed in number any other single sect, and 
comprise not a few of the richest citizens, they do not constitute 
above one-fifth of the whole population, and scarcely more than 
a tenth in Massachusetts generally. There is, however, another 
sect, calling themselves Christians (pronounced Christians), pre 
vailing largely in New England, which denies the doctrine of 
the Trinity, and I am told that many who worship in other 
" orthodox" congregations are heterodox on this point, although 
they do not choose to become separatists. One of them observed 



CHAP. X.] UNITARIAN CONGREGATIONS. 137 

to me that he thought it nearly as presumptuous to acquiesce in. 
the negative as in the affirmative of the propositions laid down 
on this subject in the Athanasian Creed. " We are," he said, 
" like children born blind, disputing about colors." 

The prominent position occupied by the Unitarians arises, not 
from their number, nor their wealth, however considerable this 
may be, but from their talent, earnestness, and knowledge. 
Many of the leading minds in the Union belong to this sect, and 
among them, Channing, Sparks, Dewey, and other well-known 
authors, have been converts from the Congregationalists. 

To have no creed, no standard to rally round, no fixed canons 
of interpretation of Scripture, is said to be fatal to their progress. 
Yet one of their body remarked to me that they might be well 
satisfied that they were gaining ground, when it could be said 
that in the last thirty years (since 1815) the number of their 
ministers had increased in a tenfold ratio, or from fifty to five 
hundred, whereas the population had only doubled in twenty-five 
years. He also reminded me that their ranks are scarcely ever 
recruited from foreign emigrants, from whom the Romanists, 
Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists, and Episcopalians annually 
draw large accessions. A more kindly feeling has of late years 
sprung up between the Unitarians and Congregationalists, because 
some of the most eminent writers of both sects have joined in 
defending themselves against a common adversary, namely, those 
rationalists who go so far as to deny the historical evidence of the 
miracles related in the New Testament, and who, in some other 
points, depart more widely from the Unitarian standard, than 
does the latter from that of Rome itself. Norton, author of 
" The Genuineness of the Gospels" may be mentioned, as one 
of the celebrated Unitarian divines who has extorted from the 
more liberal members of all " orthodox" denominations the praise 
of being a defender of the faith. 

In the course of my two visits to the United States, I enjoyed 
opportunities of hearing sermons preached by many of the most 
eminent Unitarians among them were Channing, Henry Ware, 
Dewey, Bellows, Putnam, and Gannet and was much struck, 
not only with their good sense and erudition, but with the fervor 



138 EMINENT PREACHERS CHANNING S WORKS. [CHAP. X. 

of their eloquence. I had been given to understand that I 
should find a want of warmth in their discourses, that they were 
too cold and philosophical, and wanting in devotional feeling ; 
but, on the contrary, there were many of them most impressive, 
full of earnestness and zeal, as well as of original views and 
instruction. One of the chief characteristics was the rare allu 
sion made to the Old Testament, or to controverted points of 
doctrine, or to the mysteries of the Christian religion, and the 
frequency with which they dwelt 011 the moral precepts and 
practical lessons of the Gospels, especially the preaching of 
Christ himself. Occasional exhortations to the faithful, cheer 
fully to endure obloquy for the sake of truth, and to pay no court 
to popularity, an undue craving for which was, they said, the 
bane of a democracy, convinced me how much the idea of their 
standing in a hostile position to a large numerical majority of the 
community was present to their minds. On some occasions, 
however, reference was naturally made to doctrinal points, par 
ticularly to the humanity of Christ, his kindred nature, and its 
distinctness from that of the eternal, omnipotent, and incorporeal 
Spirit which framed the universe ; but chiefly on occasions when 
the orator was desirous of awakening in the hearts of his hearers 
emotions of tenderness, pity, gratitude, and love, by dwelling on 
the bodily sufferings of the Redeemer on the cross. More than 
once have I seen these appeals produce so deep a sensation, as to 
move a highly educated audience to tears ; and I came away 
assured that they who imagine this form of Christianity to be 
essentially cold, lifeless, and incapable of reaching the heart, or 
of powerfully influencing the conduct of men, can never have 
enjoyed opportunities of listening to their most gifted preachers, 
or had a large personal intercourse with the members of the sect. 
When I wished to purchase a copy of the writings of Chan- 
ning arid of Dewey in Boston, I was told that I could obtain 
more complete and cheaper editions in London than in the Unit 
ed States ; a proof, not only how much they are read in England, 
but that the pecuniary interests of British authors are not the 
only ones which suffer by the want of an international copyright. 
On inquiring of the publishers at Boston, as to the extent of the 



CHAP. X.] NOTHINGARIANS. 139 

sale of Channing s works in the United States, I was informed 
that several of them, published separately, had gone through 
many editions, and no less than 9000 copies of the whole, in six 
volumes, had been sold already (1845), and the demand for them 
was on the increase, many copies having been recently ordered 
from distant places in the West, such as St. Louis and Chicago. 
A reprint of the same edition at Glasgow, has circulated widely 
in England, and the reading of it in America is by no means 
confined to Unitarians, the divines of other denominations, 
especially the Calvinists, being desirous to know what has been 
written against them by their great antagonist. 

Having been informed by one of my friends that about a fifth 
of all the New Eriglanders were " Nothingarians," I tried, but 
with little success, to discover the strict meaning of the term. 
Nothing seems more vague and indefinite than the mariner of its 
application. I fancied at first that it might signify deists or in 
fidels, or persons careless about any religious faith, or who were 
not church-goers ; but, although it may sometimes signify one or 
all of these, I found it was usually quite otherwise. The term 
latitudinarian, used in a good sense, appeared most commonly to 
convey the meaning ; for a Nothingarian, I was informed, was 
indifferent whether he attended a Baptist, Methodist, Presbyte 
rian, or Congregationalist church, and was often equally inclined 
to contribute money liberally to any one or all of them. A Meth 
odist writer of some eminence remarked to me, that the range of 
doctrines embraced by these denominations, was not greater, if so 
great, as that which comprehended within the same pale a high 
tractarian and a low churchman, and that he who would indiffer 
ently subscribe to these two forms of Episcopalianism, might with 
equal propriety be styled a Nothingarian. In other cases I as~ 
certained that the term Nothingarian was simply used for persons 
who, though they attended worship regularly in some church, had 
never been communicants. One of the latter, an Episcopalian, 
once said to me, " I have never joined any church ;" and then 
in explanation added, " it would be hard at my age to renounce 
society, dancing, and public amusements." I expostulated soon 
afterward with an Episcopalian minister in Virginia, observing- 



140 RELIGION AND POLITICS. [CHAP. X. 

that such ideas of austerity and asceticism were not consistent 
with the spirit of the Anglican Church. This he admitted, but 
pleaded the absolute necessity of extreme strictness to enable them 
to efface the stigma transmitted to them from colonial times ; for 
in the Southern states, particularly in Virginia, the patronage of 
the mother country, in filling up livings, was for a century scan 
dalously abused, and so many young men of profligate and im 
moral habits were sent out, as to create a strong prejudice against 
the Established Church of England in the minds of the more 
zealous and sincere religionists. 

On one of my voyages home from America, an officer of rank 
in the British army lamented that the governor of one of our col 
onies had lately appointed as Attorney-General one who was an 
atheist. T told him I knew the lawyer in question to be a zeal 
ous Baptist. " Yes," he replied, " Baptist, Atheist, or something 
of that sort." I have no doubt that if this gallant colonel should 
visit New England, his estimate of the proportion of Nothinga 
rians in the population would be very liberal. 

Traveling as I did in 18456, through a large part of the 
Union, immediately after the close of the protracted contest for 
the Presidency, when the votes in favor of Mr. Clay and Mr. 
Polk had been nearly balanced, I was surprised to find in the 
north, south, and west, how few of the Americans with whom I 
conversed as traveling companions, could tell me to what denom 
ination of Christians these two gentlemen belonged. I at length 
ascertained that one of them was an Episcopalian, and the other 
a Presbyterian. This ignorance could by no means be set down 
to indifFerentism. Had one of the candidates been a man of im 
moral character, it would have materially affected his chance of 
success, or probably if he had been suspected of indifference about 
religion, and not a few of the politicians whom I questioned were 
strongly imbued with sectarian feelings ; but it was clear that in 
the choice of a first magistrate their minds had been wholly oc 
cupied with other considerations, and the separation of religion 
and politics, though far from being as complete as might be 
wished, is certainly one of the healthy features of the working of 
the American institutions 



CHAPTER XI. 

Boston. Whig Caucus. Speech of Mr. Webster. Politics in Massachu 
setts. Election of Governor and Representatives. Thanksgiving Day 
and Governor s Proclamation. Absence of Pauperism. Irish Repeal 
Meeting. New England Sympathizer. Visit to a Free School. State 
Education. Pay and Social Rank of Teachers. Importance of the Pro 
fession. Rapid Progress and Effects of Educational Movement. Popu 
lar Lectures. Lending Libraries. 

Nov. 10, 1845. WENT to a great meeting of about 3500 
people in Faneuil Hall, where they were discussing the election 
of the governor and executive officers of the State. It was called 
a Whig caucus, being only attended by persons of one political 
party, or if others were present, they were there only by courtesy, 
and expected to be silent, and not interrupt the harmony of the 
proceedings. When I entered, I found Mr. Daniel Webster on 
his legs. Since the arrival of the last mail steamer from Liver 
pool fears had been entertained that the pretensions of the Cabi 
net of Washington to the whole, or greater part of Oregon, must 
end in a war between England and the United States. This 
topic was therefore naturally uppermost in the minds of a peace- 
loving and commercial community.. The cautious and measured 
expressions of the Whig statesman when out of office, and his 
evident sense of the serious responsibility incurred by one who 
should involve two great nations in war, formed a striking con 
trast to the unguarded tone of the late inaugural address of the 
President of the Union on the same subject. I was amused to 
hear frequent references made to the recent debate in the British 
House of Commons, the exact words of Sir Robert Peel and 
others being quoted and commented upon, just as if the discussion 
had been simply adjourned from Westminster to Boston. The 
orator rebuked the blustering tone of defiance, in which dema 
gogues and newspapers in some parts of the Union were indulg 
ing against England. He then condemned the new constitution 



142 POLITICS IN MASSACHUSETTS. [CHAP. XI. 

of Texas, which prohibits the Legislature from ever setting the 
bondman free, and deprecated the diversion made from the ranks 
of the Whigs by the Abolitionists, who, by setting up a candi 
date of their own for the Presidentship, had enabled their oppo 
nents to carry a man pledged to the annexation of Texas. At 
the same time he gave this party the credit of being as conscien 
tious as they were impracticable. He then alluded to another 
" separate organization," as it is here called, namely, that of the 
" Native Americans," which had in like manner defeated the 
object they had in view, by dividing the Whigs, the majority of 
whom agreed in thinking the present naturalization laws very 
defective, and that a stop should be put to fraudulent voting. 
The introduction of a long Latin quotation from Cicero showed 
that the speaker reckoned on having a considerable number at 
least of well-educated men in his large audience. The frequent 
mention of the name of Governor George N. Briggs, the initial 
letter only of the second appellative being pronounced, grated 
strangely on my English ear ; for though we do not trouble our 
selves to learn all the Christian names of our best actors, as Mr. 
T. P. Cooke and Miss M. Tree, we are never so laconic and 
unceremonious in dealing with eminent public men. I had asked 
several persons what K. signified in the name of the President, 
James K. Polk, before T ascertained that it meant Knox ; but, 
in the United States, it might have no other signification than 
the letter K. ; for, when first in Boston, I requested a friend to 
tell me -what B. stood for in his name, and he replied, " For 
nothing ; my surname was so common a one, that letters ad 
dressed to me were often mis-sent, so I got the Post-Office to 
allow me to adopt the letter B." 

I came away from this and other public meetings convinced 
that the style of speaking of Mr. Webster, Mr. Everett, Mr. Win- 
throp, arid some others, would take greatly in England, both in 
and out of parliament. It was also satisfactory to reflect, that 
in Massachusetts, where the whole population is more educated 
than elsewhere, arid more Anglo-American, having less of recent 
foreign admixture, whether European or African, the dominant 
party is against the extension of slavery to new regions like Texas, 



CHAP. XL] ELECTION. 143 

against territorial aggrandizement, whether in the north or south, 
and against war. They are in a minority it is true : but each 
state in the Union has such a separate and independent position, 
that, like a distinct nation, it can continue to cherish its own 
principles and institutions, and set an example to the rest, which 
they may in time learn to imitate. The Whigs were originally 
in favor of more centralization, or of giving increased power to 
the federal executive, while the democratic party did all they 
could to weaken the central power, and successfully contended for 
the sovereign rights and privileges of each member of the confed 
eration. In so doing they have perhaps inadvertently, and with 
out seeing the bearing of their policy, guarded the older and more 
advanced commonwealths from being too much controlled and 
kept down by the ascendency of newer and ruder states. 

A few days later, I went to see the electors give their votes. 
Perfect order and good-humor prevailed, although the contest 
was a keen one. As I approached the poll, the agents of differ 
ent committees, supposing that I might be an elector, put into 
my hands printed lists, containing the names of all the candidates 
for the offices of Governor, Lieutenant-governor, five senators, 
and thirty-five representatives. Every registered voter is entitled 
to put one of these " tickets" into the balloting box. The real 
struggle was between the Whigs and Democrats, the former of 
whom carried the day ; but, besides their tickets, two others were 
presented to me, one called the Native American, and the other 
the Working Man s ticket. The latter had for its emblem a 
naked arm, wielding a hammer, and for its motto, " The strong 
right arm of labor." The five senators proposed in this list, 
consisted of two printers, a carpenter, a blacksmith, and a sur 
veyor, and among the representatives were four shoemakers, one 
tailor, eight carpenters, four printers, an engineer, &c. 

I heard Americans regret, that besides caucuses there are no 
public meetings here where matters are debated by persons of 
opposite parties and opinions, such as are sometimes held in En 
gland. I was surprised to hear that such experiments were of 
rare occurrence in a country where men opposed in politics 
frequently argue with so much good temper, and where, in so 



144 THANKSGIVING DAY. [CHAP. XI. 

many hotels and taverns, newspapers of all shades of opinion are 
taken in just as in our great club-houses in London, affording 
opportunities of knowing what can be said on all sides of every 
question. I have since learnt from correspondents, that, in a 
period of political excitement, the people in many parts of Massa 
chusetts have begun to engage different lecturers to explain to 
them the opposite facts, views, and arguments adduced for and 
against the chief subjects under discussion. 

Nov. 27. This day, Thanksgiving Day, and the 4th of July, 
Independence Day, are the only two holidays in the American 
calendar. The Governor has, they say, as usual, made a bad 
guess in regard to weather, for there is a pelting rain. It was 
indeed ascertained by actual measurement at Cambridge, that in 
nineteen hours between yesterday evening and to-day, at four 
o clock, there has fallen no less than four and a half inches of 
rain, or one-eighth part of the average of the whole year, which 
amounts to thirty-six inches at Boston. By this unlucky accident 
many a family gathering has been interrupted, and relatives have 
been unable to come in from the country to join a merry meeting, 
corresponding to that of an English Christmas Day. Many a 
sermon, also, carefully prepared for the occasion, has been preached 
to empty pews ; but the newspapers inform us, that some of 
these effusions will be repeated on Sunday next. Sixteen states 
have now adopted this New England custom of appointing a day 
for thanksgiving, and it is spreading fast, having already reached 
South Carolina, and even Louisiana. A month before, I had 
heard with interest the Governor s proclamation, read in all the 
churches, full of good feeling and good sense. He called on the 
people of the state, now that the harvest was gathered in, to 
praise the God of Heaven for his bounties, and in their cheerful 
family circles to render to Him a tribute of thanksgiving for His 
goodness : 

" Let us praise Him, that, under His protecting Providence, the institu 
tions of state, of religion, of learning and education, established by the 
prudence and wisdom of our fathers, under which their children have been 
prosperous and happy, have come down to us unimpaired and in full 
vigor : 

" That the various classes of our citizens, under the mild and equal 



CHAP. XL] ABSENCE OF PAUPERISM. 145 

government of laws made by themselves, pursue, unmolested, upon the 
land and upon the sea, their peaceful occupations : 

" That although we have heard the distant rumor, and seen the prepar 
ations for war our common country is yet at peace with the world." 

In no part of the address was any claim set up to the peculiar 
favor of God, or his special intervention in chastising the nation 
for particular transgressions ; nothing to imply that He does not 
govern the world by fixed and general laws, moral and physical, 
which it is our duty to study and obey, and which, if we disobey, 
whether from ignorance or willfulness, will often be made the 
instruments of our punishment even in this world. The procla 
mation concluded thus, in the good old style : 

: Given at the Council Chamber, in Boston, this 1st day of October, in the 
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and forty-five, and of the 
Independence of the United States the seventieth. 

" GEORGE N. BRIGGS. 

"By his Excellency the Governor, with the advice and consent of the 
Council - " JOHN G. PALFREY, Secretary. 

" God save the Commonwealth of Massachusetts." 

The almost entire absence of pauperism even in the large 
towns, except among the old and infirm, forms a striking point of 
contrast between, the state of things in New England and in 
Europe. One of my friends, who is serving on a committee in 
Boston to see that the poor who are too old to work have all 
necessary comforts, has just ordered, as one of the indispensables, 
a carpet for the bed-side of an old woman. Yet, within five 
miles of Boston, some of the newly arrived emigrants of the lower 
class of Irish, may now be seen living in mud huts by the side 
of railway cuttings, which they are employed to dig, who are 
regarded by many of the native-born laborers with no small dis 
gust, not only as the most ignorant and superstitious of mortals, 
but as likely, by their competition, to bring down the general 
standard of wages. The rich capitalists, on the other hand, 
confess to me, that they know not how they could get on with 
the construction of public works, and obtain good interest for their 
money, were they deprived of this constant influx of foreign labo . 
VOL. i. G 



146 IRISH REPEAL MEETING. [CHAP. XI. 

They speak also with kindness of the Irish, saying they are 
most willing to work hard, keep their temperance vows, and, in 
spite of the considerable sums drawn from them by the Catholic 
priests, are putting by largely out of their earnings into the 
Savings Banks. It is also agreed that they are most generous to 
their poor relations in Ireland, remitting money to them annually, 
and sometimes enough to enable them to pay their passage across 
the Atlantic. At the same time they confess, with much con 
cern, that the efforts now making by the people at large, aided 
by the wealthiest class, to establish a good system of state 
instruction, and to raise the moral and intellectual character of 
the millions, must be retarded by the intrusion of so many rude 
and ignorant settlers. Among other mischiefs, the political 
passions and party feelings of a foreign country are intruded into 
the political arena, and a tempting field laid open to demagogues 
of the lowest order. 

Returning home one night after dark from a party, I heard 
music in a large public building, and, being told it was a repeal 
meeting held by the Irish, had the curiosity to look in. After a 
piece of instrumental music had been performed, an orator, with 
an Irish accent, addressed the crowd on the sufferings of the 
Irish people precisely as if he had forgotten on which side of the 
Atlantic he then was. He dwelt on the tyranny of the Saxons, 
and spoke of repeal as the only means of emancipating their 
country from British domination, and solicited money in aid of 
the great cause. Seeing, with no small surprise, an industrious 
native-born artisan of Boston, whom I knew, in the crowd, I 
asked him, as we went out together, whether he approved of the 
objects of the meeting. He belonged to the extreme democratic 
party, and answered, very coolly and quite seriously, " We hope 
that we may one day be able to do for Ireland what France did 
for the United States in our great struggle for independence." 

On my return home, I found that my pocket had been picked 
of a purse containing fortunately a few dollars only, an accident 
for which I got no commiseration, as my friends hoped it would 
be a lesson to me to keep better company in future. 

That a humble mechanic of Boston should be found who 



CHAP. XL] VISIT TO A FREE SCHOOL. 147 

indulged in wild projects for redressing the wrongs of the Hiber 
nian race, ought not to create wonder, when I state that before 
the end of the year 1845, a resolution was moved in Congress, 
by Mr. M Connell, one of the members for Alabama, after he 
had been talking much about the spirit of Christian love and 
peaceful brotherhood which distinguished the American republic, 
to the following effect : " That the Irish, ground down by 
British misrule, have for centuries groaned under a foreign 
monarchical yoke, and are now entitled to share the blessings of 
our free institutions." I am happy to say, however, that this 
absurd motion was not even seconded. 

The population of Boston, exclusive of Charlestown, Roxbury, 
and Cambridge (which may be regarded as suburbs), is at present 
about 115,000, of which 8000 are Roman Catholics, chiefly of 
Irish extraction ; but there are besides many Scotch and English 
emigrants in the city. In order to prove to me how much may 
be done to advance them in civilization in a single generation, I 
was taken to a school where nine-tenths of all the children were 
of parents who had come out from England or Ireland. It was 
not an examination day, and our visit was wholly unexpected. 
We entered a suite of three well-aired rooms, containing 550 
girls. There were nine teachers in the room. The pupils were 
all between the ages of nine and thirteen, the greater portion of 
them the daughters of poor laborers, but some of them of parents 
in good circumstances. Each scholar was seated on a separate 
chair with a back to it, the chair being immovably fixed to the 
ground to prevent noise. There was no uniformity of costume, 
but evidently much attention to personal neatness, nearly all of 
them more dressed than would be thought in good taste in chil 
dren of a corresponding class in England. They had begun their 
studies at nine o clock in the morning, and are to be six hours at 
school, studying fifty minutes at a time, and then being allowed 
ten minutes for play in a yard adjoining. I observed some of the 
girls very intent on their task, leaning on their elbows and in 
other careless attitudes, and we were told by the masters that 
they avoid as much as possible finding fault with them on minor 
points when they are studying. The only punishments are a 



143 STATE EDUCATION. [CHAP. XL 

reprimand before the class, and keeping them back after school 
hours. The look of intelligence in the countenances of the greater 
number of them was a most pleasing sight. In one of the upper 
classes they were reading, when we went in, a passage from Paley 
" On Sleep," and I was asked to select at random from the school- 
books some poem which the girls might read each in their turn. 
I chose Gray s Elegy in a Churchyard, as being none of the 
simplest for young persons to understand. They each read a 
verse distinctly, and many of them most gracefully, and explained 
correctly the meaning of nearly all the words and allusions on 
which I questioned them. 

We afterward heard the girls of the arithmetic class examined 
in algebra, and their answers showed that much pains had been 
taken to make them comprehend the principles on which the 
methods of calculation depended. We then visited a boy s gram 
mar school, and found there 420 Protestant and 100 Catholic 
boys educated together. We remarked that they had a less re 
fined appearance and were less forward in their education than 
the girls whom we had just seen, of the same age, and taken 
from the same class in society. In explanation I was told that 
it is impossible to give the boys as much schooling, because they 
can earn money for their parents at an earlier age. 

The number of public or free schools in Massachusetts in 
1845-6, for a population of 800,000 souls, was about 3500, 
and the number of male teachers 2585, and of female 5000, 
which would allow a teacher for each twenty-five or thirty chil 
dren, as many as they can well attend to. The sum raised by 
direct taxation for the wages and board of the tutors, and for 
fuel for the schools, is upward of 600,000 dollars, or 120,000 
guineas ; but this is exclusive of all expenditure for school-houses, 
libraries, and apparatus, for which other funds are appropriated, 
and every year a great number of newer and finer buildings are 
erected. 

Upon the whole about one million of dollars is spent in teach 
ing a population of 800,000 souls, independently of the sums 
expended on private instruction, which in the city of Boston is 
supposed to be equal to the money levied by taxes for the free 



CHAP. XL] PAY OF TEACHERS. 149 

schools, or 260,000 dollars (55,000/.). If we were to enforce a 
school-rate in Great Britain, bearing the same proportion to our 
population of twenty-eight millions, the tax would amount annu 
ally to more than seven millions sterling, and would then be far 
less effective, owing to the higher cost of living, and the com 
parative average standard of incomes among professional and 
official men. 

In Boston the master of the Latin School, where boys are fitted 
for college, and the master of the High School, where they are 
taught French, mathematics, and other branches preparatory to 
a mercantile career, receive each 2400 dollars (500/.), the gov 
ernor of the state having only 2500 dollars. Their assistants 
are paid from 1800 to 700 dollars (37 Ql. to 150Z.). The 
masters of the grammar schools, where boys and girls are taught 
in separate school-houses English literature, general history, and 
algebra, have salaries of 1500 dollars (315/.), their male assist 
ants 600 (1251.), and their female 300 (651.). The mistresses 
of schools, where children from four to seven years old are taught 
to read, receive 325 dollars (70/.). In Salem, Roxbury, Lowell, 
and other large towns, where living is more moderate, the salaries 
are about one-third less ; and in rural districts, where the schools 
are not kept open for the whole year, the wages of the teachers 
are still smaller. 

The county of Worcester, Massachusetts, for example, has a 
population of about 100,000, and the number of schools in it is 
about 543, the schools being kept open some four, others twelve 
months, and on an average six months in the year. The male 
teachers, of whom there are about 500, receive 30 dollars (61. 
6s.) a month ; the women teachers, of whom there are 700, 
about 13 dollars a month (21. 15s.). 

Among other changes, we are told, in the State Reports, that 
the number of female teachers has been augmented more rapidly 
than that of the males, especially in schools where the youngest 
pupils are taught, because the services of women cost less, and 
are found to be equally, if not more, efficient. But my inform 
ants in general were desirous that I should understand that the 
success of their plan of national education does not depend so much 



150 SOCIAL POSITION OF TEACHERS. [CHAP. XT. 

on the number and pay of the teachers as on the interest taken 
in it by the entire population, who faithfully d vote more time 
and thought to the management of the schools than to any other 
public duty. 

The cost of living in New England may, on the whole, be 
taken to be at least one-third less than in Great Britain ; and 
the spirit of the political institutions, the frugal manner of conduct 
ing the government, the habits of society, and a greater general 
equality of fortunes, where the custom of primogeniture does not 
prevail, causes the relative value of incomes such as those above 
enumerated, to confer a more respectable social position than 
they would do with us. I was assured that in the country 
towns the schoolmasters associate with the upper class of citizens, 
holding as good a place in society as the clergy and medical 
men, but not ranking so high as the lawyers. 

On this point, however (the relative position of the teachers), 
I found great differences of opinion among my informants ; but 
a general agreement that their pay and social rank ought to be 
raised, so as to enable the state to command the services of men 
and women of the best abilities and accomplishments. 

Channing had, for many years before his death, insisted on 
the want of institutions to teach the art of teaching. There are 
now several of these normal schools in full activity, where a course 
of three years instruction is given. As yet, however, few can 
afford to attend more than one year ; but even this short training- 
has greatly raised the general standard of efficacy, and the bene 
ficial influence has extended even to schoolmasters who have not 
yet availed themselves of the new training. The people have, 
in fact, responded generously to the eloquent exhortations of 
Channing, not to economize, for the sake of leaving a fortune to 
the rising generation, at the expense of starving their intellects 
and impoverishing their hearts. It was a common prejudice, he 
said, and a fatal error to imagine that the most ordinary abilities 
are competent to the office of teaching the young. " Their voca 
tion, on the contrary, is more noble even than that of the states 
man, arid demands higher powers, great judgment, and a capacity 
of comprehending the laws of thought arid moral action, arid the 



CHAP. XL] HIGH OFFICE OF TEACHERS. 151 

various springs and motives by which the child may be roused to 
the most vigorous use of all its faculties." ^ 

Nevertheless, some of his most enthusiastic admirers confessed 
to me that they could not assent to his doctrine, that "to teach, 
whether by word or action, is the highest function on earth," 
unless young men and women, between the ages of seventeen and 
twenty-two, are the pupils, instead of children between four and 
sixteen. They expressed their misgivings and fears that the 
business of the schoolmaster, who is to teach reading and writing 
and the elements of knowledge, must check the development of 
the mind, if not tend to narrow its powers. As the real friends 
of progress, they had come reluctantly to this conclusion ; but 
they admitted that to despond at present would be premature. 
The experiment of promoting the teacher of every school to 
that rank in society which the importance of his duties entitles 
him to hold, and of training him in his art, has never yet been 
tried. 

We have yet to learn what may be the effect of encouraging 
men of superior energy and talent, who have a natural taste for 
the calling, to fit themselves for the profession. It must doubt 
less entail, like, every other liberal calling, such as the legal, 
medical, clerical, military, or mercantile, a certain amount of 
drudgery and routine of business ; but, like all these depart 
ments, it may afford a field for the enlargement of the mind, if 
they who exercise it enjoy, in a like degree, access to the best 
society, can exchange thoughts with the most cultivated minds 
in their district, and have leisure allowed them for self-culture, 
together with a reasonable hope, if they distinguish themselves, 
of being promoted to posts of honor and emolument, not in other 
professions, such as the clerical, but in their own. The high 
schools of Boston, supported by the state, are now so well man 
aged, that some of my friends, who would grudge no expense to 
engage for their sons the best instructors, send their boys to them 
as superior to any of the private establishments supported by the 
rich at great cost. The idea has been recently agitated of pro 
viding similar free-schools and colleges for girls, because they 
* Glasgow Ed., vol i. p. 391. 



152 EDUCATIONAL MOVEMENT. [CHAP. XL 

could more easily be induced to stay until the age of sixteen. 
Young men, it is said, would hate nothing so much as to find 
themselves inferior in education to the women of their own age 
and station. 

Of late years the improvement of the schools has been so 
rapid, that objects which were thought Utopian even when 
Channing began his career, have been realized ; and the more 
sanguine spirits, among whom Mr. Horace Mann, Secretary of 
the Public Board of Education, stands pre-eminent, continue to 
set before the eyes of the public an ideal standard so much more 
elevated, as to make all that has hitherto been accomplished 
appear as nothing. The taxes self-imposed by the people for 
educational purposes are still annually on the increase, and the 
beneficial effects of the system are very perceptible. In all the 
large towns Lyceums have been established, where courses of 
lectures are given every winter, and the qualifications of the 
teachers who deliver them are much higher than formerly. Both 
the intellectual and social feelings of every class are cultivated 
by these evening meetings, and it is acknowledged that with the 
increased taste for reading, cherished by such instruction, habits 
of greater temperance and order, and higher ideas of comfort, 
have steadily kept pace. 

Eight years ago (1838) Channing observed that "millions, 
wearied by their day s work, have been chained to the pages of 
Walter Scott, and have owed some bright evening hours and 
balmier sleep to his magical creations ;" and he pointed out how 
many of the laboring classes took delight in history and biogra 
phy, descriptions of nature, in travels and in poetry, as well as 
graver works. In his Franklin Lecture, addressed, in 1838, to 
a large body of mechanics and men earning their livelihood " by 
manual labor," he says, " Books are the true levelers, giving to 
all who will faithfully use them the society and spiritual pres 
ence of the best and greatest of our race ; so that an individual 
may be excluded from what is called good society, and yet not 
pine for want of intellectual companionship."* 

When I asked how it happened that in so populous and rich 
* Channing, vol. ii. p. 378. 



CHAP. XL] POPULAR LECTURES. 153 

a city as Boston there was at present (October, 1845) no regular 
theater, I was told, among other reasons, that if I went into the 
houses of persons of the middle and even humblest class, I should 
often find the father of a family, instead of seeking excitement in 
a shilling gallery, reading to his wife and four or five children 
one of the best modern novels, which he has purchased for twenty- 
five cents ; whereas, if they could all have left home, he could 
not for many times that sum have taken them to the play. They 
often buy, in two or three successive numbers of a penny news 
paper, entire reprints of the tales of Dickens, Bulwer, or other 
popular writers. 

Dana, now a lawyer in Boston, and whose acquaintance I 
had the pleasure of making there, has, in his singularly interest 
ing and original work, entitled " Two Years before the Mast," 
not only disclosed to us a lively picture of life in the forecastle, 
but has shown incidentally how much a crew, composed of the 
most unpromising materials, rough and illiterate, and recruited 
at random from the merchant service of different nations, could 
be improved by associating with a single well-educated messmate. 
He was able, on one of the few holidays which were granted to 
them in California by the most tyrannical of captains, to keep 
them from going ashore, where they would have indulged in dis 
sipation, by reading to them for hours Scott s historical tale of 
" Woodstock." We ought scarcely, then, to wonder, after what 
I have said of the common schools of this city, that crowded 
audiences should be drawn night after night, through the whole 
winter, in spite of frost and snow, from the class of laborers and 
mechanics, mingled with those of higher station, to listen with 
deep interest to lectures on natural theology, zoology, geology, 
the writings of Shakspeare, the beauties of " Paradise Lost," 
the peculiar excellencies of " Comus" and " Lycidas," treated in 
an elevated style by men who would be heard with pleasure by 
the most refined audiences in London. 

Still, however, I hear many complaints that there is a want 
of public amusements to give relief to the minds of the multitude, 
whose daily employments are so monotonous that they require, 
far more than the rich, opportunities of innocent recreation, such 



154 LENDING LIBRARIES. tCHAP. XI. 

as concerts, dancing, and the theater might give, under proper 
regulations ; for these are now usually discouraged by religion 
ists, who can find no other substitute for them but sermons and 
reiterated church services. 

Among the signs of the times, and of the increasing taste for 
reading, the great number of lending libraries in every district 
must not be forgotten. Toward the purchase of these the State 
grants a certain sum, if an equal amount be subscribed by the 
inhabitants. They are left to their own choice in the purchase 
of books ; and the best English poets and novelists are almost 
always to be met with in each collection, and works of biography, 
history, travels, natural history, and science. The selection is 
carefully made with reference to what the people will read, and 
not what men of higher education and station think they ought 
to read. 



CHAPTER XII. 

Boston, Popular Education, continued. Patronage of Universities and 
Science. Channing on Milton. Milton s Scheme of teaching the Nat 
ural Sciences. New England Free Schools. Their Origin. First 
Puritan Settlers not illiterate. Sincerity of their Religious Faith. 
Schools founded in Seventeenth Century in Massachusetts. Discouraged 
in Virginia. Sir W. Berkeley s Letter. Pastor Robinson s Views of 
Progress in Religion. Organization of Congregational Churches. No 
Penalties for Dissent. Provision made for future Variations in Creeds. 
Mode of Working exemplified. Impossibility of concealing Truths 
relating to Religion from an educated Population. Gain to the Higher 
Classes, especially the Clergy. New Theological Colleges. The Lower 
Orders not rendered indolent, discontented, or irreligious by Education. 
Peculiar Stimulus to Popular Instruction in the United States. 

IT was naturally to be apprehended that, in a pure democracy, 
or where the suffrage is nearly universal, the patronage of the 
state would be almost entirely confined to providing means for 
mere primary education, such as reading, writing-, and ciphering. 
But such is not the case in Massachusetts, although the annual 
grants made to the three universities of Harvard, Amherst, and 
Williams, are now becoming inadequate to the growing wants 
of a more advanced community, and strenuous exertions are 
making to enlarge them. In the mean time, private bequests 
and donations have of late years poured in upon Harvard Uni 
versity from year to year, some of them on a truly munificent 
scale. Since my first visit to Cambridge, professorships of bot 
any, comparative anatomy, and chemistry have been founded. 
There was previously a considerable staff for the teaching of 
literature, law, and medicine ; and lately an entire new depart 
ment for engineering, natural philosophy, chemistry, geology, 
mineralogy, and natural history, in their application to the arts, 
has been instituted. One individual, Mr. Abbott Lawrence, a 
gentleman still in the prime of life, has contributed no less a 
sum than 100,000 dollars 20,000 guineas) toward the support 



156 PATRONAGE OF SCIENCE. [CHAP. XU. 

of this department. One of the new chairs is now filled by a 
zoologist of the highest European reputation, Professor Agassiz. 
A splendid bequest also, of equal amount (100,000 dollars), has 
recently been made to the Cambridge Observatory, for which the 
country had already obtained, at great cost, a large telescope, 
which has resolved the great nebula in Orion, and has enabled 
the astronomer, Mr. Bond, simultaneously with an English ob 
server, Mr. Lassell, to discover a new satellite of Saturn. 

That the State, however, will not be checked by any narrow 
utilitarian views in its patronage of the university and the higher 
departments of literature and science, we may confidently infer 
from the grants made so long ago as March, 1830, by the frugal 
Legislature of Massachusetts, for a trigonometrical survey, and 
for geological, botanical, and zoological explorations of the coun 
try, executed by men whose published reports prove them to have 
been worthy of the trust. It was to be expected that some dem 
agogues would attempt to persuade the people that such an ex 
penditure of public money was profligate in the extreme, and that 
as the universities have a dangerous aristocratic tendency, so these 
liberal appropriations of funds for scientific objects were an evi 
dence that the Whig party were willing to indulge the fancies 
of the few at the charge of the many. Accordingly, one orator 
harangued the fishermen of Cape Cod on this topic, saying that 
the government had paid 1500 dollars out of the Treasury to 
remunerate Dr. Storer for what ? for giving Latin names to 
some of the best known fish ; for christening the common cod 
Morrhua americana, the shad Alosa vulgaris, and the fall her 
ring Clupea vulgaris. His electioneering tactics did not suc 
ceed ; but might they not have gained him many votes in certain 
English constituencies? Year after year, subsequently to 1837, 
the columns of " the leading journal" of Great Britain were filled 
with attacks in precisely the same style of low and ignorant ridi 
cule against the British Association, and the memoirs of some of 
the ablest writers in Europe on natural history and science, who 
were assailed with vulgar abuse. Such articles would not have 
been repeated so perseveringly, nor have found an echo in the 
" British Critic" and several magazines, had they not found sym- 



CHAP. XII.] CIIANNING ON MILTON. 157 

pathy in the minds of a large class of readers, who ought, by their 
station, to have been less prejudiced, and who, in reality, have 
no bigoted aversion to science itself, but simply dread the effects 
of its dissemination among the peo*ple at large. 

It is remarkable that a writer of such genius and so enlarged 
a mind as Channing, who was always aiming to furnish the mul 
titude with sources of improvement and recreation, should have 
dwelt so little on the important part which natural history and 
the physical sciences might play, if once the tastes of the million 
were turned to their study and cultivation. From several passa 
ges in his works, it is evident that he had never been imbued 
w r ith the slightest knowledge or feeling for such pursuits ; and 
this is apparent even in his splendid essay on Milton, one of the 
most profound, brilliant, and philosophical dissertations in the 
English language. Dr. Johnson, while he had paid a just hom 
age to the transcendent genius of the great poet and the charms of 
his verse, had allowed his party feelings and bigotry to blind him 
to all that was pure and exalted in Milton s character. Chan 
ning, in his vindication, pointed out how Johnson, with all his 
strength of thought and reverence for virtue and religion, his vig 
orous logic, and practical wisdom, wanted enthusiasm and lofty 
sentiment. Hence, his passions engaged him in the unworthy 
task of obscuring the brighter glory of one of the best and most 
virtuous of men. But the American champion of the illustrious 
bard fails to remark that Milton was also two centuries in ad 
vance of the age in which he lived, in his appreciation of the 
share which the study of nature ought to hold in the training of 
the youthful mind. Of Milton s scheme for enlarging the ordi 
nary system of teaching, proposed after he had himself been prac 
tically engaged in the task as a schoolmaster, the lexicographer 
spoke, as might have been anticipated, in terms of disparagement 
bordering on contempt. He treated Milton, in fact, as a mere 
empiric and visionary projector, observing that " it was his pur 
pose to teach boys something more solid than the common litera 
ture of schools, by reading those authors that treat of physical 
subjects." " The poet Cowley had formed a similar plan in his 
imaginary college ; but the knowledge of external nature, and the 



158 DR. JOHNSON. [CHAP. XII. 

sciences which that knowledge requires, are not the great or the 
frequent business of the human mind : and we ought not" he 
adds, " to turn off attention* from life to nature, as if we were 
placed here to watch the growth of plants, or the motions of the 
stars." 

That a violent shock had been given in the sixteenth century 
to certain time-honored dogmas, by what is here slightingly called 
" watching the motions of the stars," was an historical fact with 
which Johnson was of course familiar ; but if it had been adduced 
to prove that they who exercise their reasoning powers, in inter 
preting the great book of nature, are constantly arriving at new 
truths, and occasionally required to modify preconceived opinions, 
or that when habitually engaged in such discipline, they often ac 
quire independent habits of thought, applicable to other depart 
ments of human learning, such arguments would by no means 
have propitiated the critic, or have induced him to moderate his 
disapprobation of the proposed innovations. In the mind of John 
son there was a leaning to superstition, and no one was more con 
tent to leave the pupil to tread forever in beaten paths, and to 
cherish extreme reverence for authority, for which end the whole 
system then in vogue in the English schools and colleges was ad 
mirably conceived. For it confined the studies of young men, up 
to the age of twenty-two, as far as possible to the non-progressive 
departments of knowledge, to the ancient models of classical ex 
cellence, whether in poetry or prose, to theological treatises, to 
the history and philosophy of the ancients rather than the mod 
erns, and to pure mathematics rather than their application to 
physics. No modern writer was more free from fear of inquiry, 
more anxious to teach the millions to think and reason for them 
selves, no one ever looked forward more enthusiastically to the 
future growth and development of the human mind, than Chan- 
ning. If his own education had not been cast in an antique 
mold, he would have held up Milton as a model for imitation, 
not only for his love of classical lore and poetry, but for his wish 
to cultivate a knowledge of the works of nature. 

Certainly no people ever started with brighter prospects of 
uniting the promotion of both these departments, than the people 



CHAP. XII.] ORIGIN OF FREE SCHOOLS. 159 

of New England at this moment. Of the free schools which 
they have founded, and the plan of education adopted by them 
for children of all sects and stations in society, they feel justly 
proud, for it is the most original thing which America has yet 
produced. The causes of their extraordinary success and recent 
progress, well deserve more attention than they have usually 
received from foreigners, especially as it seems singular at first 
sight, and almost paradoxical, that a commonwealth founded by 
the Puritans, whom we are accustomed to regard as the enemies 
of polite literature and science, should now take so prominent a 
lead as the patrons of both ; or that a sect which was so prone 
to bibliolatry that they took their pattern and model of civil 
government, and even their judicial code, from the Old Testament, 
who carried their theory of the union of Church and State so far 
as to refuse the civil franchise to all who were not in full com 
munion with their Church, and who persecuted for a time some 
non-conformists, even to the death, should nevertheless have set 
an example to the world of religious toleration, and have been 
the first to establish schools for popular education open to the 
children of all denominations Romanist, Protestant, and Jew. 
If any one entertains a doubt that the peculiar character 
stamped upon the present generation of New Englanders, in 
relation to religious and political affairs, is derived directly and 
indisputably from their Puritan ancestors, let them refer to the 
history of Massachusetts. According to the calculation of Ban 
croft, the first Puritan settlers of New England are the parents 
of one-third of the whole white population of the United States. 
Within the first fifteen years (and there never was afterward any 
considerable increase from England) there came over 21,200 
persons, or 4000 families. Their descendants, he says, are now 
(1840) not far from 4,000,000. Each family has multiplied 
on the average to 1000 souls, and they have carried to New 
York and Ohio, where they constitute half the population, the 
Puritan system of free schools, which they established from the 
beginning. When we recollect that the population of all England 
is computed to have scarcely exceeded five millions when the 
chief body of the Puritans first emigrated to the New World, we 



160 FIRST PURITAN SETTLERS. [CHAP. XII. 

may look upon, the present descendants of the first colonists as 
constituting a nation hardly inferior in numbers to what England 
itse]f was only two centuries before our times. The development, 
therefore, of the present inhabitants from a small original stock 
has been so rapid, and the intermediate generations so few, that 
we must be quite prepared to discover in the founders of the colony 
of the seventeenth century, the germ of all the wonderful results 
which have since so rapidly unfolded themselves. 

Nor is this difficult. In the first place, before the great civil 
war broke out in England, when the principal emigration took 
place to Massachusetts, the Puritans were by no means an illit 
erate or uncultivated sect. They reckoned in their ranks a 
considerable number of men of good station and family, who had 
received the best education which the schools and universities 
then afforded. Some of the most influential of the early New 
England divines, such as Cotton Mather, were good scholars, and 
have left writings which display much reading and an acquaint 
ance with the Greek and Latin languages. Milton s " Paradise 
Lost" usually accompanied the Bible into the log-houses of the 
early settlers, and with the " Paradise Lost" the minor poems 
of the same author were commonly associated. 

The Puritans who first went into exile, after enduring much 
oppression in their native country, were men who were ready to 
brave the wilderness rather than profess doctrines or conform to 
a ritual which they abhorred. They were a pure and conscien 
tious body. They might be ignorant or fanatical, but they were 
at least sincere, and no hypocrites had as yet been tempted to 
join them for the sake of worldly promotion, as happened at a 
later period, when Puritanism in the mother country had become 
dominant in the state. Full of faith, and believing that their 
religious tenets must be strengthened by free investigation, they 
held that the study and interpretation of the Scriptures should 
not be the monopoly of a particular order of men, but that every 
layman was bound to search them for himself. Hence they were 
anxious to have all their children taught to read. So early as 
the year 1647, they instituted common schools, the law declaring 
" that all the brethren shall teach their children and apprentices 



CHAP. XII.] SCHOOLS EARLY FOUNDED. 161 

to read, and that every township of fifty householders shall ap 
point one to teach all the children."^ 

Very different was the state of things in the contemporary 
colony of Virginia, to which the Cavaliers and the members of 
the Established Church were thronging. Even fifteen or twenty 
years later, Sir William Berkeley, who was governor of Virginia 
for nearly forty years, and was one of the best of the colonial 
rulers, spoke thus, in the full sincerity of his heart, of his own 
province, in a letter written after the restoration of Charles II. : 
"I thank God there are no free schools or printing, and I hope 
we shall not have them these hundred years. For learning has 
brought heresy and disobedience and sects into the world, and 
printing has divulged them, and libels against the best govern 
ment. God keep us from both."f 

Sir William Berkeley was simply expressing here, in plain 
terms, the chief motives which still continue to defeat or retard 
the cause of popular education in some parts of the United States 
and in many countries of Europe, England not excepted a 
dread of political change while the people remain in ignorance, 
and a fear of removing that ignorance, lest it should bring on 
changes of religious opinion. The New Englanders were from 
the beginning so republican in spirit, that they were not likely to 
share Governor Berkeley s apprehensions of a growing dislike to 
" the best of governments," as he termed the political maxims of 
the Stuarts ; and if, for a time, they cherished hopes of preserv 
ing uniformity of religious opinion, and even persecuted some who 
would not conform to their views, their intolerance was of short 
duration, and soon gave way to those enlightened views of civil 
and religious freedom which they had always professed, even 
when they failed to carry them into practice. 

If we contrast the principles before alluded to of the leading 
men in Massachusetts with those of the more southern settlers, 
in the early part of the seventeenth century, we learn without 
surprise that at a time when there was not one bookseller s shop 
in Virginia and no printing presses, there were several in Boston, 

* Bancroft, vol. i. p. 458. 

t Chalmers, cited by Graham, Hist, of U. S., vol. i. p. 103. 



162 PROGRESS IN RELIGION. [CHAP. XII. 

with no less than five printing-offices, a fact which reflects the 
more credit on the Puritans, because at the same period (1724) 
there were no less than thirty-four counties in the mother country, 
Lancashire being one of the number, in which there was no 
printer.^ 

When the Pilgrim Fathers were about to sail in the May 
flower from Leyden, a solemn fast was held before they embarked, 
and their pastor, Robinson, gave them a farewell address, in 
which these memorable words are recorded : 

" I charge you, before God and his blessed angels, that you 
follow rne no further than you have seen me follow the Lord 
Jesus Christ. The Lord has more truth yet to break forth out 
of his holy word. For my part, I can not sufficiently bewail 
the condition of the reformed churches, who are come to a period 
in religion, and will go at present no further than the instruments 
of their first reformation. The Lutherans can not be drawn to 
go beyond what Luther saw. Whatever part of His will our 
good God has imparted and revealed unto Calvin, they will die 
rather than embrace it. And the Calvinists, you see, stick fast 
where they were left by that great man of God, who yet saw not 
all things. This is a misery much to be lamented ; for, though 
they were burning and shining lights in their times, yet they 
penetrated not into the whole counsel of God : but, were they 
now living, they would be as willing to embrace further light as 
that which they first received. I beseech you to remember it ; 
it is an article of your church-covenant, that you will be ready to 
receive whatever truth shall be made known unto you from the 
written word of God. Remember that and every other article 
of your most sacred covenant." 

It may be said that the spirit of progress, the belief in the 
future discovery of new truths, and the expansion of Christianity, 
which breathes through every passage of this memorable dis 
course, did not characterize the New England Independents any 
more than the members of other sects. Like the rest, they had 
embodied their interpretations of Scripture in certain fixed and 
definite propositions, and were .but little disposed to cherish the 
* Macaulay, History of England, vol. i. p. 392, who cites Nichols. 



CHAP. XII.] NO PENALTIES FOR DISSENT. 163 

doctrine of the gradual development of Christianity. The Roman 
ists had stopped short at the council of Trent, when the decrees 
of a general council were canonized by the sanction of an infal 
lible Pope. In like manner, almost every Protestant church has 
acted as if religion ceased to be progressive at the precise moment 
of time when their own articles of belief were drawn up, after 
much dispute and difference of opinion. 

But the precepts inculcated by Pastor Robinson were delivered 
to a body of men whose form of ecclesiastical polity was very 
peculiar ; who held that each congregation, each separate society 
of fellow- worshipers, constituted within themselves a perfect and 
independent church, whose duty it was to compose for itself and 
modify at pleasure its rules of scriptural interpretation. In con 
formity with these ideas, the common law of New England had 
ruled, that the majority of the pew-holders in each church should 
retain their property in a meeting-house, and any endowment 
belonging to it, whatever new opinions they might, in the course 
of time, choose to adopt. In other words, if, in the lapse of ages, 
they should deviate from the original standard of faith, they 
should not suffer the usual penalties of dissent, by being dispos 
sessed of the edifice in which they were accustomed to worship, 
or of any endowments given or bequeathed for a school-house or 
the support of a pastor, but should continue to hold them ; the 
minority who still held fast to the original tenets of the sect, 
having to seek a new place of worship, but being allowed to 
dispose of their pews, as of every other freehold, if purchasers 
could be found. 

Every year in some parts of New England, where the popu 
lation is on the increase, the manner in which some one of these 
new congregations starts into existence may be seen. A few 
individuals, twenty perhaps, are in the habit of meeting together 
on the Sabbath in a private dwelling, or in the school-house 
already built for the children of all denominations in the new 
village. One of the number offers a prayer, another reads a 
chapter in the Bible, another a printed sermon, and perhaps a 
fourth offers remarks, by way of exhortation, to his neighbors. 
As the population increases, they begin to think of forming them- 



164 CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES. [CHAP. XTI. 

selves into a church, and settling a minister. But first they 
have to agree upon some creed or covenant which is to be the 
basis of their union. In drawing up this creed they are usually 
assisted by some neighboring minister, and it is then submitted 
for approbation to a meeting of all the church members, and 
is thoroughly discussed and altered till it suits the peculiar and 
prevailing shades of opinion of the assembly. When at length 
it is assented to, it is submitted to a council of neighboring 
ministers, who examine into its scriptural basis, and who, accord 
ing as they approve or disapprove of it, give or withhold " the 
hand of fellowship." 

The next step is to elect a pastor. After hearing several 
candidates preach, they invite one to remain with them ; and, 
after he has been ordained by the neighboring ministers, agree 
on the salary to be insured to him, for the collection of which 
certain members become responsible. It rarely exceeds 700 
dollars, and more usually amounts in rural districts to 500 dol 
lars, or 100 guineas annually. 

By the Congregationalists, a church is defined to be a com 
pany of pious persons, who voluntarily unite together for the 
worship of God. Each company being self-created, is entirely 
independent of every other, has the power to elect its own offi 
cers, and to admit or exclude members. Each professes to regard 
creeds and confessions of faith simply as convenient guides in the 
examination of candidates, not standards of religious truth. They 
may be the opinions of good and wise men, venerable by their 
antiquity, but of no binding authority, and are to be measured 
in each separate church by their conformity with Scripture. As 
to the union of different churches, it is pure]y voluntary, and has 
been compared to a congress of sovereign states, having certain 
general interests in common, but entirely independent of each 
other. There are no articles of union ; but if any old or new 
society is thought to depart so widely from the other churches 
that they can no longer be recognized as Christians, the rest 
withhold or withdraw their fellowship. 

Upon the whole, the separate congregational churches, both 
in Old and New England, in all above 3000 in number, have 



CHAP. XII.] CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES. 165 

held together more firmly for two centuries, and have deviated 
far less from the original standard of faith, than might have 
been expected ; although in Massachusetts and some neighboring 
States, more than a hundred meeting-houses, some of them hav 
ing endowments belonging to them, have in the course of the 
last forty years been quietly transferred, by the majority of the 
pew-holders, to what may be said to constitute new denomina 
tions. The change usually takes place when a new minister is 
inducted. This system of ecclesiastical polity is peculiarly re 
pugnant to the ideas entertained by churchmen in general, whose 
elibrts are almost invariably directed, whether in Protestant or 
Romanist communities, to inculcate a deep sense of the guilt of 
schism, and to visit that guilt as far as possible with pecuniary 
penalties and spiritual outlawry. The original contract is usually 
based on a tacit assumption that religion is not, like other branch 
es of knowledge, progressive in its nature ; and, therefore, instead 
of leaving the mind unfettered and free to embrace and profess 
new interpretations, as would be thought desirable where the 
ivorks of God are the subjects of investigation, every precaution is 
taken to prevent doubt, fluctuation, and change. It is even 
deemed justifiable to exact early vows and pledges against the 
teaching of any new doctrines ; and if the zealous inquirer should, 
in the course of years and much reading, catch glimpses of truths 
not embodied in his creed, riay, the very grounds of which could 
not be known to him when he entered the church, nor to the 
original framers of his articles of religion, no provision is made 
for enabling him to break silence, or openly to declare that he 
has modified his views. On the contrary, such a step must 
usually be attended with disgrace, and often with destitution. 

Nor does the intensity of this feeling seem by any means to 
diminish in modern times with the multiplication of new sects. 
It is even exhibited as strongly in bodies which dissent from old 
establishments as in those establishments themselves. Wesley, 
for example, took the utmost care that every Methodist chapel 
should be so vested in the " General Conference," as to insure 
the forfeiture of the building to the trustees, if any particular 
congregation should deviate from his standard of faith, or even 



166 FUTURE VARIATIONS IN CREEDS. [HAP. XII, 

should return to the Church of England, whose doctrines they 
had never renounced. But the most signal instance of a fixed 
determination to prevent any one congregation from changing its 
mind in regard to any dogma or rite, until all the others associat 
ed with it are ready to move on in the same direction, has been 
exemplified in our times by the Free Kirk of Scotland. More 
than a million of the population suddenly deserted the old estab 
lishment, and were compelled to abandon hundreds of ecclesiasti 
cal buildings, in which they had worshiped from their childhood. 
Some of these edifices remained useless for a time, locked up, 
and no service performed in them, because the minister and 
nearly all the parishioners had joined in the secession. It was 
necessary for the separatists to erect 700 or 800 new edifices 
and school-houses, on which they expended several hundred 
thousand pounds, having often no small difficulty to obtain new 
sites for churches, so that their ministers preached for a time, 
like the Covenanters of old, in the open air. It was under these 
circumstances, and at the moment of submitting to such sacrifices, 
that their new ecclesiastical organization was completed, provid 
ing that if any one of several hundred congregations should here 
after deviate, in ever so slight a degree, from any one of the 
numerous articles of faith drawn up nearly three centuries ago, 
under the sanction of John Knox, or from any one of the rules and 
forms of church government then enacted, they should be dispos 
sessed of the newly erected building, and all funds thereunto 
belonging. Had any other contract been proposed, implying the 
possibility of any future change or improvement in doctrine or 
ceremony, not a farthing would have been contributed by these 
zealous Presbyterians ; nor have they acted inconsistently, inas 
much as they are fully persuaded that they neither participate in 
an onward or backward movement, but are simply reverting to 
that pure and perfect standard of orthodoxy of the middle of the 
sixteenth century, from which others have so sinfully departed. 

It is only in times comparatively modern, that the opinion has 
gained ground in Europe, and very recently in Scotland, that in 
the settlement of landed property there should be some limitation 
of the power of the dead over the living, and that a testator can 



CHAP. XII.] FUTURE VARIATIONS IN CREEDS. 167 

not be gifted with such foresight as to enable him to know 
beforehand in what manner, and subject to what conditions, his 
wealth may be best distributed among his descendants, several 
generations hence, for their own benefit or that of the community 
at large. Whether, in ecclesiastical matters, also, there should 
not be some means provided of breaking the entail without resort 
ing to what is termed in Scotland " a disruption," so that devia 
tions from theological formularies many centuries old, should not 
be visited with pecuniary losses or disgrace whether it be ex 
pedient to allow the Romanist or Calvinist, the Swedenborgian 
or Socinian, and every other sectary to enforce, by the whole 
power of the wealth he may bequeath to posterity, the teaching 
of his own favorite dogmas for an indefinite time, and when a 
large part of the population on whom he originally bestowed his* 
riches have altered their minds, are points on which a gradual 
change has been taking place in the opinions of not a few of the 
higher classes at least. Of this no one will doubt who remem 
bers or will refer to the debates in both Houses of the British 
Parliament in 1844,^ and the speeches of eminent statesmen of 
opposite politics when the Dissenters Chapel Bill was discussed. 
But whatever variety of views there may still be on this sub 
ject in Europe, it is now the settled opinion of many of the most 
thoughtful of the New Englanders, that the assertion of the 
independence of each separate congregation, was as great a step 
toward freedom of conscience as all that had been previously 
gained by Luther s Reformation ; and it constitutes one of those 
characteristics of church government in New England, which, 
whether approved of or not, can not with propriety be lost sight 
of, when we endeavor to trace out the sources of the love of pro 
gress, which has taken so strong a hold of the public mind in New 
England, and which has so much facilitated their plan of national 
education. To show how widely the spirit of their peculiar 
ecclesiastical system has spread, I may state that even the 
Roman Catholics have, in different states, and in three or foui 
cases (one of which is still pending, in 18489), made an appeal 
to the courts of law, and endeavored to avail themselves of the 
* See the Debates on 7 & 8 Viet., ch. xlv, A D. 1844. 



168 CONGREGATIONAL POLITY. [CHAP. XII. 

principle of the Independents, so that the majority of a separate 
congregation should be entitled to resist the appointment by their 
bishop of a priest to whom they had strong objections. The 
courts seem hitherto to have determined that, as the building 
belonged to the majority of the pew-holders, they might deal 
with it as they pleased ; but they have declined to pronounce 
any opinion on points of ecclesiastical discipline, leaving the 
members of each sect free, in this respect, to obey the dictates 
of their own conscience. 

But to exemplify the more regular working of the congrega 
tional polity within its own legitimate sphere, I will mention a 
recent case which came more home to my own scientific pursuits. 
A. young man of superior talent, with whom I was acquainted, 
who was employed as a geologist in the state survey of Pennsyl 
vania, was desirous of becoming a minister of the Presbyterian 
Church in that state ; but, when examined, previous to ordina 
tion, he was unable to give satisfactory answers to questions 
respecting the plenary inspiration of Scripture, because he con 
sidered such a tenet, when applied to the first book of Gene 
sis, inconsistent with discoveries now universally admitted, re 
specting the high antiquity of the earth, and the existence of 
living beings on the globe long anterior to man. The rejected 
candidate, whose orthodoxy on all other points was fully admitted, 
was then invited by an Independent congregation in New En 
gland, to become their pastor ; and when he accepted the offer, 
the other associated churches were called upon to decide whether 
they would assist in ordaining one who claimed the right to teach 
freely his own views on the question at issue. The right of the 
congregation to elect him, whether the other churches approved 
of the doctrine or not, was conceded ; and a strong inclination is 
always evinced, by the affiliated societies, to come, if possible, to 
an amicable understanding. Accordingly, a discussion ensued, 
and is perhaps still going on, whether, consistently with a fair 
interpretation of Scripture, or with what is essential to the faith 
of a Christian, the doctrine of complete and immediate inspiration 
may or may not be left as an open question. 

Some of my readers may perhaps exclaim that this incident 



CHAP. XII. ] CHURCHMEN ON PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 169 

proves that the Congregationalists of New England are far behind 
many orthodox divines of the Church of England, or even the 
Church of Rome, as shown by Dr. Wiseman s lectures, in the 
liberality of their opinions on this head, and that the establish 
ment of the true theory of astronomy satisfied the Protestant 
world, at least, that the Bible was never intended as a revelation 
of physical science. No doubt it is most true, that within the 
last forty years many distinguished writers and dignitaries of the 
English Church have expressed their belief very openly in regard 
to the earth s antiquity, and the leading truths established by 
geology. " The Records of Creation," published in 1818, by the 
present Archbishop of Canterbury (Dr. Sumner), the writings of 
the present Dean of Westminster (Dr. Buckland), those of the 
Dean of LlandafF(Dr. Conybeare), and of the Woodwardian Pro 
fessor of Cambridge (The Rev. A. Sedgwick), and others, might 
be adduced in confirmation. All of these, indeed, have been 
cited by the first teachers of geology in America, especially in the 
" orthodox universities" of New England, as countenancing the 
adoption of their new theories ; and I have often heard scientific 
men in America express their gratitude to the English Church 
men for the protection which their high authority afforded them 
against popular prejudices at a critical moment, when many of 
the State Legislatures were deliberating whether they should or 
should not appropriate large sums of the public money to the pro 
motion of geological surveys. The point, however, under dis 
cussion in the Congregationalist Church, to which I have alluded, 
is in reality a different one, and of the utmost importance ; for it 
is no less than to determine, not whether a minister may publish 
books or essays declaratory of his own individual views, respect 
ing the bearing of physical science on certain portions of Scrip 
ture, but whether he may, without reproach or charge of indis 
cretion, freely and candidly expound to all whom he addresses, 
rich and poor, from the pulpit, those truths on which few well- 
informed men now any longer entertain a doubt. Until such 
permission be fairly granted, the initiated may, as we well know, 
go on for ages embracing one creed, while the multitude holds 
fast to another, and looks with suspicion and distrust on the phi- 

VOL: I. H 



170 BIBLICAL CONTROVERSY. [CHAP. XII. 

losopher who unreservedly makes known the most legitimate de 
ductions from facts. Such, in truth, is the present condition of 
things throughout Christendom, the millions being left in the 
same darkness respecting the antiquity of the globe, and the suc 
cessive races of animals and plants which inhabited it before the 
creation of man, as they were in the middle ages ; or, rather, 
each new generation being allowed to grow up with, or derive 
from Genesis, ideas directly hostile to the conclusions universally 
received by all who have studied the earth s autobiography. Not 
merely the multitude, but many of those who are called learned, 
still continue, while beholding with delight the external beauty 
of the rocks and mountains, to gaze on them as Virgil s hero ad 
mired his shield of divine workmanship, without dreaming of its 
historical import : 

" Dona parentis 
Miratur, rerumque ignarus imagine gaudet." 

The extent to which, in Protestant countries, and where there 
is a free press, opinions universally entertained by the higher 
classes, may circulate among them in print and may yet remain 
a sealed book to the million as completely as if they were still in 
sacerdotal keeping, is such as no one antecedently to experience 
would have believed possible. The discoveries alluded to are by 
no means confined to the domain of physical science. I may cite 
as one remarkable example the detection of the spurious nature 
of the celebrated verse in the First Epistle of John, chap. v. verse 
7, commonly called "the Three Heavenly Witnesses." Luther, 
in the last edition which he published of the Bible, had expunged 
this passage as spurious ; but, shortly after his death, it was re 
stored by his followers, in deference to popular prepossessions and 
Trinitarian opinions. Erasmus omitted it in his editions of the 
New Testament in the years 1516 and 1519; and after it had 
been excluded by several other eminent critics, Sir Isaac Newton 
wrote his celebrated dissertation on the subject between the years 
1690 and 1700, strengthening the arguments previously adduced 
against the genuineness of the verse. Finally, Porson published, 
in 1788 and 1790, his famous letters, by which the question was 



CHAP. XII.] BIBLICAL CONTROVERSY. 171 

forever set at rest. It was admitted that in. all the Greek MSS. 
of the highest antiquity, the disputed passages were wanting, and 
Person enumerated a long list of Greek and Latin authors, in 
cluding the names of many fathers of the Church, who, in their 
controversies with Arians and Socinians, had not availed them 
selves of the text in question, although they had cited some of 
the verses which immediately precede and follow, which lend a 
comparatively feeble support to their argument. 

All who took the lead against the genuineness of the passage, 
except Sir Isaac Newton, were Trinitarians ; but doubtless felt 
with Person, that " he does the best service to truth who hinders 
it from being supported by falsehood." Throughout the con 
troversy, many eminent divines of the Anglican church have 
distinguished themselves by their scholarship and candor, and it 
is well known by those who have of late years frequented the 
literary circles of Rome, that the learned Cardinal Mai was 
prevented, in 1838, from publishing his edition of the Codex 
Vaticanus, because he could not obtain leave from the late Pope 
(Gregory XVI.) to omit the interpolated passages, and had 
satisfied himself that they were wanting in all the most ancient 
MSS. at Rome and Paris. The Pontiff refused, because he was 
bound by the decrees of the Council of Trent, and of a Church 
pretending to infallibility, which had solemnly sanctioned the 
Vulgate, and the Cardinal had too much good faith to give the 
authority of his name to what he regarded as a forgery. In Ox 
ford, in 1819, the verse was riot admitted, by the examiners in 
Divinity, as Scripture warranty for the doctrine of the Trinity ; 
yet, not only is it retained in the English Prayer-Book, in the 
epistle selected for the first Sunday after Easter, but the Protest 
ant Episcopal Church in America, when finally revising their 
version of the English Liturgy in 1801, several years after 
Person s letters had been published, did not omit the passage, 
although they had the pruning knife in their hand, and were lop 
ping off several entire services, such as the Commination, Gun 
powder Treason, King Charles the Martyr, the Restoration of 
Charles II., and last, not least, the Athanasian Creed. What 
is still more remarkable, Protestants of every denomination have 



172 HOGARTH S ELECTION FEAST. [CHAP. XII. 

gone on year after year distributing hundreds of thousands of 
Bibles, not only without striking out this repudiated verse, but 
without even affixing to it any mark or annotation to show the 
multitude that it is given up by every one who has the least 
pretension to scholarship and candor. 

* Let Truth, stern arbitress of all, 
Interpret that original, 
And for presumptuous wrongs atone ; 
Authentic words be given, or none !" 

It is from no want of entire sympathy with the sentiment 
expressed in these lines of Wordsworth, and written by him on 
a blank leaf of Macpherson s Ossian, that literary or scientific 
men, whether Protestant or Catholic, European or American, 
clergy or laity, abstain in general from communicating the results 
of their scientific or biblical researches to the million, still less 
from any apprehension that the essential truths of Christianity 
would suffer the slightest injury, were the new views to be 
universally known. They hesitate, partly from false notions of 
expediency, and partly through fear of the prejudices of the vulgar. 
They dare not speak out, for the same reason that the civil and 
ecclesiastical rulers of England halted for one hundred and 
seventy years before they had courage to adopt the reform in the 
Julian calendar, which Gregory XIII., in accordance with astro 
nomical observations, had effected in 1582. 

Hogarth, in his picture of the Election Feast, has introduced 
a banner carried by one of the crowd, on which was inscribed 
the motto, " Give us back our eleven days," for he remembered 
when the angry mob, irritated by the innovation of the new 
style, went screaming these words through the streets of London. 

In like manner, the acknowledged antiquity of Egyptian civil 
ization, or of the solid framework of the globe, with its monu 
ments of many extinct races of living beings, might, if suddenly 
disclosed to an ignorant people, raise as angry a demand to give 
them back their old chronology. Hence arises a habit of con 
cealing from the unlettered public discoveries which might, it is 
thought, perplex them, and unsettle their old opinions. This 
method of dealing with the most sacred of subjects, may thus be 



CHAP. XII.] LAY TEACHERS. 173 

illustrated : A few tares have grown up among the wheat ; 
you must not pull them up, or you will loosen the soil and expose 
the roofs of the good grain, arid then all may wither : moreover, 
you must go on sowing the seeds of the same tares in the mind 
of the rising generation, for you can not open the eyes of the 
children without undeceiving and alarming their parents. Now 
the perpetuation of error among the many, is only one part of 
the mischief of this want of good faith, for it is also an abandon 
ment by the few of the high ground on which their religion 
ought to stand, namely, its truth. It accustoms the teacher to 
regard his religion in its relation to the millions as a mere piece 
of machinery, like a police, for preserving order, or enabling one 
class of men to govern another. 

If such a state of things be unsound and unsatisfactory, it is 
not so much the clergy who are to blame as the laity ; for lay 
men have more freedom of action, and can with less sacrifice of 
personal interests take the initiative in a reform. The cure of 
the evil is obvious ; it consists in giving such instruction to the 
people at large as would make concealment impossible. What 
ever is known and intelligible to ordinary capacities in science, 
especially if contrary to the first and natural impressions deriv 
able from the literal meaning, or ordinary acceptation of the text 
of Scripture, whether in astronomy, geology, or any other depart 
ment of knowledge, should be freely communicated to all. Lay 
teachers, not professionally devoted and pledged to propagate the 
opinions of particular sects, will do this much more freely than 
ecclesiastics, and, as a matter of course, in proportion as the 
standard of public instruction is raised ; and no order of men 
would be such gainers by the measure as the clergy, especially 
the most able and upright among them. Every normal school, 
every advance made in the social and intellectual position of the 
lay teachers, tends to emancipate, not the masses alone, but still 
more effectually their spiritual guides, and would increase their 
usefulness in a tenfold degree. That a clergy may be well 
informed for the age they live in, and may contain among them 
many learned and good men, while the people remain in dark 
ness, we know from history ; for the spiritual instructors may 



174 PAY OF CLERGY. [CHAP. XII. 

wish to keep the multitude in ignorance, with a view of main 
taining their own po\yer. But no educated people will ever 
tolerate an idle, illiterate, or stationary priesthood. That this is 
impossible, the experience of the last quarter of a century in 
New England has fully proved. In confirmation of this truth, 
I may appeal to the progress made by the ministers of the Meth 
odist and Baptist churches of late years. Their missionaries 
found the Congregationalists slumbering in all the security of an 
old establishment, and soon made numerous converts, besides 
recruiting their ranks largely from newly arrived emigrants. 
They were able to send more preachers into the vineyard, be 
cause they required at first scarcely any preparation or other 
qualification than zeal. . But no sooner had the children of the 
first converts been taught in the free schools under an improved 
system, than the clergy of these very denominations, who had 
for a time gloried in their ignorance and spoken with contempt 
of all human knowledge, found it necessary to study for some 
years in theological seminaries, and attend courses of church 
history, the Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and German languages, the 
modern writings of German and other biblical scholars, and 
every branch of divinity. The Baptist college at Newton has 
greatly distinguished itself among others, and that of the Meth 
odists at Middletown in Connecticut ; while the Independents 
have their theological college at Andover in Massachusetts, which 
has acquired much celebrity, and drawn to it pupils from great 
distances, and of many different denominations. 

The large collections of books on divinity which are now seen 
in the libraries of New England clergy, were almost unknown 
a quarter of a century ago. 

The average pay, also, of the clergy in the rural districts of 
New England has increased. About the middle of the last 
century, it was not more than 200 dollars annually, so that they 
were literally " passing rich with forty pounds a year ;" whereas 
now they usually receive 500 at least, and some in the cities 
2000 or 3000 dollars. Nor can there be a doubt that, in pro 
portion as the lay teachers are more liberally remunerated, the 
scale of income required to command the services of men of 



CHAP. XIL] POPULAR INSTRUCTION. 175 

first-rate talent in the clerical profession, must and will be 
raised. 

Already there are many indications in Massachusetts that a 
demand for higher qualifications in men educated for the pulpit 
is springing up. It is no bad augury to hear a minister exhort 
his younger brethren at their ordination not to stand in awe of 
their congregations, but to remember they have before them sin 
ful men who are to be warned, not critics who are to be propi 
tiated. " Formerly," said Channing, " Felix trembled before 
Paul ; it is now the successor of Paul who trembles :" a saying 
which, coming as it did from a powerful and successful preacher, 
implies that the people are awaking, not that they are growing 
indifferent about religious matters, but that the day of soporific 
discourses, full of empty declamation or unmeaning common 
places, is drawing to a close. 

It will be asked, however, even by some who are favorable to 
popular education, whether the masses can have leisure to profit 
in after life by such a style of teaching as the government of 
Massachusetts is now ambitious of affording to the youth of the 
country, between the ages of four and fourteen. To this I may 
answer, that in nations less prosperous and progressive it is ascer 
tained that men may provide for all their bodily wants, may feed 
and clothe themselves, and yet give up one-seventh part of their 
time, or every Sabbath, to their religious duties. That their re 
ligion should consist not merely in the cultivation of a devotional 
spirit toward their Maker, but also in acquiring pure and lofty 
conceptions of his attributes a knowledge of the power and 
wisdom displayed in his works an acquaintance with his moral 
laws a just sense of their own responsibility, and an exercise of 
their understandings in appreciating the evidences of their faith, 
few of my readers will deny. To insure the accomplishment of 
these objects, a preparatory education in good schools is indis 
pensable. It is not enough to build churches and cathedrals, to 
endow universities or theological colleges, or to devote a large 
portion of the national revenues to enable a body of spiritual in 
structors to discharge, among other ecclesiastical duties, that ot 
preaching good sermons from the pulpit. Their seed may full 



176 POPULAR INSTRUCTION. [CHAP. XII. 

on a soil naturally fertile, but will perish if there has been no 
previous culture of the ground. At the end of seventy years 
men of good natural abilities, who have been attentive to their 
religious observances, have given up ten entire years of their life, 
a period thrice as long as is required for an academical course 
of study, and at the close of such a career may, as we know, be 
ignorant, sensual, and superstitious, and have little love or taste 
for things intellectual or spiritual. 

But granting that time and leisure may be found, it will still 
be asked whether, if men of the humblest condition be taught to 
enjoy the poems of Milton and Gray, the romances of Scott, or 
lectures on literature, astronomy, and botany, or if they read a 
daily newspaper and often indulge in the stirring excitement of 
party politics, they will be contented with their situation in life, 
and submit to hard labor. All apprehension of such consequences 
is rapidly disappearing in the more advanced states of the Ameri 
can Union. It is acknowledged by the rich that, where the free 
schools have been most improved, the people are least addicted 
to intemperance, are more provident, have more respect for prop 
erty and the laws, are more conservative, and less led away by 
socialist or other revolutionary doctrines. So far from indolence 
being the characteristic of the laboring classes, where they are 
best informed, the New Englanders are rather too much given to 
overwork both body and brain. They make better pioneers, 
when roughing it in a log-house in the backwoods, than the un 
educated Highlander or Irishman ; and the factory girls of 
Lowell, who publish their " Offering," containing their own 
original poems and essays, work twelve hours a day, and have 
not yet petitioned for a ten-hour bill. 

In speculating on the probability of the other states in the 
north, south, and west, some of them differing greatly in the de 
gree of their social advancement, and many of them retarded by 
negro slavery, adopting readily the example set them by the 
New Englanders. and establishing free and normal schools, I 
find that American enthusiasts build their hopes chiefly on that 
powerful stimulus which they say is offered by their institutions 
for popular education a stimulus such as was never experienced 



CHAP. XII.] POPULAR INSTRUCTION. 177 

before in any country in the world. This consists not so much 
in the absence of pauperism, or in the individual liberty enjoyed 
by every one in civil and religious rights, but in the absence of 
the influence of family and fortune the fair field of competition, 
freely open to all who aspire, however humble, to rise one day 
to high employments, especially to official or professional posts, 
whether lay or ecclesiastical, civil or military, requiring early 
cultivation. Few will realize their ambitious longings ; but 
every parent feels it a duty to provide that his child should not 
be shut out from all chance of winning some one of the numerous 
prizes, which are awarded solely on the ground of personal quali 
fications, not always to the most worthy, but at least without 
any regard to birth or hereditary wealth. It seems difficult to 
foresee the limit of taxation which a population, usually very in 
tolerant of direct taxes, will not impose on themselves to secure 
an object in which they have all so great a stake, nor does any 
serious obstacle or influence seem likely to oppose their will. 
There is in no state, for example, any dominant ecclesiastical 
body sufficiently powerful to thwart the maxims of those states 
men who maintain that, as the people are determined to govern 
themselves, they must be carefully taught and fitted for self- 
government, and receive secular instruction in common schools 
open to all. The Roman Catholic priests, it is true, in the state 
of New York, where there are now 11,000 schools in a popula 
tion of two millions and a half, have made some vigorous efforts 
to get the exclusive management of a portion of the school funds 
into their own hands, and one, at least, of the Protestant sects 
has openly avowed its sympathy in the movement. But they 
have failed from the extreme difficulty of organizing a combined 
effort, where the leaders of a great variety of rival denominations 
are jealous of one another ; and, fortunately, the clergy are be 
coming more and more convinced that, where the education of 
the million has been carried farthest, the people are most regular 
in their attendance on public worship, most zealous in the de 
fense of their theological opinions, and most liberal in contribut 
ing funds for the support of their pastors and the building of 
churches. 

H* 



CHAPTER XIII. 

Leaving Boston for the South. Railway Stove. Fall of Snow. New Haven, 
and Visit to Professor Silliman. New York. Improvements in the 
City. Croton Waterworks. Fountains. Recent Conflagration. New 
Churches. Trinity Church. News from Europe of Converts to Rome. 
Reaction against Tractarians. Electric Telegraph, its Progress in 
America. Morse and Wheatstone. 11,000 Schools in New York for 
Secular Instruction. Absence of Smoke. Irish Voters. Nativism. 

Dec. 3. 1 845. HAVING resolved to devote the next six months 
of my stay in America to a geological exploration of those parts 
of the country which I had not yet visited, I left Boston just as 
the cold weather was setting in, to spend the winter in the south. 
The thermometer had fallen to 23 F., and on our way to the 
cars we saw skaters on the ice in the common. Soon after we 
started, heavy snow began to fall, but in spite of the storm we 
were carried to Springfield, 100 miles, in five hours. We passed 
a luggage train with twenty-two loaded cars, rolling past us in 
the opposite direction, on 1 wheels, including those of the engine 
and tender. In the English railways, the passengers often suffer 
much from cold in winter. Here, the stove in the center of the 
long omnibus is a great luxury, and I saw one traveler after an 
other leave his seat, walk up to it and warm his feet on the fender. 
As I was standing there, a gentleman gave me the President s 
speech to read, which, by means of a railway express, had, for 
the first time, been brought from Washington to Boston, 470 
miles, in one day. It was read with interest, as all were 
speculating on the probability of a war with England about 
Oregon. While I was indulging my thoughts on the rapid 
communication of intelligence by newspapers and the speed and 
safety of railway traveling, a fellow-passenger interrupted my 
pleasing reveries by telling me I was standing too near the iron 
stove, which had scorched my clothes and burnt a hole in my 
great coat, and immediately afterward I learnt at Springfield, that 



CHAP. XIII. ] VISIT TO PROFESSOR SILLIMAN. 179 

the cars on the line between that town and Albany, where there 
is only one track, had run against a luggage train near Chester, 
and many passengers were injured. Some say that two were 
killed. According to others, one of the trains was five minutes 
before its time ; but our informant took my thoughts back to 
England, and English narratives of the like catastrophes by say 
ing, " It has been ascertained that no one was to blame." We 
had no reason to boast of our speed the next day, for we were 
twelve hours in going sixty- two miles to New Haven. The delay 
was caused by ice on the rail, and by our having to wait to let 
the New York train pass us, there being only one line of rail. 
A storm in the Sound had occasioned the New York cars to be 
five hours behind their time. We saw many sleighs dashing 
past and crossing our road. It was late before we reached the 
hospitable house of Professor Silliman, who with his son gave me 
jnany valuable instructions for my southern tour. Their letters 
of introduction, however, though most useful, were a small part 
of the service they did me both in this tour and during my former 
visit to America. Every where, even in the states most remote 
from New England, I met with men who, having been the pupils 
of Professor Silliman, and having listened to his lectures when at 
college, had invariably imbibed a love for natural history and 
physical science. 

In the morning, when we embarked in the steamer for New 
York, I was amused at the different aspect of the New Haven 
scenery from that which I remembered in the autumn of 1841. 
The East Rock was now covered with snow, all but the bold 
precipice of columnar basalt. The trees, several of which, espe 
cially the willows, still retained many of their leaves, were bent 
down beneath a weight of ice. I never saw so brilliant a spec 
tacle of the kind, for every bough of the large drooping elms and 
the smallest twigs of every tree and shrub were hung with trans 
parent icicles, which, in the bright sunshine, reflected the pris 
matic colors like the cut-glass drops of a chandelier. As we sailed 
out of the harbor, which was crowded with vessels, we saw all 
the ropes of their riggings similarly adorned with crystals of ice. 
A stormy voyage of nine hours carried us through Long Island 



180 CROTON WATERWORKS. [CHAP. XIII. 

Sound, a distance of ninety miles, to New York. It is only three 
years since we were last in this city, yet in this short interval we 
see improvements equaling in importance the increase of the 
population, which now amounts in round numbers to 440,000 ; 
New York containing 361,000, and Brooklyn, which is con 
nected with it "by a ferry, together with Williamsburg 79,000. 
Among other novelties since 1841, we observe with pleasure the 
new fountains in the midst of the city supplied from the Croton 
waterworks, finer than any which I remember to have seen in 
the center of a city since I was last in Rome. Two of them 
are now, in spite of an intense frost, throwing up columns of water 
more than thirty feet high, one opposite the City Hall, and an 
other in Hudson Square ; but I am told that when we return in 
the summer we shall see many others in action. A work more 
akin in magnificence to the ancient and modern Roman aqueducts 
has not been achieved in our times ; the water having been, 
brought from the Croton river, a distance of about forty miles, 
at the expense of about three millions sterling. The health of 
the city is said to have already gained by greater cleanliness and 
more wholesome water for drinking ; and I hear from an eminent 
physician that statistical tables show that cases of infantine cholera 
and some other complaints have sensibly lessened. The water can 
be carried to the attics of every house, and many are introducing 
baths and indulging in ornamental fountains in private gardens. 
The rate of insurance for fire has been lowered ; and I could not 
help reflecting as I looked at the moving water, at a season when 
every pond is covered with ice, how much more security the city 
must now enjoy than during the great conflagration in the winter 
of 1835, when there was such a want of water to supply the 
engines. Only five months ago (July 19th, 1845), another 
destructive fire broke out near the battery, and when it was 
nearly extinguished by the aid of the Croton water, a tremendous 
explosion of saltpeter killed many of the firemen, and scattered 
the burning materials to great distances, igniting houses in every 
direction. A belief that more gunpowder still remained imex- 
ploded checked for a time the approach of the firemen, so tnat a 
large area was laid waste, and even now some of the ruins are 



CHAP. XIII.] NEW CHURCHES. 181 

smoking, there being a smoldering heat in cellars filled with 
"dry goods." When the citizens of London rejected the splendid 
plan which Sir Christopher Wren proposed for its restoration, he 
declared that they had not deserved a fire, but the New Yorkers 
seem to have taken full advantage of the late catastrophe. As 
it was the business part of the city which the flames laid in 
ruins, we could not expect much display of ornamental architec 
ture ; but already, before the ashes have done smoking, we see 
entire streets of substantial houses which have risen to their full 
height, and the ground has been raised five feet higher than 
formerly above the river, so a to secure it from inundations, 
which has so enhanced its value, that many of the sites alone 
have sold for prices equal to the value of the buildings which 
once covered them. Among the new edifices, we were shown 
some which are fire-proof. Unfortunately, many a fine tree has 
been burned, and they are still standing without their bark, but 
the weeping willows bordering the river on the Battery have 
escaped unsinged. 

Among the new features of the city we see several fine church 
es, some built from their foundations, others finished since 1841. 
The wooden spires of several are elegant, and so solid, as to have 
all the outward effect of stone. The two most conspicuous of 
the new edifices are Episcopalian, Trinity and Grace Church. 
The cost of the former has been chiefly defrayed by funds derived 
from the rent of houses in New York, bequeathed long since to 
the Episcopal Church. The expense is said to have equaled 
that of erecting any four other churches in the city. It is entire 
ly of stone, a fine-grained sandstone of an agreeable light-brown 
tint. The top of the steeple is 289 feet from the ground. The 
effect of the Gothic architecture is very fine, and the Episcopa 
lians may now boast that of all the ecclesiastical edifices of this 
continent, they have erected the most beautiful. Its position is 
admirably chosen, as it forms a prominent feature in Broadway, 
the principal street, and in another direction looks down Wall- 
street, the great center of city business. It is therefore seen 
from great distances in this atmosphere, so beautifully clear even 
at this season, when every stove is lighted, and when the ther- 



182 TRINITY CHURCH. [Cmu>. XIII. 

mometer has fallen twenty degrees below the freezing point. 
Where there is so much bright sunshine and no smoke, an archi 
tect may well be inspired with ambition, conscious that the effect 
of every pillar and other ornament will be fully brought out with 
their true lights and shades. The style of the exterior of Trinity 
Church reminds us of some of our old Gothic churches in Lin 
colnshire and Northamptonshire. The interior is in equally good 
taste, the middle aisle sixty-five feet high, but the clustered 
columns will not have so stately an appearance, nor display 
their true proportions when the wooden pews have been intro 
duced round their base. An attempt was made to dispense 
with these ; but the measure could not be carried ; in fact, much 
as we may admire the architectural beauty of such a cathedral, 
one can not but feel that such edifices were planned by the 
genius of other ages, and adapted to a different form of worship. 
When the forty-five windows of painted glass are finished, and 
the white-robed choristers are singing the Cathedral service, to 
be performed here daily, and when the noble organ peals forth 
its swelling notes to the arched roof, the whole service will 
remind us of the days of Romanism, rather than seem suitable 
to the wants of a Protestant congregation. It is not the form 
of building best fitted for instructing a large audience. To make 
the whole in keeping, we ought to throw down the pews, and let 
processions of priests in their robes of crimson, embroidered with 
gold, preceded by boys swinging censers, and followed by a crowd 
of admiring devotees, sweep through the spacious nave. 

That the whole pomp and splendor of the ancient ceremonial 
will gradually be restored, with no small portion of its kindred 
dogmas, is a speculation in which some are said to be actually 
indulging their thoughts, and is by no means so visionary an idea 
as half a century ago it might have been thought. In the dio 
cese of New York, the party which has adopted the views com 
monly called Puseyite, appears to have gone greater lengths 
than in any part of England. The newspapers published in 
various parts of the Union bear testimony to a wide extension of 
the like movement. We read, for example, a statement of a 
bishop who has ordered the revolving reading-desk of a curate to 



CHAP. XIII.] CONVERTS TO ROME. 183 

be nailed to the wall, that he might be unable to turn with it 
toward the altar. The offending clergyman has resigned for the 
sake of peace, and part of his congregation sympathizing in his 
views have raised for him a sum of 6000 dollars. In another 
paper I see a letter of remonstrance from a bishop to an Episco 
pal clergyman, for attending vespers in a Romanist church, and 
for crossing himself with holy water as he entered. The epistle 
finishes with an inquiry if it be true that he had purchased 
several copies of the Ursuline Manual for young persons. The 
clergyman, in reply, complains of this petty and annoying inqui 
sition into his private affairs, openly avows that he is earnestly 
examining into the history, character, claims, doctrines, and 
usages of the Church of Rome, and desirous of becoming practi 
cally acquainted with their forms of worship that when present 
for this purpose he had thought it right to conform to the usage 
of the congregation, &c. 

It would be easy to multiply anecdotes, and advert to contro 
versial pamphlets, with which the press is teeming, in proof of 
the lively interest now taken in similar ecclesiastical questions, 
so that the reader may conceive the sensation just created here 
by a piece of intelligence which reached New York the very day 
of our arrival, and is now going the round of the newspapers, 
namely, the conversion to the Romish -Church of the Rev. Mr. 
Newman, of Oxford. Some of his greatest admirers are put to 
confusion ; others are rejoicing in the hope that the event may 
prove a warning to many who have departed from the spirit of 
the Reformation ; and a third party, who gave no credit for sin 
cerity to the leaders of a movement which they regarded as 
retrograde, arid who still suspect that they who have joined in it 
here are actuated by worldly motives, are confessing that they 
did injustice to the great Oxford tractarian. One of them re 
marked to me, " We are often told from the pulpit here that we 
live in an age of skepticism, and that it is the tendency of our 
times to believe too little rather than too much ; and yet Protest 
ants of superior talent are now ready to make these great sacri 
fices for the sake of returning to the faith of Rome !" I might 
have replied, that reaction seems to be almost as much a princi- 



184 THE ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH. [CHAP. XIII. 

pie of the moral as of the material world, and that we know, 
from the posthumous writings of one who had lived on intimate 
terms with the originators of the Tractarian movement in Oxford, 
that a recoil from doubts derived from the study of the German 
rationalists, led directly to their departure in an opposite direc 
tion. " They flung themselves," says Blanco White, writing in 
1837, "on a phantom which they called Church. Their plan 
was to stop all inquiry," and " to restore popery, excluding the 
pope."* Meanwhile, the attempt to revive the credulity of the 
middle ages, and to resuscitate a belief in all the miracles of 
mediaeval saints, has produced, as might naturally have been 
expected, another reaction, giving strength to a party called the 
anti-supernaturalists, who entirely reject all the historical evi 
dence in favor of the Scripture miracles. Their leader in New 
England, Mr. Theodore Parker, is the author of a work of great 
erudition, originality, and earnestness (lately reprinted in England), 
in which, while retaining a belief in the Divine origin of Chris 
tianity, and the binding nature of its moral code, he abandons the 
greater part of the evidences on which its truth has hitherto been 
considered to repose. I heard this author, during my late stay 
in Boston, preach to a congregation respectable for its numbers 
and station. 

Next to the new churches and fountains, the most striking 
change observable in the streets of New York since 1841, is the 
introduction of the electric telegraph, the posts of which, about 
30 feet high and 100 yards apart, traverse Broadway, and are 
certainly not ornamental. Occasionally, where the trees interfere, 
the wires are made to cross the street diagonally. The success 
ful exertions made to render this mode of communication popular, 
and so to cheapen it as to bring the advantages of it within the 
reach of the largest possible number of merchants, newspaper 
editors, and private individuals, is characteristic of the country. 
There is a general desire evinced of overcoming space, which 
seems to inspire all their exertions for extending and improving 
railways, lines of steam navigation, and these telegraphs. Agri 
culturists and mercantile men in remote places, are eager to know 
* Life of J. Blanco White, vol. ii. p. 355, and vol. iii. p. 106. 



CHAP. XIII.] THE ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH. 185 

every where, on the very day of the arrival of an Atlantic mail 
steamer, the prices of grain, cotton, and other articles in the Euro 
pean markets, so that they may speculate on equal terms with the 
citizens of Boston and New York. The politician, who is am 
bitious, not only of retaining all the states of the Union in one 
powerful confederation, but of comprising the whole continent 
under one empire, hails the new invention with delight, and 
foresees at once its important consequences. Mr. Winthrop well 
knew the temper of the people whom he addressed, when he 
congratulated a large meeting, that they might now send intelli 
gence from one end of the Union to the other with the rapidity 
of thought, and that they had realized the promise of the King 
of the Fairies, that he would "put a girdle round about the earth 
in forty minutes." Already many paragraphs in the newspapers 
are headed, " Received by lightning, printed by steam," and all 
seem heartily to welcome the discovery as an instrument of prog 
ress. When promoting such works, they may exclaim, without 
boastfulness 

" These are imperial arts, and worthy kings." 

After my return from America, I learned that the length of 
line completed in 1846, amounted to above 1600 miles, and in 
1848 there were more than 5000 miles of wire laid down. In 
that year one of my English friends sent a message by tele 
graph to Liverpool, in September, which reached Boston by 
mail steamer, via Halifax, in twelve days, and was sent on im 
mediately by electric telegraph to New Orleans, in one day, the 
answer returning to Boston the day after. Three days were 
then lost in waiting for the steam-packet, which conveyed the 
message back to England in twelve days ; "so that the reply 
reached London on the twenty-ninth day from the sending of the 
question, the whole distance being more than 10,000 miles, which 
had been traversed at an average rate exceeding 350 miles a day. 

It is satisfactory to learn that the telegraph, although so often 
passing through a wild country, in some places anticipating even 
the railway, seems never yet to have been injured by the lovers 
of mischief. The wires have also been often struck by light- 



186 THE ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH. [CHAP. XIII 

ning, so frequent and vivid in this climate, without serious de 
rangement of the delicate machinery. The telegraph generally 
in use is the patent of Mr. Morse, whose invention combines the 
power of printing a message simultaneously with its transmis 
sion. As the magnetic force becomes extremely feeble when 
conducted through a great length of wire, Morse employs it sim 
ply to make a needle vibrate, and so open and close the galvanic 
circuit placed in each office, where a local battery is set in mo 
tion, which works the printing machine. The long wires, 
therefore, may be compared to slender trains of gunpowder, 
which are made to fire a distant cannon or mine. It is not the 
battery in Philadelphia which works the instrument in Wash 
ington, but a battery in the Washington office. This contrivance 
is obviously nothing more than a new adaptation of the method 
specified by Mr. Wheatstone, in his patent of June, 1837, for 
ringing an alarum bell in each station by means of a local bat 
tery, of which I saw him exhibit experiments in 1837. 

In September of the same year Mr. Morse invented an in 
genious mode of printing messages, by causing an endless scroll of 
paper to roll off one cylinder on to another by means of clock 
work, the paper being made to pass under a steel pen, which is 
moved by electro-magnetism. 

An agent of Mr. Morse explained to me the manner in which 
the steel pen was made to indent the paper, which is not pierced, 
but appears as if it had been pressed on by a blunted point, the 
under surface being raised as in books printed for the blind. If 
the contact of the pen be continued instead of making a dot, it 
produces a short or a long line, according to the time of contact. 
The following is a specimen : 

TheElectroMag netic 

Telegraph. 

In the latest improvements of the telegraph in England, the 
magnetic force has been so multiplied by means of several thou 
sand coils of wire, that they can send it direct, so as to move the 



CHAP, XIII.] SCHOOLS IN NEW YORK. 187 

needle at great distances without the aid of local batteries. The 
use, however, of this instrument has been comparatively small in 
Great Britain, the cost of messages being four times as great as 
in the United States. 

The population of the State of New York amounts, in the 
present year (1845) to 2,604,495 souls. Of this number as 
we learn by the report of the government inspector of schools, no 
less than 807,200 children, forming almost one-third of the in 
habitants, have received the benefit of instruction either for the 
whole or part of the year. Of these, 31,240 attended private 
schools, and 742,433 the common or public schools of the state. 
We are also informed in the same official document, that the 
number of public schools is now 11,003. The whole amount 
of money received by the school trustees during the year for 
teachers wages, and district libraries, was 1,191,697 dollars, 
equal to about 250,000/. This sum has been raised chiefly by 
rates, and about one-third of it from the revenue of the school 
fund, which produces a yearly income of 375,387 dollars. The 
teachers in the common schools, both male and female, are 
boarded at the public expense, arid, in addition to their board, 
receive the following salaries : Male teachers, during the winter 
term, 1 4 dollars, 1 6 cents ; and during the summer term, 1 5 
dollars, 77 cents per month, equal to about 5Ql. a year. Female 
teachers, 7 dollars, 37 cents in the winter term, and 6 dollars, 
2 cents in the summer term. In some counties, however, the 
average is stated to be as high as 20, or even 26 dollars per 
month for the male teachers, and from 9 to 1 1 for the female. 
There are also district libraries in connection with most of the 
schools. 

All these 11,000 schools have been organized on what has 
been styled in England, even by respectable members in the 
House of Commons, the infidel or godless plan, which generally 
means nothing more than that they are not under the manage 
ment of the clergy. The Roman Catholic bishops and priests 
command a vast number of votes at the elections in New York, 
yet they failed, in 1842, to get into their exclusive control that 
part of the public school money which might fairly be considered 



188 SECULAR EDUCATION. [CHAP. XIII. 

as applicable to the teaching of children of their own denomina 
tion. Their efforts, however, though fortunately defeated, were 
attended by some beneficial results. It is obviously the duty of 
every government which establishes a national system of secular 
education, to see that no books are used in the schools, containing 
sectarian views, or in which the peculiar opinions of any sect 
are treated with marked contempt. The Catholics complained 
that some of the works put into the hands of children, especially 
those relating to English history, were written with a strong 
Protestant bias, and that, while the superstitions of popery and 
the bigotry of Bloody Mary were pointedly dwelt upon, the per 
secutions endured by Romanists at the hands of Protestant rulers 
were overlooked, or slightly glanced at. The expunging of such 
passages, both in the State of New York and in New England, 
must have a wholesome tendency to lessen sectarian bitterness, 
which, if imbibed at an early age, is so difficult to eradicate ; 
and children thus educated will grow up less prejudiced, and 
more truly Christian in spirit, than if the Romish or any other 
clergy had been permitted to obtain the sole arid separate train 
ing of their minds. 

I have often mentioned the absence of smoke as a striking and 
enviable peculiarity of the Atlantic cities. For my own part, I 
never found the heat of a well-managed stove oppressive, when 
vessels of water were placed over it for moistening the air by 
free evaporation ; and the anthracite coal burns brightly in open 
grates. Even in a moral point of view, I regard freedom from 
smoke as a positive national gain, for it causes the richer and 
more educated inhabitants to reside in cities by the side of their 
poorer neighbors during a larger part of the year, which they 
would not do if the air and the houses were as much soiled by 
smoke and soot as Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds, or Sheffield. 
Here the dress and furniture last longer and look less dingy, 
flowers and shrubs can be cultivated in town gardens, and all 
who can afford to move are not driven into the country or some 
distant suburb. The formation of libraries and scientific and 
literary institutions, museums, and lectures, and the daily inter 
course between the different orders of society in a word, all 



CHAP. XIII.] IRISH VOTERS. 189 



that can advance and refine the mind and taste of a great popu 
lation, are facilitated by this contact of the rich and poor. In 
addition, therefore, to the importance given to the rniddb and 
lower classes by the political institutions of America, I can not 
but think it was a fortunate geological arrangement for the civil 
ization of the cities first founded on this continent, that the an- 
thracitic coal-fie]ds were all placed on the eastern side of the 
Alleghany mountains, and all the bituminous coal-fields on their 
western side. 

One day, when we were dining at the great table of the Carl- 
ton Hotel, one of the largest and most fashionable establishments 
of the kind in New York, we were informed by an American 
friend, that a young man and woman sitting opposite to us were 
well known to him as work-people from a factory near Boston. 
They scarcely spoke a word, but were conforming carefully to 
the conventional manners of those around them. 

Before we left New York, we witnessed an unforeseen effect of 
the abundance of waste water recently poured into the city through 
the new Croton aqueduct. In the lower streets near the river 
the water in the open gutters had frozen in the course of the 
night, and, next morning, the usual channels being blocked up 
with ice, a stream poured down the middle of the street, and was 
in its turn frozen there, so that when I returned one night from 
a party, I wished I had been provided with skates, so continuous 
was the sheet of ice. Then came a thaw, and the water of the 
melted ice poured into the lower stories of many houses. The 
authorities are taking active measures to provide in future against 
the recurrence of this evil. 

I suggested to one of my friends here that they had omitted, 
among their numerous improvements, to exclude the pigs from 
the streets. "It is not possible," said he, " for they all have 
votes ; I mean their Irish owners have, and they turn the scale 
in the elections for mayor and other city officers. If we must 
have a war," he added, " about Oregon, it will at least be at 
tended with one blessing the stopping of this incessant influx 
of hordes of ignorant adventurers, who pour in and bear down 
our native population. Whether they call themselves the true 



190 NATIVISM. [CHAP. XIII. 

sons of Erin, or the noble sons of Germany, they are the dupes 
and tools of our demagogues." He then told me that in the last 
presidential election he had been an inspector, and had rejected 
many fraudulent votes of newly arrived emigrants, brought to the 
poll without letters of naturalization, and he had no doubt that 
some other inspectors had been less scrupulous when the voters 
were of their own political party. " But for the foreign vote," 
he affirmed, " Clay would have been elected." " Have you then 
joined the native American party ?" " No ; because, by sepa 
rating from the Whigs, they have weakened the good cause, and 
nativism being chiefly anti-Irish, too often degenerates into relig 
ious bigotry , or into a mere anti-popery faction." 



CHAPTER XIV. 

New York to Philadelphia. Scenery in New Jersey. War about Oregon, 
Protectionist Theories. Income Tax and Repudiation. Recrimina 
tions against British Aggrandizement. Irish Quarter and fraudulent 
Votes. Washington. Congress and Annexation of Texas. General 
Cass for War. Winthrop for Arbitration. Inflated Eloquence. Su 
preme Court. Slavery in District of Columbia. Museum, Collection of 
Corals. Sculpture from Palenque. Conversations with Mr. Fox. A 
Residence at Washington not favorable to a just Estimate of the United 
States. False Position of Foreign Diplomatists. 

Dec. 9, 1845. LEFT New York for Philadelphia by railway. 
When crossing the ferry to New Jersey, saw Long Island and 
Staten Island covered with snow. Between New York and New 
ark, New Jersey, there is a deep cutting through a basaltic 01 
greenstone rock, a continuation of the mass which forms the 
columnar precipices, called the Palisades, on the Hudson river, 
above New York. From the jagged face of the cliffs in this cut-, 
ting, were hanging some of the largest icicles I ever beheld, re 
minding me of huge stalactites pendent from the roofs of limestone 
caverns in Europe. 

In New Jersey we passed over a gently undulating surface of 
country, formed of red marl and sandstone, resembling in appear 
ance, and of about the same geological age, as the new red sand 
stone (trias) of England. The soil in the fields is of a similar 
red color, and all signs of recent clearings, such as the stumps of 
trees, have nearly disappeared. The copses, formed of a second 
growth of wood, and the style of the fences round the fields, gave 
an English aspect to the country. We went by Newark, Eliza- 
bethtown, Princeton, Trenton, Bordentown, and Burlington. In 
some of these places, as at Elizabethtown, houses and churches 
have grown up round the railway ; and we passed through the 
middle of Burlington, a great source of convenience to the natives, 
and of amusement to the passengers, but implying a slow rate of 
traveling. Hereafter, to enable express trains to go at full speed 
from north to south, there must be branch lines outside the towns. 



192 WAR ABOUT OREGON, [CHAP. XIV. 

As we passed Burlington, a fellow passenger told us that in an 
Episcopalian college established there, called St. Mary s Hall, were 
a hundred young girls, whom he called " the holy innocents," as 
sembled from every part of the Union. Eighteen of them had. 
in September last, taken their degrees in arts, receiving, from the 
hands of the Bishop of New Jersey, diplomas, headed by an en 
graving of the Holy Virgin and Child, and issued " in the name 
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost." The session had ended 
with the ceremony of laying and consecrating the corner-stone of 
"the chapel of the Holy Innocents for the use of the scholars of 
St. Mary s Hall." 

Whether we took up a newspaper, or listened to conversation 
in the cars, we found that the Oregon question, and a rupture 
with England, were the all-engrossing topic of political specula 
tion. The democratic party are evidently intoxicated with their 
success in having achieved the annexation of Texas, and are bent 
on future schemes of territorial aggrandizement. Some talk of 
gaining the whole of Oregon, others all Mexico. I heard one 
fellow-traveler say modestly, " We are going on too fast ; but 
Mexico must in time be ours." On arriving at Philadelphia. I 
found some of the daily journals written in a tone well-fitted to 
create a war-panic, counting on the aid of France in the event 
of a struggle with Great Britain ; boasting that if all the eastern 
cities were laid in ashes by an English fleet, they would rebuild 
them in five years, and extinguish all the debts caused by the 
war in thirty years ; whereas England, borrowing as in the last 
war many hundred millions sterling, must become bankrupt or 
permanently crippled with taxation. I asked an acquaintance, 
whether the editor of such articles secretly wished for war, or 
wanted to frighten his readers into a pacific policy. " He has 
lately gone over," said he, " to the protectionist party. Having 
made large purchases of shares in an iron company, and fearing 
that, should peace continue, the free-traders would lower the 
tariff, he patriotically hopes for a war with England to enable 
him to make a fortune. He is one of those philanthropic monop 
olists who would have joined in a toast given some years ago at 
a public dinner by one of our merchants, < May the wants of all 



CHAP. XIV ] INCOME TAX. 193 

nations increase, and may they be supplied by Pennsylvania. " 
" But will his war dreams be realized, think you ?" " Probably 
Hiot ; yet the mere anticipation of such a contingency is doing- 
mischief, checking commercial enterprise, causing our state bonds 
to fall in value, and awakening evil passions. You will scarcely 
believe that I have heard men of respectable standing in the world 
declare, that if a war breaks out, we shall at least be able to 
sponge out our state debt !" 

I found that the income tax laid on to pay the interest of this 
debt, is weighing heavily on Pennsylvania, and many a citizen is 
casting a wistful glance across the Delaware, at the untaxed 
fields and mansions of New Jersey. Some manage to evade half 
their burdens by taking houses in that state, and resorting in the 
winter season to Philadelphia for the sake of society. One of the 
Philadelphians assured me, that he and others paid sixteen per 
cent, "on their income for state taxes ; and after honestly respond 
ing to all the inquisitorial demands of the collectors, they had the 
mortification of thinking that men who are less conscientious 
escape half the impost. " Capital," he said, is deserting this 
city, and some thriving store-keepers, whom you knew here in 
1842, have transferred their business to New York. In your 
Travels in America, you were far too indulgent to the Petm- 
sylvanian Whigs, who promoted the outlay of government money 
on public works, which has been our ruin. The wealthy Ger 
man farmers and democrats opposed that expenditure ; and it is 
not German ignorance, as some Whigs pretend, which has en 
tailed debt and disgrace on this state, but the extravagance of 
the influential merchants, who were chiefly Whigs. You see by 
the papers that the county of Lancaster, is 50,000 dollars in ar- 
rear in the payment of state taxes, and the punishment inflicted 
by government is to withhold the school-money from these de 
faulters, thereby prolonging the evil, if it be ignorance which has 
dulled their moral sense." 

The reluctance to resort to coercive measures, on the part of 

the men in power, for fear of endangering their popularity, is 

striking ; and John Bull would smile at a circular just issued 

and addressed by the state treasurer to counties, some of which 

VOL, i. I 



194 BRITISH AGGRANDIZ EMENT. [CHAP. XIV. 

are three years in arrear. He praises others for their cheerful 
promptness in bearing their fair share of the public liabilities, 
and exhorts the rest to follow their good example, for the honoj* 
arid credit of the Commonwealth. The necessity of compulsory 
measures is gently hinted at as a possible contingency, should 
they continue to be defaulters. As a proof, however, that more 
cogent methods of persuasion are sometimes resorted to, I see 
advertisements of the sale of city property for the discharge of 
taxes ; and it is fair to presume, that patriotic exhortations have 
not always been without effect, or they would be thought too 
ridiculous to be employed. 

I observed to a friend, that when I left the New Englanders, 
they were decidedly averse to war about Oregon. " Yes," he 
rejoined, but they are equally against free trade ; whereas, the 
people in the West, who are talking so big about fighting for 
Oregon, are in favor of a low tariff and more trade with En- 

O 

gland, which would make war impossible. Which of these two, 
think you, is practically the peace party ?" 

In the leading articles of several of the papers, I read some 
spirited recriminations in answer to English censures on the 
annexation of Texas. Its independence, they say, had been 
acknowledged by Great Britain, and its inhabitants had volun 
tarily joined the Union. Some journals talk of following " the 
classical example of the mother-country," and allude to the con 
quest of Sinde, and the intended " annexation of Borneo." A 
passage is also cited from a recent article in one of the leading 
London journals, to the following effect : " That as the Punjab 
must eventually be ours, the sooner we take possession of it the 
better, and the less blood and treasure will be spent in saving 
from anarchy the richest part of India." But it is easier thus to 
recriminate than to reply to the admirable protest published in 
the beginning of the present year (January, 1845), by a con 
vention of delegates from various and opposite political parties in 
Massachusetts, which set forth, in strong terms, the unjustifiable 
manner in which Texas was originally filched from Mexico, and 
the tendency of such annexation to extend and uphold slavery, 
and " probably to lead to a Mexican war." 



CHAP. XIV.] FRAUDULENT VOTES. 195 

During our stay in Philadelphia, we heard much regret ex 
pressed at the establishment of what is called here an Irish 
.quarter, entailing, for the first time, the necessity of keeping up 
a more expensive police. In the riots of May 6, 1844, many 
lives were lost, and a party has been formed of native Americans 
to resist what they call " the papal garrison." Although much 
sectarian feeling, mixed with the prejudice of race, may have 
been betrayed against the Irish Romanists, I find it impossible 
not to sympathize with the indignation cherished here in regard 
to the interference of aliens with the elections, and the danger 
which threatens the liberties of the country from fraudulent vot 
ing. Originally a residence of five years was required to confer 
the electoral franchise on a new settler, and the time did not 
begin to count till after a regular notification of his intention to 
settle and acquire the rights of citizenship, accompanied by for 
swearing his allegiance to any other sovereignty. The federalists 
imprudently extended the term to sixteen years, in the president 
ship of John Adams, which excluded more than half of the popu 
lation in some newly peopled districts. The original term of five 
years after registration was again restored in Jefferson s president 
ship, and continued till the contest between John Quincy Adarns 
and Jackson, when Mr. Buchanan carried his proposition that, 
instead of registration, two witnesses might depose on parole that 
the candidate for naturalization had resided five years. This 
regulation has led to much fraud and perjury ; and cases so 
flagrant have occurred, that judges have been cashiered for con 
niving at them. The same rules, however, are not binding in 
all state elections, for in Virginia, at present, the right of citizen 
ship demands a residence of seven years, while in Michigan, new 
comers can vote two years after their arrival. 

How many of the stories related of fraudulent voting may be 
true, I can not pretend to decide ; but I was amused at their 
number and variety. It came out, I am told, in evidence on a 
late trial, that convicts had been carried to the poll at New York, 
and then taken back to prison ; and that the dexterity of those 
who manage the Irish vote often consists in making Paddy believe 
that he is really entitled to the franchise, One of these dupe? 



196 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. [CHAP. XIV. 

having voted several times over for one candidate, was at length 
objected to, and observed with naivete, " that it was hard that 
his vote should at last be challenged, when so many inspectors 
had taken it before that same day." An emigrant ship arrived 
at Newcastle, on the Delaware, in the heat of an election for 
governor ; the Irish emigrants were asked if they would support 
the democratic candidate. " We are all for the opposition," they 
replied ; and the ingenuity of the canvasser was taxed to make 
them comprehend that the Ins in America, corresponded in their 
politics with the Outs in Great Britain. 

Such anecdotes prove indisputably that the purity of the elec 
tions is at least impeached, and it must also be borne in mind that 
the system of ballot precludes all scrutiny after the election is over. 

Dec. 13. Washington. Went into the House of Represent 
atives ; the front seats in the gallery are reserved for ladies. We 
found the member for Connecticut, Mr. Rockwell, on his legs, 
delivering what seemed to me an admirable speech against the 
annexation of Texas, especially that part of its new constitution 
which prohibited the legislature from taking steps toward the 
future abolition of slavery. Some of the representatives were 
talking, others writing, none listening. The question was evi 
dently treated as one gone by mere matter of history, which the 
course of events had consigned to the vault of all the Capulets. 
Nevertheless, a feeling of irritation and deep disgust is pervading 
the minds of the anti-slavery party at this sudden accession of 
new territory, open to a slave population. A powerful reaction 
has begun to display itself, so that the incorporation of Texas 
into the Union may eventually be attended Math consequences 
most favorable to the good cause, rousing the whole north to 
make a stand against the future extension of slavery. Mr. 
Winthrop has hailed this more hopeful prospect in the happiest 
strain of eloquence, addressing " the lone star of Texas," as it 
was called, in the words of Milton : 

; Fairest of stars, last in the train of night, 
If rather thou belong st not to the dawn." 

Crossing the Rotunda, we passed into the Senate, and heard 
General Cass, of Michigan, delivering a set speech on the Oregon 



CHAP. XIV.] ARBITRATION. 197 

question. The recent acquisition of Texas, which we had heard 
condemned in the other house as a foul blot on their national 
policy, was boasted of by him as a glorious triumph of freedom. 
He drew an animated picture of the aggrandizing spirit of Great 
Britain with her 150 millions of subjects, spoke of her arrogance 
and pride, the certainty of a war, if they wished to maintain 
their just rights, and the necessity of an immediate armament. 

"Great Britain," he said, "might be willing to submit the 
Oregon question to arbitration, but the crowned heads, whom she 
would propose as arbiters, would not be impartial, for they would 
cherish anti-republican feelings." I thought the style of this 
oration better than its spirit, and it was listened to with atten 
tion ; but in spite of the stirring nature of the theme, none of the 
senators betrayed any emotion. 

When he sat down, others followed, some of whom read ex 
tracts from the recently delivered speeches of Sir Robert Peel 
and Lord John Russell on the Oregon affair, commenting freely 
and fairly upon them, and pointing out that there was nothing 
in the tone of the British Government, nor in the nature of their 
demands, which closed the door against an amicable adjustment. 
I came away from this debate much struck with the singular 
posture of affairs ; for the executive and its functionaries seem to 
be doing their worst to inflame popular- passions, while the legis 
lature, chosen by universal suffrage, is comparatively calm, and 
exhibits that sense of a dangerous responsibility, which a presi 
dent and his cabinet might rather have been expected to display. 

In reference to one of the arguments in General Cass s speech, 
Mr. Winthrop soon afterward moved in the House of Represent 
atives (Dec. 19, 1845), "That arbitration does not necessarily 
involve a reference to crowned heads ; and if a jealousy of such 
a reference is entertained in any quarter, a commission of able 
and dispassionate citizens, either from the two countries con 
cerned, or from the world at large, offers itself as an obvious and 
unobj ectionable alternative. 

A similar proposition emanated simultaneously, and without 
concert, from the English Cabinet, showing that they were 
regardless of precedents, and relied on the justice of their cause. 



198 RECRIMINATION. [CHAP. XIV. 

Although it was declined, the mere fact of a great nation having 
waived all punctilious etiquette, and offered to settle a point at 
issue by referring the question to private citizens of high charac 
ter and learned in international law, proves that the world is 
advancing in civilization, and that higher principles of morality 
are beginning to gain ground in the intercourse between nations. 
" All who ought to govern," said a member of Congress to me, 
" are of one mind as to Lord Aberdeen s overture ; but they who 
do govern here, will never submit to arbitration." 

The Senate consists at present of fifty-nine members, and will 
soon be augmented by two from Texas and two from Iowa, the 
Union consisting now of twenty-seven states, with a population 
of about twenty millions. 

The appearance of the members of the House of Representa 
tives is gentlemanlike, although I doubt not that the scenes of 
violence and want of decorum described by many travelers, are 
correct pictures of what they witnessed. In this nation of read 
ers they are so sensitive to foreign criticism, that amendment may 
be confidently looked for. At this moment, the papers, by way 
of retaliation, are amusing their readers with extracts from a 
debate in the Canada House of Assembly. The following may 
serve as an example : " Our Canadian friends occasionally read 
us a lecture on courtesy and order, we therefore cite from a report 
of their legislative proceedings, what we presume they intend as 
a model for our imitation. Mr. De B. appealed to the chair to 
stop the member for Quebec, and threatened if he was not called 
to order, that he must go over and pull his nose ; at which Mr. 
A. rejoined, Come and do it, you scoundrel ! " Another exam 
ple of recrimination that I have lately seen, consisted in placing 
in two parallel columns, first an extract from the leading article 
of the London Times, rating the Americans in good set terms 
for their rudeness to each other in debate, and coarse abuse of 
England ; arid, secondly, an account given by the same journal 
of a disorderly discussion in the House of Commons on an Irish 
question, in which, among other incidents, a young member of 
the aristocracy (intoxicated let us hope) rose in the midst of the 
hubbub, and imitated the crowing of a cock. 



CHAP. XIV.] INFLATED ELOQUENCE. 199 



A member of Congress, who frequented, when in London, the 
gallery of the House of Commons, tells me he was struck with 
what seemed an affectation of rusticity, members lolling in loung 
ing attitudes on the benches with their hats on, speaking with 
their hands thrust into their breeches pockets, and other acts, as 
if in defiance of restraint. The English method of coughing 
down a troublesome member is often alluded to here, and has, on 
one occasion, been gravely recommended for adoption, as a par 
liamentary usage which might advantageously be imitated, rather 
than the limitation of each speaker to one hour, a rule now in 
force, which has too often the effect of making each orator think 
it due to himself to occupy the house for his full term. 

It would be impossible to burlesque or caricature the ambitious 
style of certain members of Congress, especially some who have 
risen from humble stations, and whose schooling has been in the 
back-woods. A grave report, drawn up in the present session 
by a member for Illinois, as chairman of the Post-office Commit 
tee, may serve as an example. After speaking of the American 
republic as " the infant Hercules," and the extension of their 
imperial dominion over the "northern continent and oriental 
seas," he exclaims, " the destiny of our nation has now become 
revealed, and great events, quickening in the womb of time, 
reflect their clearly-defined shadows into our very eye-balls. 

" Oh. why does a cold generation frigidly repel ambrosial gifts 
like these, or sacrilegiously hesitate to embrace their glowing and 
resplendent fate ? 

" Must this backward pull of the government never cease, and 
the nation tug forever beneath a dead weight, which trips its 
heels at every stride ?" 

From the Senate House we went to another part of the Capi 
tol, to hear Mr. Webster plead a cause before the Judges of the 
Supreme Court. These judges wear black gowns, and are, 1 
believe, the only ones in the United States who have a costume. 
The point at issue was most clearly stated, namely, whether the 
city of New York had a legal right to levy a tax of one dollar 
on every passenger entering that port, who had never before 
visited any port of the Union. The number of emigrants being 



200 WASHINGTON. [CHAP. XIV. 

great, no less than 100,000 dollars had been annually raised by 
this impost, the money being applied chiefly as an hospital fund. 
It was contended that the Federal Government alone had the 
right of imposing duties on commerce, in which light this passen 
ger tribute ought to be viewed. The Court, however, ruled 
otherwise. 

It was pointed out to me, as a remarkable proof of the ascend 
ency of the democratic party in the Federal Government for 
many years past, that only one of all the judges now on the bench 
had been nominated by the Whigs. 

One day, as we were walking down Pennsylvania Avenue 
with Mr. Winthrop, we met a young negro woman, who came 
up to him with a countenance full of pleasure, saying it was 
several years since she had seen him, and greeting him with 
such an affectionate warmth of expression, that I began to con 
trast the stiffness and coldness of the Anglo-Saxon mariners with 
the genial flow of feeling of this southern race. My companion 
explained to me, that she was a very intelligent girl, and was 
grateful to him for an act of kindness he had once had an oppor 
tunity of showing her. I afterward learnt, from some other 
friends to whom I told this anecdote, that, three years before, 
Mr. Winthrop and a brother member of Congress from the north 
had been lodging in the house of this girl s mistress, and hearing 
that she was sentenced to be whipped for some offense, had both 
of them protested they would instantly quit the house if the mis 
tress persevered. She had yielded, and at length confessed that 
she had been giving way to a momentary fit of temper. 

Washington is situated in the district of Columbia, comprising 
an area of 1 square miles, borrowed from the neighboring states 
to form an independent jurisdiction by itself. Several attempts 
have been made to declare it free, but hitherto in vain, thanks 
to the union of the northern democrats and southern slave-own 
ers, aided by the impracticable schemes of the abolitionists. 

The view of the city and the river Potomac from the hill on 
which the Capitol stands is fine ; but, in spite of some new pub 
lic edifices built in a handsome style of Greek architecture, we 
are struck with the small progress made in three years since we 



CHAP. XIV.] MUSEUM. 201 

were last here. The vacant spaces are not filling up with private 
houses, according to the original plan, so that the would-be me 
tropolis wears still the air of some projector s scheme which has 
failed. The principal hotels, however, have improved, and we 
were not annoyed, as when last here, by the odors left in the 
room by the colored domestics, who had no beds, but slept any 
where about the stairs or passages, without changing their clothes. 
With similar habits, in a hot climate, no servants of any race, 
whether free or slave, African or European, would be endurable. 
In the public museum at the Patent Office I was glad to see 
a fine collection of objects of natural history, brought here by 
the late Exploring Expedition, commanded by Captain Wilkes. 
Among other treasures is a splendid series of recent corals, a good 
description of which, illustrated by plates, will soon be publish 
ed by Mr. Dana, at the expense of Government. These zoo 
phytes are accompanied by masses of solid limestone, occasionally 
including shells, recently formed in coral reefs, like those men 
tioned by Mr. Darwin as occurring in the South Seas, some as 
hard as marble, others consisting of conglomerates of pebbles and 
calcareous sand. In several of the specimens I saw the imbedded 
zoophytes and shells projecting from the weathered surface, as do 
the petrifactions in many an ancient limestone where they have 
resisted disintegration more than the matrix. Other fragments 
were as white and soft as chalk ; one in particular, a cubic foot 
in bulk, brought from one of the Sandwich Islands, might have 
been mistaken for a piece of Shakspeare s Cliff, near Dover. It 
reminded me that an English friend, a professor of political econ 
omy, met me about fifteen years ago on the beach at Dover, after 
he had just read my " Principles of Geology," and exclaimed, 
" Show me masses of pure white rock, like the substance of 
these cliffs, in the act of growing in the ocean over areas as 
large as France or England, and I will believe all your theory 
of modern causes." Since that time we have obtained data for 
inferring that the growth of corals, and the deposition of chalk- 
like calcareous mud, is actually going on over much wider areas 
than the whole of Europe, so that I am now entitled to claim 
my incredulous friend as a proselyte. 

!* 



202 SCULPTURp; FROM PALENQUE. [CHAP. XIV. 

In one of the glass cases of the Museum I saw the huge skull 
of the Megatherium, with the remains of other extinct fossil 
animals found in Georgia a splendid donation presented by Mr. 
Hamilton Couper. In another part of the room were objects of 
antiquarian interest, and among the rest some sculptured stories 
from the ruins of Palenque, inscribed with the hieroglyphic or 
picture-writing of the Aborigines, with which Stephen s lively 
work on Central America, and the admirable illustrations of 
Catherwood, had made us familiar. The camp-chest of General 
Washington, his sword, the uniform worn by him when he re 
signed his commission, and even his stick, have been treasured 
up as relics in this national repository. If the proposition lately 
made in the public journals, to purchase Washington s country 
residence and negro-houses at Mount Vernon, and to keep them 
forever in the state in which he left them, should be carried 
into effect, it would not only be a fit act of hero-worship, but in 
the course of time this farm would become a curious antiquarian 
monument, showing to after generations the state of agriculture 
at the period when the Republic was founded, and how the old 
Virginian planters and their slaves lived in the eighteenth century. 

Before leaving Washington we called, with Mr. Winthrop, at 
the White House, the residence of the President. A colored 
servant in livery came to the door, and conducted us to the re 
ception-room, which is well-proportioned and well-furnished, not 
in sumptuous style, but without any affectation of republican 
plainness. We were politely received by Mrs. Polk, her hus 
band being engaged on public business. I was afterward intro 
duced to General Scott, to Captain Wilkes, recently returned 
from his expedition to the South Seas, to Mr. Bancroft, Secretary 
of the Navy, and called on our minister, Mr. Pakenham, and our 
old friends, M. and Madame de Gerolt, the Prussian minister and 
his wife. I also examined a fine collection of fossils belonging to 
Mr. Markoe, who has taken an active part in founding an insti 
tution here for the promotion of science arid natural history. The 
day before our departure I had a long and agreeable conversation 
with our ex-minister, Mr. Fox, whose sudden and unexpected 
death happened a few months later. I told him that some En- 



CHAP. XIV.] CONVERSATIONS WITH MR. FOX. 203 



glish travelers wondered that I should set out on a long tour when 
the English and American papers were descanting on the proba 
bility of a war. He said, that "when Macleod was detained 
prisoner in 1841, there was really some risk, because he might 
have been hanged any day by the New Yorkers, in spite of the 
desire of the Federal Government to save him ; but now there 
is no war party in England, and all reasonable men here, includ 
ing the principal officers of the army and navy, are against it. 
Some of the western people may be warlike, for there are many 
patriots who believe that it is their destiny to rise on the ruins 
of the British empire ; but when the President, according to 
treaty, shall have given notice of a partition of Oregon, there will 
be time for negotiation. If one of two disputants threatens to 
knock the other down eighteen months hence, would you appre 
hend immediate mischief?" "They are not arming," said I. 
"No augury can be drawn from that fact," he replied; "the 
people are against large peace establishments, knowing that there 
is no fear of hostile attacks from without unless they provoke 
them, and satisfied that their wealth and population are annually 
increasing. They are full of courage, and would develop extraor 
dinary resources in a war, however much they would suffer at 
the first onset." 

We then conversed freely on the future prospects of civiliza 
tion in the North American continent. He had formed far less 
sanguine expectations than I had, but confessed, that though he 
had resided so many years in the country, he knew little or noth 
ing of the northern states, especially of New England. When 
I dwelt on the progress I had witnessed, even in four years, in 
the schools and educational institutions, the increase of readers 
and of good books, and the preparations making for future scien 
tific achievements, he frankly admitted that he had habitually 
contemplated the Union from a somewhat unfavorable point of 
view. I observed to him that Washington was not a metropo 
lis, like London, nor even like Edinburgh or Dublin, but a town 
which had not thriven, in spite of government patronage. The 
members of Congress did not bring their families to it, because it 
\vould often take them away from larger cities, where they were 



204 FOREIGN DIPLOMATISTS. [CHAP. XIV r . 



enjoying more refined and intellectual society. It was as if the 
Legislature of the British empire, representing not only England, 
Scotland, and Ireland, but Canada, Newfoundland, the West 
Indies, Australia, the Cape, and all the other dependencies of the 
British crown, were to meet in some third-rate town. Nor even 
then would the comparison be a fair one, because if there be one 
characteristic more than another which advantageously distin 
guishes three-fourths of the American population, it is the high 
social, intellectual, and political condition, relatively speaking, of 
the working classes. The foreign diplomatist residing in Wash 
ington lives within the borders of the slave territory, where the 
laborers are more degraded, and perhaps less progressive, than in 
any European state. Besides, the foreign embassador, in his offi 
cial and political capacity, too often sees exposed the weak side 
of the constitution of the Union, and has to deplore the power- 
lessness of the federal executive to carry out its own views, and 
to control the will of thirty independent states, or as many im- 
peria in imperio. Just when he may have come to an under 
standing with the leading statesmen on points of international 
law, so that his negotiations in any other metropolis would have 
been brought to a successful issue, he finds that the real difficul 
ties are only beginning. It still remains to be seen whether the 
government is strong enough to contend with the people, or has 
the will so to act, or whether it will court popularity by yielding 
to their prejudices, or even exciting their passions. Such is at 
this moment the position of affairs, and of our minister at Wash 
ington. 





Library 




^-^ California 
CHAPTER XV. 

Washington to Richmond. Legislature of Virginia in Session. Substitu 
tion of White for Slave Labor. Progress of Negro Instruction. Slave- 
dealers. Kindness to Negroes. Coal of Oolitic Period near Richmond. 
Visit to the Mines. Upright Fossil Trees. Deep Shafts, and Thick 
ness of Coal Seams. Explosion of Gas. Natural Coke. Resemblance 
of the more modern Coal-measures to old Carboniferous Rocks. Whites 
working with free Negroes in the Mines. 

Dec, 16, 1845. FROM Washington we went to Richmond, 
and were glad to find that the great southern line of railway from 
Acquia Creek had been completed since we were last here, by 
which we escaped twelve miles of jolting over a rough road, de 
scribed with so much humor by Dickens. 

At Richmond T went into the Supreme Court of Appeal, and, 
as I entered, heard the counsel who was pleading, cite a recent 
decision of the English Court of Chancery as bearing on his case. 
The Houses of Legislature of Virginia were in session, and I 
heard part of a debate on a proposed railway from Baltimore to 
the valley of the Great Kanawha, in Western Virginia. Much 
jealousy was expressed lest the metropolis of Maryland, instead 
of Richmond, should reap the chief fruits of this project, at which 
I was not surprised ; for Virginia, with a population of 1,100,000 
inhabitants, has no towns larger than Richmond and Norfolk. 
Beverly, and the early writers on this state, say, " that the peo 
ple were prevented from congregating in large towns by the en 
joyment of an extensive system of river navigation, which ena 
bled merchant ships to sail up every where to the warehouses of 
each planter and receive their freight. Hence there was less 
activity and enterprise, and a want of the competition, which the 
collected life in cities promotes."^ 

One of the senators, whom I had met the day before at a din 
ner party, conversed with me on the publication of the geological 
* See "Graham s History," vol. i. p. 145. 



206 VIRGINIA. [Cmp. XV. 



maps and reports of the State Survey, which have been admira 
bly executed under the direction of Professor W. B. Rogers. 

The division of legislative duties between a central power, such 
as I had just seen deliberating at Washington, and the separate 
and independent states, such as that now in simultaneous action 
here at Richmond, seems the only form fitted for a widely ex 
tended empire, if the representative system is to prevail. The 
present population of the different states may be compared, on an 
average, to that of English counties, or, at least, to colonies of the 
British empire. At the same period of the year, when each is 
managing its own affairs in regard to internal improvements 
schools, colleges, police, railways, canals, and direct taxes the 
central parliament is discussing questions of foreign policy the 
division of Oregon ; the state of the army and navy, questions of 
free trade, and a high or low tariff. 

By aid of railways, steamers, and the electric telegraph, it 
might be possible to conduct all the business of the twenty-seven 
states at Washington, but not with the same efficiency or econ 
omy ; for, in that case, the attention of the members of the two 
houses of Congress would be distracted by the number and variety 
of subjects submitted to them, and the leading statesmen would 
be crushed by the weight of official and parliamentary business. 

While at Richmond, we saw some agreeable and refined so 
ciety in the families of the judges of the Supreme Court and 
other lawyers ; but there is little here of that activity of mind 
and feeling for literature and science which strikes one in the 
best circles in New England. Virginia, however, seems to be 
rousing herself, and preparing to make an effort to enlarge her 
resources, by promoting schools and internal improvements. Her 
pride has been hurt at seeing how rapidly her old political 
ascendency has passed away, and how, with so large and rich a 
territory, she has been outstripped in the race by newer states, 
especially Ohio. She is unwilling to believe that her negro 
population is the chief obstacle to her onward march, yet can 
not shut her eyes to the fact that the upper or hilly region of 
the Alleghanies, where the whites predominate, has been ad 
vancing in a more rapid ratio than the eastern counties. The 



CHAP. XV.] WHITE AND SLAVE LABOR. 207 

whites who live west of the Blue Ridge are about equal in 
number to those who live east of it ; but the eastern division, or 
lower country, owns a greater number of slaves, and in right of 
them has more votes. The western men are talking loudly of 
a convention to place them on a more equal footing, some even 
desiring a separation into two states. There has also been a 
suggestion, that it might be well to allow a single county to 
declare itself free, without waiting for the emancipation of others. 
Among other signs of approaching change, I am told that several 
new settlers from the north have made a practical demonstration 
that slave labor is less profitable, even east of the Blue Ridge, 
than that of free whites. As we sailed down the Potomac from 
Washington, a landed proprietor of Fairfax county pointed out 
to me some estates in Virginia, on the right bank of the river, in 
which free had been substituted for slave labor since I was here 
in 1841. Some farmers came from New Hampshire and Con 
necticut, and, having bought the land at five dollars an acre, 
tilled it with their own hands and those of their family, aided in 
some cases by a few hired whites. To the astonishment of the 
surrounding planters, before the end of four years, they had raised 
the value of the soil from five to forty dollars per acre, having 
introduced for the first time a rotation of corn and green crops, 
instead of first exhausting the soil, and then letting it lie fallow 
for years to recover itself. They have also escaped the ruinous 
expense of feeding large bodies of negroes in those seasons when 
the harvest is deficient. They do not pretend to indulge in that 
hospitality for which the old Virginians and North Carolinians 
were celebrated, who often mortgaged their estates to pay the 
annual salary of their overseer, till he himself became the pro 
prietor. The master, in that case, usually migrated with part 
of his negroes to settle farther south or southwest, introducing 
into the new states more civilized habits and manners than would 
have belonged to them had they been entirely peopled by adven 
turers from the north or from Europe. 

On Sunday, December the 21st, we attended service in a 
handsome new Episcopal church, called St. Paul s, and heard 
the rector announce to the congregation that a decision had just 



203 NEGRO EDUCATION. [CHAP. XV. 

been come to (by a majority of all the proprietors of the church, 
as I was afterward informed), that one of the side galleries 
should henceforth be set apart exclusively for people of color. 
This resolution, he said, had been taken in order that they and 
their servants might unite in the worship of the same God, as 
they hoped to enter hereafter together into his everlasting king 
dom, if they obeyed his laws. I inquired whether they would 
not have done more toward raising the slaves to a footing of 
equality in the house of prayer, if they had opened the same 
galleries to negroes and whites. In reply, I was assured that, 
in the present state of social feeling, the colored people would 
gain less by such joint occupancy, because, from their habitual 
deference to the whites, they would yield to them all the front 
places. There were few negroes present ; but I am told that, if 
I went to the Baptist or Methodist churches, I should find the 
galleries quite full. There are several Sunday schools here for 
negroes, and it is a singular fact thai, in spite of the law against 
instructing slaves, many of the whites have been taught to read 
by negro nurses. A large proportion of the slaves and free 
colored people here are of mixed breed. The employment of 
this class as in-door servants in cities arises partly from the in 
terest taken in them by their white parents, who have manu- 
mited them and helped them to rise in the world, and partly 
because the rich prefer them as domestic servants, for their ap 
pearance is more agreeable, and they are more intelligent. 
Whether their superiority is owing to physical causes, and that 
share of an European organization which they inherit in right 
of one of their parents, or whether it may be referred to their 
early intercourse and contact with the whites, in other words, 
to a better education, is still matter of controversy. 

Several Virginian planters have spoken to me of the negro 
race as naturally warm-hearted, patient, and cheerful, grateful 
for benefits, and forgiving of injuries. They are also of a relig 
ious temperament, bordering on superstition. Even those who 
think they ought forever to remain in servitude, give them a 
character which leads one to the belief that steps ought long 
ago to have been taken toward their gradual emancipation, 



CHAP. XV.] NEGRO SLAVERY. 209 

Had some legislative provision been made with this view before 
the annexation of Texas, a period being fixed after which all the 
children born in this state should be free, that new territory 
would have afforded a useful outlet for the black population of 
Virginia, and whites would have supplied the vacancies which 
are now filled up by the breeding of negroes. In the absence 
of such enactments, Texas prolongs the duration of negro slavery 
in Virginia, aggravating one of its worst consequences, the in 
ternal slave trade, and keeping up the price of negroes at home. 
They are now selling for 500, 750, and 1000 dollars each, ac 
cording to their qualifications. There are always dealers at 
Richmond, whose business it is to collect slaves for the southern 
market ; and, until a gang is ready to start for the south, they 
are kept here well fed, and as cheerful as possible. In a court 
of the jail, where they are lodged, I see them every day amusing 
themselves by playing at quoits. How much this traffic is ab 
horred, even by those who encourage it, is shown by the low social 
position held by the dealer, even when he has made a large for 
tune. When they conduct gangs of fifty slaves at a time across 
the mountains to the Ohio river, they usually manacle some of the 
men, but on reaching the Ohio river, they have no longer any 
fear of their attempting an escape, and they then unshackle them. 
That the condition of slaves in Virginia is steadily improving, 
all here seem agreed. One of the greatest evils olf the system 
is the compulsory separation of members of the same family. 
Since my arrival at Richmond, a case has come to my knowl 
edge, of a negro who petitioned a rich individual to purchase 
him, because he was going to be sold, and was in danger of being 
sent to New Orleans, his wife and child remaining in Virginia. 
But such instances are far less common than would be imagined, 
owing to the kind feeling of the southern planters toward their 
" own people," as they call them. Even in extreme cases, 
where the property of an insolvent is brought to the hammer, 
public opinion acts as a powerful check against the parting of 
kindred. We heard of two recent cases, one in which the pa 
rents were put up without their children, and the mother being 
in tears, no one would bid till the dealer put the children up 



210 KINDNESS TO NEGROES. [CHAP. XV. 

also. They then sold very well. Another, where the dealer 
was compelled, in like manner, to sell a father and son to 
gether. I learned with pleasure an anecdote, from undoubted 
authority, very characteristic of the indulgence of owners of the 
higher class of society here toward their slaves. One of the 
judges of the Supreme Court at Richmond, having four or five 
supernumerary negroes in his establishment, proposed to them to 
go to his plantation in the country. As they had acquired town 
habits, they objected, and begged him instead to look out for a 
good master who would carry them to a city farther south, where 
they might enjoy a warm climate. The judge accordingly made 
his arrangements, and, for the sake of securing the desired con 
ditions, was to receive for each a price below their market value. 
Just as they were about to leave Richmond for Louisiana, one 
of the women turned faint-hearted, at which all the rest lost 
courage ; for their local and personal attachments are very strong, 
although they seem always ready to migrate cheerfully to any 
part of the world with their owners. The affair ended in the 
good-natured judge having to repurchase them, paying the dif 
ference of price between the sum agreed upon for each, and 
what they would have fetched at an auction. 

Great sacrifices are often made from a sense of duty, by re 
taining possession of inherited estates, which it would be most 
desirable to sell, and which the owners can not part with, because 
they feel it would be wrong to abandon the slaves to an un 
known purchaser. We became acquainted with the family of a 
widow, who had six daughters and no son to take on himself the 
management of a plantation, always a responsible, and often a 
very difficult undertaking. It was felt by all the relatives and 
neighbors to be most desirable that the property, situated in a 
remote part of the country, near the sea, should be sold, in order 
that the young ladies and their mother should have the benefit 
of society in a large town. They wished it themselves, being 
in very moderate circumstances, but were withheld by conscien 
tious motives from leaving a large body of dependents, whom 
they had known from childhood, and who could scarcely hope to 
be treated with the same indulgence by strangers. 



CHAP. XV.] COAL OF OOLITIC PERIOD. 211 

I had stopped at Richmond on my way south, for the sake of 
exploring geologically some coal mines, distant about thirteen 
miles from the city to the westward. Some of the largest and 
most productive of these, situated in Chesterfield County, belong 
to an English company, and one of them was under the manage 
ment of Mr. A. F. Gifford, formerly an officer in the British 
army, and married to a Virginian lady. At their agreeable 
residence, near the Blackheath mines, we were received most 
kindly and hospitably. On our road from Richmond, we passed 
many fields which had been left fallow for years, after having 
been exhausted by a crop of tobacco. The whole country was 
covered with snow, and, in the pine forests, the tall trunks of the 
trees had a white coating on their windward side, as if one half 
had been painted. I persevered, nevertheless, in my examination 
of the mines, for my underground work was not impeded by the 
weather, and I saw so much that was new, and of high scientific 
interest in this coal-field, that I returned the following spring to 
complete my survey. 

There are two regions in the state of Virginia (a country 
about equal in area to the whole of England proper), in which 
productive coal-measures occur. In one of these which may be 
called the western coal-field, the strata belong to the ancient 
carboniferous group, characterized by fossil plants of the same 
genera, arid, to a great extent, the same species, as those found 
in the ancient coal-measures of Europe. The other one, wholly 
disconnected in its geographical and geological relations, is found 
to the east of the Appalachian Mountains, in the middle of that 
granitic region, sometimes called the Atlantic Slope. * In con 
sequence of the isolated position of these eastern coal-beds, the 
lowest of which rest immediately on the fundamental granite, 
while the uppermost are not covered by any overlying fossiliferous 
formations, we have scarcely any means of determining their 
relative age, except by the characters of their included organic 
remains. The study of these, induced Professor W. B. Rogers, 
in his memoir, published in 1842,f to declare his opinion that 

* See geological map of the U. S. in my " Travels in North America," 
vol. i. and ii. p. 92. t Trans, of American Geologists, p. 298. 



212 UPRIGHT FOSSIL TREES. [CHAP. XV. 

this coal was of newer date than that of the Appalachians, and 
was about the age of the Oolite or Lias, a conclusion which, after 
a careful examination of the evidence on the spot, and of all the 
organic remains which 1 could collect, appears to me to come 
very near the truth. If we embrace this conclusion, these rocks 
are the only ones hitherto known in all Canada and the United 
States, which we can prove, by their organic remains, to be of 
contemporaneous origin with the Oolitic or Jurassic formation of 
Europe. The tract of country occupied by the crystalline rocks, 
granite, gneiss, hornblende-schist, and others, which runs parallel 
to the Alleghariy Mountains, and between them and the sea, is 
in this part of Virginia about seventy miles broad. In the midst 
of this area occurs the coal-field alluded to, twenty-six miles long, 
and varying in breadth from four to twelve miles. The James 
river flows through the middle of it, about fifteen miles from its 
northern extremity, while the Appomattox river traverses it near 
its southern borders. The beds lie in a trough (see section, fig. 
4, p. 213), the lowest of them usually highly inclined where they 
crop out along the margin of the basin, while the strata higher 
in the series, occupying the central parts of the area, and which 
are devoid of organic remains and of coal, are nearly horizontal. 

A great portion of these coal-measures consists of quartzose 
sandstone and coarse grit, entirely composed of the detritus of the 
neighboring granitic and syenitic rocks. Dark carbonaceous 
shales arid clays, occasionally charged with iron ores, abound in 
the proximity of the coal-seams, and numerous impressions of 
plants, chiefly ferns and Zarnites, are met with in shales, to 
gether with flattened and prostrate stems of Calamites and Equi- 
setum. These last, however, the Calamites and Equisetum, are 
very commonly met with in a vertical position, more or less com 
pressed perpendicularly. I entertain no doubt that the greater 
number of these plants standing erect in the beds above and 
between the seams of coal which I saw at points many miles 
distant from each other, have grown in the places where they 
are now buried in sand and mud, and this fact implies the 
gradual accumulation of the coal-measures during a slow and 
repeated subsidence of the whole region. 



CHAP. XV.] THICKNESS OF COAL-SEAMS. 213 

A great number of fossil fish, chiefly referable to two nearly 
allied species of a genus very distinct from any ichthyolite hith 
erto discovered elsewhere (a ganoid with a homocercal tail), 
occur in the lower strata, with a few shells ; but they afforded 
me no positive characters to determine whether the deposit was 
of marine or fresh-water origin. Above these fossiliferous beds, 
which probably never exceed 400 or 500 feet in thickness, a 
great succession of grits, sandstone, and shales, of unknown depth, 
occur. They have yielded no coal, nor as yet any organic re 
mains. No speculator has been bold enough to sink a shaft 
through them, and it is believed that toward the central parts of 
the basin they might have to pass through 2000 or 2500 feet 
of sterile rocks before reaching the fundamental coal-seams. 

The next ideal section will show the manner in which I sup 
pose the coal-field to be placed in a hollow in the granitic rocks, 
the whole country having suffered by great denudation, and the 
surface having been planed off almost uniformly, and at the same 
time overspread by a deep covering of gravel with red and yellow 

Section showing the Geological Position of the James River, or East Virginian 

Coal-Field. 



Fig. 4. 




A. Granite, gneiss, &c. B. Coal-measures. 

C. Tertiary strata. D. Drift or ancient alluvium. 

clay, concealing the subjacent formation from view, so that the 
structure of the region could not be made out without difficulty 
but for artificial excavations. It will be seen by the section 
that the tertiary strata first make their appearance at Rich 
mond about thirteen miles from the eastern outcrop of the coal, 
and they continue to occupy the lower country between that city 
and the Atlantic. 

The only beds of coal hitherto discovered lie in the lower part 



214 VEGETABLE STRUCTURE OF COAL. [CHAP. XV. 

of the coal-measures, and consequently come up to the surface all 
round the margin of the basin. As the dip is usually at a con 
siderable angle, vertical shafts, from 400 to 800 feet deep, are 
required to reach the great seam, at the distance of a few hun 
dred yards inside the edge of the basin. It is only, therefore, along 
a narrow band of country that the coal can crop out naturally, 
and even here it is rarely exposed, and only where a river or 
valley has cut through the superficial drift, often thirty or forty 
feet thick. The principal coal-seam occurs in greatest force at 
Blackheath and the adjoining parts of Chesterfield county, where 
the coal is for the most part very pure, and actually attains the 
unusual thickness of between thirty or forty feet. I was not a 
little surprised, when I descended, with Mr. Gifford, a shaft 800 
feet deep, to find myself in a chamber more than forty feet high, 
caused by the removal of the coal. Timber props of great 
strength are required to support the roof, and although the use of 
wood is lavish here, as in most parts of the United States, the 
strong props are seen to bend under the incumbent weight. This 
great seam is sometimes parted from the fundamental granite by 
an inch or two of shale, which seems to have constituted the soil 
on which the plants grew. At some points where the granite 
floor touches the coal, the contact may have been occasioned by 
subsequent disturbances, for the rocks are fractured and shifted in 
many places. This more modern coal, as well as that of New 
castle, and other kinds of more ancient date, exhibits under the 
microscope distinct evidence of vegetable structure, consisting in 
this case principally of parallel fibers or tubes, whose walls are 
pierced with circular or elongated holes. See fig. 5. B. and F. 

By analysis it is found that so far as relates to the proportions 
of carbon and hydrogen, the composition of this coal is identical 
with that of ordinary specimens of the most ancient coal of 
America and Europe, although the latter has been derived from 
an assemblage of plants of very distinct species. The bituminous 
coal, for example, of the Ohio coal-field, and that of Alabama, 
yields the same elements. 

For many years the cities of New York and Philadelphia hava 
been supplied with gas for lighting their streets and houses, from 



CHAP. XV.] 



EXPLOSION OF GAS. 



215 




Vegetable Structure of Mineral Charcoal from Clover-hill Mines, Virginia. 

coal of the Blackheath mines, and the annual quantity taken by 
Philadelphia alone, has of late years amounted to 10,000 tons. 
We miufht have expected, therefore, that there would be danger 
of the disengagement of inflammable gases from coal containing 
so much volatile matter. Accordingly, here, as in the English 
coal-pits, fatal explosions have sometimes occurred. One of these 
happened at Blackheath, in 1839, by which forty-five negroes 
and two white overseers lost their lives ; and another almost as 
serious, so lately as the year 1844. 

Before I examined this region, I was told that a strange 
anomaly occurred in it, for there were beds of coke overlying 
others consisting of bituminous coal. I found, on visiting the 
various localities of this natural coke, that it was caused by the 
vicinity or contact of volcanic rocks (greenstone and basalt), 
which, coming up through the granite, intersect the coal- 
measures, or sometimes make their way laterally between two 
strata, appearing as a conformable mass. As in the Durham 
coal-field in England (in the Has well collieries, for example), the 
igneous rock has driven out all the gaseous matter, and, where 



216 MODERN AND ANCIENT COAL-FIELDS. [CHAP. XV. 

it overlies it, has deprived the upper coal of its volatile ingre 
dients, while its influence has not always extended to lower 
seams. In some spots, the conversion of coal into coke seems 
to have been brought about, not so much by the heating agency 
of the intrusive basalt, as by its mechanical effect in breaking up 
and destroying the integrity of the beds, and rendering them 
permeable to water, thereby facilitating the escape of the gases 
of decomposing coal. 

In conclusion, I may observe that I was much struck with 
the general similarity of this more modern or Oolitic coal-field, 
and those of ancient or Paleozoic date in England and in Europe 
generally. I was especially reminded of the carboniferous rocks 
near St. Etienne, in France, which I visited in 1843, These 
also rest on granite, and consist of coarse grits and sandstone 
derived from the detritus of granite. In both coal-fields, the 
French and the Virginian, upright Calamites abound ; fossil 
plants are met with in both, almost to the exclusion of other 
organic remains, shells especially being absent. The character 
of the coal is similar, but in the richness and thickness of the 
seams the Virginian formation is pre-eminent. When we behold 
phenomena so identical, repeated at times so remote in the earth s 
history, and at periods when such very distinct forms of vegeta 
tion flourished, we may derive from the fact a useful caution, in 
regard to certain popular generalizations respecting a peculiar 
state of the globe during the remoter of the two epochs alluded 
to. Some geologists, for example, have supposed an atmosphere 
densely charged with carbonic acid to be necessary to explain 
the origin of coal an atmosphere so unlike the present, as to be 
unfit for the existence of air-breathing, vertebrate animals ; but 
this theory they will hardly be prepared to extend to so modern 
an era as the Oolitic or Triassic.^ 

During my visit to one of the coal-pits, an English overseer, 
who was superintending the works, told me that within his 
memory there had been a great improvement in the treatment 

* See a paper on this coal-field, by the author, Quarterly Journal Geolog. 
Soc., August, 1847, vol. iii. p. 261, and an accompanying memoir, descrip 
tive of the fossil plants, by Charles J. F. Bunbury, For. S. G. S. 



CHAP. XV.] NEGROES IN THE MINES. 217 

of the negroes. Some years ago, a planter came to him with a 
refractory slave, and asked him to keep him underground for a 
year by way of punishment, saying, that no pay would be re 
quired for his hire. The overseer retorted that he would be no 
man s jailer. The British company at Blackheath having re 
solved not to employ any slaves, and Mr. Gifford, having engaged 
130 free^^roes, found he could preserve good discipline without 
corpora^^Pnishment ; and he not only persuaded several newly 
arrived laborers from England to work with the blacks, but old 
Virginians, also, of the white race, engaged themselves, although 
their countrymen looked down upon them at first for associating 
with such companions. They confessed that, for a time, " they 
felt very awkward," but it was not long before the proprietors 
of other mines followed the example which had been set them. 
VOL. i. K 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Journey through North Carolina. Wilmington. Recent Firj^i Passports 
for Slaves. Cape Fear River and Smithfield. Spanish IJHB^and Uses 
of. Charleston. Anti-Negro Feeling. Passage from Mulattoes to 
Whites. Law against importing free Blacks. Dispute with Massachu 
setts. Society in Charleston. Governesses. War Panic. Anti-English 
Feeling caused by Newspaper Press. National Arbitration of the Amer 
icans. Dr. Bachman s Zoology. Geographical Representation of Spe 
cies. Rattle-Snakes. Turkey Buzzards. 

Dec. 23, 1845. THE monotony of the scenery in the princi 
pal route from the northern to the southern states is easily 
understood by a geologist, for the line of railroad happens to run 
for hundreds of miles on the tertiary strata, near their junction 
with the granitic rocks. Take any road in a transverse direction 
from the sea coast to the Alleghanies, and the traveler will meet 
with the greatest variety in the scenery.^ In passing over the 
tertiary sands and clays, we see Pine Barrens where the soil is 
sandy, and a swamp, or cane-brake, where the argillaceous beds 
come to the surface. The entire absence of all boulders and 
stones, such as are observable almost every where in the New 
England States and New York, is a marked geological peculiar 
ity of these southern lowlands. Such erratic blocks and boulders 
are by no means confined in the north to the granitic or second 
ary formations, for some of the largest of them, huge fragments 
of granite, for example, twenty feet in diameter, rest on the 
newer tertiary deposits of the island of Martha s Vineyard, off 
the coast of Massachusetts. 

After leaving Richmond, I remarked that the railway from 
Weldon to Wilmington, through North Carolina, had not im 
proved in the last three years, nor the stations or inns where wo 
stopped. I was told, in explanation, that this line would soon 

* Sco iny " Travels in North America," voL i. p. 93 ; an<! the colored 
^eulo. icrtl map, ! 



CHAP. XVI.] WILMINGTON. 219 

be superseded, or nearly so, by a more inland road now making 
through Haleigh. We reached Wilmington without much de 
lay, in spite of the ice on the rails, and the running of our loco 
motive engine against a cow. On approaching that town, we 
were glad to see that the ground was not covered with snow as 
every where to the northward, and our eyes were refreshed by 
the sigl^pf verdure, caused by the pines, and by two kinds of 
evergreef oaks, besides magnolias, and an undergrowth of holly 
and kalmia. In the streets and suburbs of Wilmington, the 
Pride-of-India tree (Melia azedarach) is very conspicuous, some 
of them twenty-five years old, having survived many a severe 
frost, especially that of the autumn of the present year, the se 
verest since 1835. There are also some splendid live oaks here 
(Quercus virens), a tree of very slow growth, which furnishes 
the finest timber for ship-building. 

We reached Wilmington after the steamboat for Charleston 
had departed, and I was not sorry to have a day to collect ter 
tiary fossils in the cliffs near the town. The streets which had 
just been laid in ashes when we were here four years ago, are 
now rebuilt ; but there has been another fire this year, imputed 
very generally to incendiaries, because it broke out in many 
places at once. There had been a deficiency of firemen, owing 
to the state having discontinued the immunity from militia duty, 
formerly conceded to those who served the fire-engines. The 
city, however, has now undertaken to find substitutes for young 
men who will join the fire companies. A lady told me that, 
when the conflagration burst forth very suddenly, she was with 
a merchant whose house was not insured, and, finding him panic- 
struck, and incapable of acting for himself, she had selected his 
ledgers and other valuables, and was carrying them away to her 
own house ; but on the way the civic guard stopped her in the 
dark, and, suspecting her to be a person of color, required her to 
show her pass. She mentioned this incidentally, as a serious 
cause of delay when time was precious ; but it brought home 
forcibly to our minds the extraordinary precautions which one 
half the population here think it necessary to take against the 
other half. 



220 SMITHFIELD, NORTH CAROLINA. [CHAP. XVI. 

A large export of turpentine is the chief business of this port, 
and gashes are seen cut in the bark of the pines in the neighbor 
ing forest, from which resin exudes. The half decayed wood of 
these resinous pines forms what is called light wood, burning 
with a most brilliant flame, and often used for candles, as well 
as for reviving the fire. A North Carolinian is said to migrate 
most unwillingly to any new region where this prime luxury of 
life is wanting. 

When we sailed for Charleston, the steamer first proceeded 
thirty miles to the mouth of the Cape Fear river, and then an 
chored there for several hours at a village called Smith field, in 
North Carolina. Here I strolled along the shore, and in a few 
minutes found myself in a wild region, out of sight of all human 
habitations, and every sign of the work of man s hands. The 
soil, composed of white quartzose sand, was hopelessly barren. 
Coming to a marsh, I put up many peewits, which flew round 
me, uttering a cry resembling that of our European species. The 
evergreen oaks round the marsh were hung with Spanish moss, 
or Tiilandsia, the pods of which are now full of downy seeds. 
This plant is not a parasite like the misletoe, of which a species 
is also common on the trees here, but simply supports itself on 
trees, without sending any roots into them, or drawing nourish 
ment from their juices. It is what the botanists call an epiphyte, 
and is precisely the same species ( Tiilandsia usncoides), which 
is also common in Brazil ; so that as we journey southward, this 
flowering epiphyte, together with the palmetto, or fan-palm, may 
be regarded as marking an approach toward a more tropical veg 
etation. When dried, the outer soft part of the .Tillandsia de 
cays and leaves a woody fiber in the middle, much resembling 
horse-hair in appearance, and very elastic. It is used in the 
United States, and exported to Liverpool, for stuffing mattresses. 
In preparing it they first bury the moss, and then take it up 
again when the exterior coating has rotted off. The birds also 
select only the woody fiber of the withered or dead stems for 
building their nests. 

On the morning of Christmas-day, we reached Charleston, S.C., 
and found the interior of the Episcopal church of St. Philip 



CHAP. XVI.] CHARLESTON. 221 

adorned with evergreens and with artificial flowers, in imitation 
of magnolias and asters. During the whole service the boys in 
the streets were firing pistols and letting off fireworks, which re 
minded me of the liberal expenditure of gunpowder indulged in 
by the Roman Catholics in Sicily, when celebrating Christmas 
in the churches. I once heard a file of soldiers at Girgenti fire 
off their muskets inside a church. Here at least it was on the 
outside ; but, as it was no part of the ceremony, it was a greater 
interruption to the service. We saw some of the white race very 
shabbily dressed, and several mulattoes in the church, separated 
from the whites, in fashionable attire, which doubtless they were 
fully entitled to wear, being much richer, j Instead of growing 
reconciled to the strong line of demarkation drawn between the 
two races, it appears to me more and more unnatural, for I some 
times discover that my American companions can not tell me, 
without inquiry, to which race certain colored individuals belong ; 
and some English men and women, of dark complexion, might 
occasionally be made to feel aivkward, if they were traveling with 
us here. On one occasion, the answer to my query was, " If I 
could get sight of his thumb nail I could tell you." It appears 
that the white crescent, at the base of the nail, is wholly want 
ing in the full blacks, and is that peculiarity which they acquire 
the last as they approximate by intermixture, in the course of 
generations, toward the whites. 

I have just seen the following advertisement in a newspaper : 
" Runaway. Reward. A liberal reward will be given for 
the arrest of a boy named Dick. He is a bright mulatto so 
bright, that he can readily, as he has done before, pass himself 
for a white. He is about thirty years of age," &c. Another ad 
vertisement of a runaway negro ; states, " his color is moderated 
by in-door work." 

So long as the present system continues, the idea of future 
amalgamation must be repugnant to the dominant race. They 
would shrink from it just as a European noble would do, if he 
were told that his grandchild or great grandchild would inter 
marry with the direct descendant of one of his menial servants. 
That the alleged personal dislike of the two races toward each 



222 DISPUTE WITH MASSACHUSETTS. [CHAP. XVI. 

other, so much insisted upon by many writers, must arise chiefly 
from prejudice, seems proved, not only by the mixture of the 
races, but by the manner in which we see the Southern women, 
when they are ill, have three or four female slaves to sleep on 
the floor of their sick room, and often consign their babes to black 
nurses to be suckled. 

That the attainder of blood should outlast all trace of African 
features, betrays a feeling allied to the most extravagant aristo 
cratic pride of the feudal ages, and stands out in singular relief 
and contrast here in the South, where the whites, high and low, 
ignorant arid educated, are striving among themselves to main 
tain a standard of social equality, in defiance of all the natural 
distinctions which difference of fortune, occupation, and degrees 
of refinement give rise to. 

A few years ago a ship from Massachusetts touched at Charles 
ton, having some free blacks on board, the steward and cook being 
of the number. On their landing, they were immediately put 
into jail by virtue of a law of South Carolina, not of very old 
standing. The government of Massachusetts, in a state of great 
indignation, sent a lawyer to investigate the case and remonstrate. 
This agent took up his abode at the Charleston Hotel, where we 
are now comfortably established. A few days after his arrival, 
the hotel was surrounded, to the terror of all the inmates, by a 
mob of " gentlemen," who were resolved to seize the New Erf* 
gland envoy. There is no saying to what extremities they would 
have proceeded, had not the lawyer s daughter, a spirited girl, re 
fused to leave the hotel. The excitement lasted five days, and 
almost every northern man in Charleston was made to feel him 
self in personal danger. At length, by the courage and energy 
of some of the leading citizens, Mr. H was enabled to es 
cape, and then the most marked attentions were paid, and civili 
ties offered, to the young lady, his daughter, by the families of 
the very men who had thought it right, " on principle," to get 
up this riot. The same law has given rise to some very awk 
ward disputes with the captains of English vessels, whose color 
ed, sailors have, in like mariner, been imprisoned. To obtain re 
dress for the injury, in such cases, is impossible. The Federal 



CHAP. XVI.] SOCIETY IN CHARLESTON. 223 

Government is too weak to enforce its authority, and the sover 
eign state is sheltered under the segis of the grand confederacy. 

JBy virtue of a similar law, also, in force in Alabama, tho 
crews of several vessels, consisting of free blacks, have been com 
mitted to jail at Mobile, and the captains obliged to pay the costs, 
and give bonds to carry them away. 

I asked a New England merchant, who is here, why the city 
of Charleston did not increase, having such a noble harbor. He 
said, " There have been several great fires, and the rich are ab 
sentees for half the year, flying from malaria. Besides, you will 
find that large cities do not grow in slave states as in the North. 
Few, if any of the ships, now in this harbor, belong to merchants 
of Charleston." 

We were as much pleased with what we saw of the society of 
Charleston, during this short visit, as formerly, when we were 
here in 1842. I have heard its exclusiveness much commented 
on ; for there are many families here, whose ancestors started 
from genteel English stocks in Virginia two hundred years ago, 
and they and some of the eminent lawyers and others, who, by 
their education and talents, have qualified themselves to be re 
ceived into the same circle, do not choose to associate on intimate 
terms with every one who may happen to come and settle in the 
place. There is nearly as wide a range in the degrees of refine 
ment of manners in American as in European society, and, to 
counterbalance some unfavorable circumstances, the social system 
has also some advantages. There is too great a predominance 
of the mercantile class, and the democracy often selects rude and 
unpolished favorites to fill stations of power ; but such men are 
scarcely ever without some talent. On the other hand, mere 
wealth is less worshiped than in England, and there is no rank 
and title to force men of slender abilities, and without even agree 
able manners, into good company, or posts of political importance. 

The treatment in the southern states of governesses, who 
usually come from the North or from England, is very kind and 
considerate. They are placed on a much greater footing of 
equality with the family in which they live, than in England. 
Occasionally we find that the mother of the children has staid at 



224 WAR-PANIC. [CHAP. XVI. 

home, in order that the teacher may take her turn, and go out to 
a party. This system implies a great sacrifice of domestic pri 
vacy ; but when the monotony of the daily routine of lessons is 
thus relieved to the instructress, the pupil must also be a gainer. 
Their salaries are from 50 to 100 guineas, which is more than 
they receive in the northern states. 

The negroes here have certainly not the manners of an op 
pressed race. One evening, when we had gone out to dine in 
the suburbs, in a close carriage, the same coachman returned for 
us at night with an open vehicle. It was very cold, the frost 
having been more intense this year than any winter since 1835, 
and I remonstrated strongly ; but the black driver, as he shut 
the door, said, with a good-humored smile, " that all the other 
carriages of his master were engaged ;" and added, " Never 
mind, it will soon be over !" 

One of the judges of the Admiralty Court tells me that, on 
Christmas eve, the day we came here, at nine o clock at night, 
when he was just going to bed, an English resident came to him 
whose mind was so full of the prevailing war-panic, that nothing 
would satisfy him but the obtaining immediate letters of natural 
ization. He seemed to think that hostilities with England 
might break out in the course of the night, and that, in conse 
quence, all his property would be confiscated. He was accord 
ingly enrolled as a citizen, " although," said the judge, " we shall 
not gain much by his courage, should we have to defend Charles 
ton against a British fleet." 

Some months ago a British post-office steam-ship sailed into 
the harbor here, and took soundings in various places, and this 
incident has given offense to many, although in reality the sur 
vey was made under the expectation that the proposed scheme 
for extending the line of British West India mail-steamers along 
this coast would soon take effect. 

I asked -a South Carolinian, a friend of peace, and one who 
thinks that a war would ruin the maritime states, why so many 
of the people betrayed so much sympathy with the hostile demon 
stration got up by the press against England. " We have a set 
of demagogues," he replied, in this country, who trade on the 



CHAP. XVI.] ANTI-ENGLISH FEELING. 305 

article called < hatred to England/ as so much political capital, 
just as a southern merchant trades in cotton, or a Canadian one 
in lumber. They court the multitude by blustering and by 
threatening England. There is a natural leaning in the South 
toward Great Britain, as furnishing a market for their cotton, 
and they are averse to the high tariff which the northerners have 
inflicted on them. But these feelings are neutralized by a dis 
like of the abolitionist party in England, and by a strong spirit 
of antagonism to Great Britain, which the Irish bring over here. 
All these sources of estrangement, however, are as nothing in 
comparison with the baneful effect of your press, and its persever 
ing misrepresentation of every thing American. Almost every 
white man here is a reader and a politician, and all that is said 
against us in England is immediately cited in our newspapers, 
because it serves to augment that political capital of which I 
have spoken." I remarked that the nation arid its government 
are not answerable for all the thoughtless effusions of anonymous 
newspaper writers, and that the tone of the English journals, 
since the agitation of the Oregon affair, had been temperate, 
guarded, and even courteous. "It is very true," he said ; " the 
Times, in particular, formerly one of the most insolent and ma 
lignant. But the change has been too sudden, and the motive 
too transparent. The English know that the world can never 
suspect them of want of courage if they show a disinclination to 
go to war. Not wishing to waste their blood and treasure for 
so useless a possession as Oregon, they are behaving like a man 
who, having insulted another, has no mind, when called out, to 
fight a duel about nothing. He therefore makes an apology. 
But such civility will not last, and if the anonymous abuse 
habitually indulged in. were not popular, it would long ago have 
ceased." 

A short time after this conversation, I fell in with a young 
officer of the American navy who was wishing for war, partly 
for the sake of active service, but chiefly from intense nationality. 
" We may get the worst of it," he said, "for a year or two, but 
England will not come out of the struggle without being forced 
to acknowledge that she has had to deal with a first-rate instead 

K* 



226 ANTI-ENGLISH FEELING. [CHAP. XVI. 

of a second-rate power." Soon after this T met an English 
sportsman, who had been traveling for his amusement in the 
western states, where he had been well received, and liked the 
people much, but many of them had told him, " We must have 
a brush with the English before they will respect us." 

This sentiment is strong with a certain party throughout the 
Union, and would have no existence if they did not respect the 
English, and wish in their hearts to have their good opinion. 
It may be well for an old nation to propound the doctrine that 
every people ought to rest on their own dignity, and be satisfied 
with their place in the world without troubling themselves about 
what others think of them, or running the risk of having applied 
to them the character which Goldsmith ascribed to the French 
of his times : 

" Where the weak soul within itself unblest, 
Leans for support upon another s breast." 

But they whose title to consideration is new, however real, will 
rarely occupy their true place unless they take it ; whereas an 
older nation has seldom to assert its claims, and they are often 
freely conceded, long after it has declined from its former power. 
To an ambitious nation, feeding its imagination with anticipations 
of coming greatness, it is peculiarly mortifying to find that what 
they have actually achieved is barely acknowledged. They grow 
boastful and impatient to display their strength. When they 
are in this mood, no foreign country should succumb to them ; 
but, on the other hand, it is equally impolitic and culpable to 
irritate them by disparagement, or by not yielding to them their 
proper place among the nations. " You class us," said one of 
their politicians to me in Washington, " with the South American 
republics ; your embassadors to us come from Brazil and Mexico 
to Washington, and consider it a step in their advancement to go 
from the United States to Spain, or some second-rate German 
court, having a smaller population than two of our large states. 
Yet, in reality, where is there a people in the world, except 
France, with which it so much concerns you to live in amity as 
the United States, and with what other nation have you and 
your chief colonies so much commercial intercourse ?" 



CHAP. XVI.] DR. BACHMAN S ZOOLOGY. 227 

On listening to complaints against the English press, my 
thoughts often recurred to Bonaparte s prosecution of the royalist 
emigrant, Peltier, after the peace of Amiens, February, 1803, 
and the appeal to the jury of Sir James Mackintosh, as counsel 
for the defendant, on the want of dignity on the part of the First 
Consul, then in reality the most powerful sovereign in Europe, 
in persecuting a poor, defenseless, and proscribed exile, for abusive 
editorial articles. The court and jury were probably of the same 
mind ; but the verdict of guilty showed that they deemed it no 
light matter that the peace of two great nations should be dis 
turbed, by permitting anonymous libels, or a continued outpour 
ing of invective and vituperation, calculated to provoke the ruler 
of a friendly country. In America the sovereign people read 
every thing written against them, as did Napoleon to the last, 
and, like him, with unmitigated resentment. 

Before leaving Charleston I called on Dr. Bachman, whose 
acquaintance I had made in 1842, and was glad to see on his 
table the first volumes of a joint work by himself and Audubon, 
on the land quadrupeds of North America. These authors will 
give colored figures and descriptions of no less than 200 mam 
malia, exclusive of cetacea, all inhabiting this continent between 
the southern limits of the Arctic region and the Tropic of Cancer, 
for they now include Texas in the United States. Not more 
than seventy-six species are enumerated by preceding naturalists, 
and several of these are treated by Bachman and Audubon not 
as true species but mere varieties. Their industry, however, in 
augmenting the list of new discoveries, is not always welcomed 
by the subscribers, one of whom has just written to say, " if you 
describe so many squirrels, I can not go on taking in your book." 
The tribe alluded to in this threatening epistle, especially the 
striped species, is most fully represented in North America, a 
continent so remarkable for its extent of woodland and the variety 
of its forest trees. Yet, after traveling so much in the woods, I 
had never got sight of more than three or four species, owing, I 
am informed, to their nocturnal habits. I regretted that I had 
not yet seen the flying squirrel in motion, and was surprised to 
hear that Dr. Bachman had observed about a hundred of them 



228 DR. BACHMAN S ZOOLOGY. [CHAP. XVI. 

every evening, for several weeks, near Philadelphia, on two tall 
oaks, in the autumn, when acorns and chestnuts were abundant, 
and when they had spare time for play. They were amusing 
themselves by passing from one tree to another, throwing them 
selves off from the top of one of the oaks, and descending at a 
considerable angle to near the base of the other ; then inclining 
the head upward just before reaching the ground, so as to turn and 
alight on the trunk, which they immediately climbed up to repeat 
the same mano3uvre. In this way there was almost a continuous 
flight of them crossing each other in the air between the two trees. 

I had heard much of the swamp-rabbit, which they hunt near 
the coast in South Carolina and Georgia, and was glad to see a 
stuffed specimen. It is an aquatic hare (Lepus palustris), diving 
most nimbly, and outswimming a Newfoundland dog. 

Dr. Bachman pointed out to me ten genera of birds, and ten 
of quadrupeds, all peculiar to North America, but each repre 
sented on the opposite side of the Rocky Mountains by distinct 
species. The theory of specific centers, or the doctrine that the 
original stock of each species of bird and quadruped originated in 
one spot only, may explain in a satisfactory manner one part of 
this phenomenon ; for we may assume that a lofty chain of 
mountains opposed a powerful barrier to migration, and that the 
mountains were more ancient than the introduction of these par 
ticular quadrupeds and birds into the planet. But the limitation 
of peculiar generic types to certain geographical areas, now ob 
served in so many parts of the globe, points to some other and 
higher law governing the creation of species itself, which in the 
present state of science is inscrutable to us, and may, perhaps, 
remain a mystery forever. The adaptation of peculiar forms, 
instincts, qualities, and organizations to the present geography 
and climate of a region, may be a part only of the conditions 
which govern in every case the relations of the animate beings 
to their habitations. The past condition and changes of the 
globe and its inhabitants, throughout the whole period when the 
different beings were entering, each in succession, upon the scene, 
and all the future conditions and changes to the end of vast 
periods, during which they may be destined to exist, ought to be 



CHAP. XVI.] RATTLE-SNAKES. 229 

known, before we can expect to comprehend why certain types 
were originally selected for certain areas, whether of land or water. 

In the museum of the Medical College, Professor Shepard 
showed me a fine specimen of the large rattle-snake of South 
Carolina (Crotalm adamantinus), preserved in spirits. It 
was said to have been nine years old, having six rattles, the 
tail acquiring one annually after the third year. When brought 
into the laboratory in winter in a torpid state, an electric shock 
had been communicated to it, which threw it into a state of 
extreme excitement. Two tortoises, nearly torpid, were also 
put by the professor into a glass bell filled with laughing gas, and 
they immediately began to leap about with great agility, arid con 
tinued in this state of muscular excitement for more than an hour. 

In both my tours in America, I heard stories not only of dogs, 
which had died suddenly from the bite of rattle-snakes, but men 
also ; and the venom is said to be more virulent in the south. I re 
joiced, therefore, that I had chosen the coldest season for my visit 
to these latitudes ; but it seemed singular that in my wanderings 
to explore the rocks in various states, I had never yet got sight of 
a single snake, or heard its rattle. That they make a much greater 
figure in books of travels than in real life, I can not but suspect. 

Almost all the best houses in Charleston are built with veran 
dahs, and surrounded with gardens. In some of the streets we 
admired the beautiful evergreens, and remarked among them the 
Prunus virginiana, with black cherries hanging to it, and Mag 
nolia grandiflora. The number of turkey buzzards is surprising. 
I have seen nine of them perched side by side, like so many 
bronze statues, breaking the long line of a roof in the clear blue 
sky, while others were soaring in the air, each feather, at the 
extremity of their extended wings, being spread out, so as to be 
seen separate from the rest. A New England friend, whom we 
met here, seeing my interest in these birds, told me they are the 
sole scavengers of the place, and a fine of five dollars is imposed 
on any person who kills one. " You are lucky in being here in 
a 3old season ; if you should come back in summer, you would 
think that these vultures had a right to the whole city, it stinks 
so intolerably." 



CHAPTER XVII. 

Charleston to Savannah. Beaufort River, or Inland Navigation in South 
Carolina. Slave Stealer. Cockspur Island. Rapid Growth of Oysters. 
Eagle caught by Oyster. Excursion from Savannah to Skiddaway 
Island. Megatherium and Mylodon. Cabbage Palms, or Tree Palmet 
tos. Deceptive Appearance of Submarine Forest. Alligators swallow 
ing Flints. Their Tenacity of Life when decapitated. Grove of Live 
Oaks. Slaves taken to Free States. 

Dec. 28, 1845. A FINE steam-ship, the General Clinch, 
conveyed us to Savannah. I was surprised, when sailing out 
of the beautiful harbor of Charleston, on a bright scorching day, 
to see a cloud of smoke hanging over the town, and learned that 
they burn here not a little of what is called Liverpool coal. 
Among others on board, was a female passenger from one of the 
western states, who, having heard rne make inquiries for my 
wife, went up to her in the ladies cabin and said, " Your old 
man is mighty eager to see you ;" " old man," as we afterward 
found, being synonymous with husband in the West. We were 
to go by the inland navigation, or between the islands and the 
coast. After passing Edisto Point, we ran aground at the en 
trance of St. Helena s Sound, in mid-passage, and were detained 
some hours till the tide floated us off to the westward, through 
the winding mazes of a most intricate channel, called the Beau 
fort River. We passed between low sandy islands, and an 
equally low mainland, covered with evergreen oaks, and long- 
leaved pines and palmettos, six or seven feet high. Sometimes 
we sailed by a low bluff or cliff of white sand, two or three feet 
in height, then by a cotton plantation, then by large salt marshes 
covered with reeds, on which the cattle are supported when fod 
der is scarce in winter. The salt water in this narrow channel 
was as calm as a lake, and perfectly clear. Numerous wild 
ducks were diving as our steamboat approached, and beds of 
oysters were uncovered between high and low water mark. It 



CHAP. XVII.] BEAUFORT. 231 

was a novel and curious scene, especially when we approached 
Beaufort, a picturesque town composed of an assemblage of villas, 
the summer residences of numerous planters, who retire here 
during the hot season, when the interior of South Carolina is un 
healthy for the whites. Each villa is shaded by a verandah, 
surrounded by beautiful live oaks and orange trees laden with 
fruit, though with leaves slightly tinged by the late severe frost. 
It is hoped that these orange trees will not suffer as they did in 
February, 1835, for then the cold attacked them much later in 
the season, and after the sap had risen. The Pride-of-India tree, 
with its berries now ripe, is an exotic much in favor here. A 
crowd of negroes, in their gay Sunday clothes, came down to 
look at our steamboat, grinning and chattering, and looking, 
as usual, perfectly free from care, but so ugly, that although 
they added to the singularity and foreign aspect of the scene, 
they detracted greatly from its charms. 

Had it not been for the dense beds of oysters between high 
and low water mark, hundreds of which adhere to the timbers of 
the pier at Beaufort, as barnacles do in our English ports, I might 
have supposed the channel to be really what it is called, a river. 

An old Spanish fort, south of Beaufort, reminded me that this 
region had once belonged to the Spaniards, who built St. Augus 
tine, still farther to the south, the oldest city in the United 
States, and I began to muse on the wonderful history of the 
Anglo-Saxon race in settling these southern states. To have 
overcome and driven out in so short a time Indians, Spaniards, 
and French, arid yet, after all, to be doomed to share the terri 
tory with three millions of negroes ! 

Of this latter race, we had not a few passengers on board. 
Going into the steerage to converse with some of them, my curi 
osity was particularly attracted to a group of three, who were 
standing by themselves. The two younger, a girl and a lad, 
were very frank, and willing to talk with me, but I was imme 
diately joined by a young white man, not ill-looking, but who 
struck me as having a very determined countenance for his age. 
" These colored people," he said, " whom you have been speaking 
to, belong to me, and they have probably told you that I have 



232 SLAVE STEALER. [CHAP. XVII. 

brought them by railway from Augusta to Charleston. I hope 
to dispose of them at Savannah, but if not, I shall take them to 
Texas, where I may sell them, or perhaps keep them as laborers 
and settle there myself." He then told me he had fought in the 
wars for the independence of Texas, which I afterward found was 
quite true, and, after telling me some of his adventures, he said, 
" I will take 450 dollars for the girl, and 600 for the boy ; they 
are both of pure blood, would stand a hot climate well ; they can 
not read, but can count up to a thousand." By all these quali- 
ities, negative and positive, he evidently expected to enhance in 
my eyes the value of the article which he meant me to buy ; and 
no sooner did he suspect, by one of my questions, that I was a 
foreigner traveling for my amusement, than he was off the sub 
ject, and I attempted in vain to bring him back to it and to learn 
why the power of counting was so useful, while that of reading 
was undesirable. About three weeks after this incident, when 
we were at Macon in Georgia, there was a rme and cry after a 
thief who had stolen five negroes near Augusta, and had taken 
them to Savannah, in the General Clinch, where he had sold one 
of them, a girl, for 450 dollars. From Savannah he had been 
traced with the remaining four, by railway, to Macon, whence it 
was supposed he had gone south. The description of the delin 
quent left me no doubt that he was my former fellow-traveler, 
and I now learnt that he was of a respectable family in Georgia, 
the spoiled child of a widowed mother, self-willed and unmanage 
able from his boyhood, and who had gone off against the wishes 
of his relations to fight in Texas. I recollected that when we 
were at Beaufort, none of his negroes had gone ashore, and that 
he had kept his eye always anxiously on them during our stay 
there. I also remarked, that the planters on board, who, for the 
most part, were gentlemanlike in their manners, shunned all in 
tercourse with this dealer, as if they regarded his business as 
scarcely respectable. A vast majority of the slave-owners acqui 
esced originally in the propriety of abolishing the external slave- 
trade ; but the internal one can not, they say, be done away 
with, without interfering with the free circulation of labor from 
fin overpeopled district to another where hands are scarce. To 



CHAP. XVII.] EAGLE CAUGHT BY AN OYSTER. 233 

check this, they maintain, would injure the negroes as much as 
their masters. When they are forced to part with slaves, they 
usually sell one to another, and are unwilling to dispose of them 
to a stranger. It is reckoned, indeed, quite a disgrace to a negro 
to be so discarded. When the former master bids for one of his 
" own people," at a sale of property forced on by debt, the public 
are unwilling to bid against him. It is clear, therefore, that a 
dealer must traffic in the lowest and most good-for-nothing class 
of laborers, many of whom, in Europe, would be in the hands of 
policemen, or in convict ships on their way to a penal settlement. 
I heard of one of these dealers, who, having made a large fortune, 
lived sumptuously in one of the towns on the Mississippi after 
retiring from business, but in spite of some influential connections, 
he was not able to make his way into the best society of the place. 
At the mouth of the Savannah River we passed Cockspur 
Island, where there is a fort. The sea is said to have encroach 
ed many hundred yards on this island since 1740, as has hap 
pened at other points on this low coast ; but there has been also 
a gain of land in many places. An officer stationed at the fort 
told me, that when a moat was dug and the sea-water admitted, 
oysters grew there so fast, that, at the end of two years, they 
afforded a regular supply of that luxury to the garrison. The 
species of oyster which is so abundant here (Ostrea virginica) 
resembles our European Ostrea edulis in shape, when it lives 
isolated and grows freely under water ; but those individuals 
which live gregariously, or on banks between high and low 
water, lose their round form and are greatly lengthened. They 
are called racoon oysters, because they are the only ones which 
the racoons can get at when they come down to feed at low tide. 
Capt. Alexander, of the U.S. artillery, told me that, in the sum 
mer of 1844, he saw a large bald-headed eagle, Aquila leucoce- 
phala, which might measure six feet from tip to tip of its ex 
tended wings, caught near the bar of the Savannah river by one 
of these racoon oysters. The eagle had perched upon the shell 
fish to prey upon it, when the mollusk suddenly closed its valves 
and shut in the bird s claw, and would have detained its enemy 
till the rising tide had come up and drowned it, had not the cap- 



234 EXCURSION TO SKIDDAWAY. [CHAP. XVII 

tain in his boat secured it with a noose, and disengaged it from 
the oyster. He flapped his wings violently as they approached, 
but could not escape. 

Dec. 29. Savannah has a population of 12,000 souls, but 
seems rather stationary, though some new buildings are rising. 
The mildness of its climate is attributed partly to the distance 
to which the Alleghany Mountains retire from the sea coast in 
this latitude, and partly to the proximity of the Gulf-stream. But 
many of the northern invalids, who are consumptive, and had 
hoped to escape a winter by taking refuge in this city, are com 
plaining of the frost, and say that the houses are inadequately 
protected against cold. The sun is very powerful at mid-day, 
and we see the Camellia Japonica in the gardens flowering in 
the open air ; but the leaves of the orange trees look crisp and 
frost-bitten, and I am told that the thermometer lately fell as low 
as 17 Fahr., so that even the salt water froze over in some of 
the marshes. 

While at Savannah I made a delightful excursion, in com 
pany with Dr. Le Conte, Captain Alexander, and Mr. Hodgson, 
to Skiddaway, one of the sea-islands, which may be said to form 
part of a great delta on the coast of Georgia, between the mouths 
of the Savannah and Ogeechee rivers. This alluvial region con 
sists of a wide extent of low land elevated a few feet above high 
water, and intersected by numerous creeks and swamps. I gave 
some account in my former tour of my visit to Heyner s Bridge,* 
where the bones of the extinct mastodon and mylodon were found. 
Skiddaway is five or six miles farther from Savannah in the same 
southeast direction, and is classical ground for the geologist, for, 
on its northwest end, where there is a low cliff from two to six 
feet in height, no less than three skeletons of the huge Megathe 
rium have been dug up, besides the remains of the Mylodon, 
Elephas primigenius, Mastodon giganteus, and a species of the 
ox tribe. The bones occur in a dark peaty soil or marsh mud, 
above which is a stratum, three or four feet thick, of sand, charged 
with oxide of iron, and below them and beneath the sea level, 
occurs sand containing a great number of marine fossil shells, all 
* Travels in North America, vol. i. p. 163. 



CHAP. XVII.] 



CABBAGE PALM. 



235 



belonging to species which still inhabit the neighboring coast, 
showing how modern is the date, geologically speaking, of the ex 
tinct animals, since they were evidently posterior to the existing 
molluscous fauna of the sea. 

The scenery of the low flat island of Skiddaway had more of 
a tropical aspect than any which I had yet seen in the United 
States. Several distinct species of palmetto, or fan palm, were 
common, as also the tree, or cabbage palm, a noble species, which 

Fig. 6. 




Charruerops Palmetto. 
Cabbage Palm, or Tall Palmetto, Skiddaway Island, Georgia. 

I had never seen before. In some of the cotton-fields many in 
dividuals were growing singly, having been planted at regular in 
tervals to the exclusion of all other trees, and were from twenty- 
five to forty feet in height. The trunk bulges at the base, above 
which it is usually about one foot in diameter, and of the same 
size throughout, or rather increasing upward. At the top the 



236 BIRDS. [CHAP. XVII. 

leaves spread out on all sides, as in other fan palms. Those 
which have fallen off do not leave separate scars on the trunk, 
but rings are formed by their bases. The cabbage of the young" 
palm is used as a vegetable, but when this part is cut off", the 
plant is killed. I saw sections of the wood, and the structure of 
it resembles that of true palms. It is said by Elliott to be inval 
uable for submarine construction, as it is never attacked by the 
ship-worm, or Teredo tiavalis. This tree flourishes in a clay 
soil, and is of slow growth. It requires the sea air, and has not 
suffered from the late severe frost. We saw some plants twelve 
years old, and others which in fifty years had attained a height 
of about twenty or twenty-five feet. Such as have reached forty 
feet are supposed to be at least a century old. In those fields 
where the negroes were at work, and where the cotton plants 
were still standing five or six feet high, with no other trees ex 
cept these palms, I could well imagine myself in the tropics. 
We put up many birds, the names of which were all familiar to 
Dr. Le Conte ; among others the Virginian partridge (Ortyx 
mrginiana), the rook (Corvus americanus), nearly resembling 
our European species, not only in plumage but in its note, the 
marsh hawk (Circus cyaneus), the snowy heron (Ardea can- 
didissima), the bald-headed eagle, the summer duck, and meadow 
lark. We also heard the mocking-bird in the woods. As we 
were entering a barn, a screech-owl (Bubo asio, Lin.) flew out 
nearly in the face of one of the party. When we came to a tree 
partially barked by lightning, I asked Dr. Le Conte whether he 
adopted the theory that this decortication was caused by steam ; 
the sap or juices of the tree, immediately under the bark, being 
suddenly converted by the heat of the electric fluid into vapor. 
He said that lightning was so common here, that he had had 
opportunities of verifying this hypothesis by observing that the 
steam, or small cloud of smoke, as it is commonly called, which 
is produced when a tree is struck, disappears immediately, as if 
by condensation. 

There are decided proofs on the coast of Georgia of changes in 
the level of the land, in times geologically modern, and I shall 
afterward mention the stumps of trees below the sea-level, at the 



CHAP. XVII.] ALLIGATORS. 237 

mouth of the Altamaha river, in proof of a former subsidence ; 
but a stranger is in great danger of being deceived, because the 
common pine, called the loblolly (Pinus tceda), has tap-roots as 
large as the trunk, which run down vertically for seven or eight 
feet, without any sensible diminution in size. At the depth of 
about ten feet below the surface this root sends off numerous 
smaller ones horizontally, and when the sea has advanced and 
swept away the enveloping sand from such tap-roots, they remain 
erect, and become covered with barnacles and oysters. When so 
circumstanced, they have exactly the appearance of a submarine 
forest, caused by the sinking down of land. A geologist, who is 
on his guard against being deceived by the undermining of a cliff, 
and the consequent sliding down and submergence of land covered 
with trees which remain vertical, may yet be misled by finding 
these large tap-roots standing upright under water. 

As the alligators are very abundant in the swamps near the 
mouth of the Savannah, I heard much of their habits, and was 
surprised to learn that pebbles are often met with in their stom 
achs, which they have swallowed to aid their digestion, as birds 
eat sand and gravel to assist the mechanical action of the gizzard. 
The peculiar conformation of the alligator s stomach confirms 
this view. On the site of some of the old Indian villages whole 
baskets full of flint arrow-heads have been picked up, and some 
of these, much worn and rubbed, have been taken out of the 
stomachs of these reptiles. 

The extraordinary tenacity of life manifested by the alligator 
when seriously mutilated, led Dr. Le Conte to make a series of 
experiments, with a view of throwing light on the philosophy of 
the nervous system in man as compared to the lower animals. 
A young alligator was decapitated at the point where the neck 
or atlas articulates with the occiput. Not more than two ounces 
of blood flowed from the wound. The jaws of the detached head 
still snapped at any thing which touched the tongue or lining 
membrane of the mouth. After the convulsions produced by de 
capitation had subsided, the trunk of the animal remained in a 
state of torpor resembling profound sleep. But when pricked or 
pinched on the sides, the creature would scratch the spot, some- 



238 GROVE OF LIVE OAKS. [CHAP. XVII. 

times with the fore, and sometimes with the hind foot, according 
to the situation of the injury inflicted. These movements of the 
limbs were promptly and determinately performed, and were 
always confined to the members on the side of the irritating 
cause. If touched below the posterior extremity on the thick 
portion of the tail, he would slowly and deliberately draw up 
the hind foot, and scratch the part, and would use considerable 
force in pushing aside the offending object. These experiments 
were repeatedly performed, and always with the same results, 
appearing to prove that the creature could not have been totally 
devoid of sensation and consciousness. Dr. Le Conte concludes, 
therefore, that, although in man and the more highly organized 
vertebrata, volition is seated in the brain, or encephalus, this 
function in reptiles must extend over the whole spinal cord, or 
cerebro-spinal axis. Some, however, may contend that the mo 
tions observed are merely spasmodic and involuntary, like sneez 
ing, the necessary results of certain physical conditions of the 
nervous system, and not guided in any way by the mind. If so, 
it can not be denied that they have all the appearance of being 
produced with a perfect knowledge of the end in view, and to be 
directed peculiarly to that end ; so that, if we embrace the hy 
pothesis that they supervene simply on the application of stimuli, 
without any sensations being carried to the brain, and without 
any co-operation of the mind, must we not in that case suspect 
that a large proportion of the actions of quadrupeds, usually 
attributed to the control of the will, may in like manner be per 
formed without consciousness or volition ?* 

When we got back to Savannah, I found my wife just returned 
from Bonaventure, about four miles distant, where she had ac 
companied a lady on a drive to see a magnificent grove of live 
oaks, the branches of which, arching over head, form a splendid 
aisle. It was formerly the fashion of the planters of the Caro- 
lirias and Georgia, to make summer tours in the northern 
states, or stay in watering-places there ; but they are now in the 
habit of visiting the upland region of the Alleghanies in their 

* See a paper by J. Le Conte, New York Journal of Medicine, Nov. 
1845, p. 335. 



CHAP. XVII.] SLAVES TAKEN TO FREE STATES. 239 

own states, and speak enthusiastically of the beauty and grandeur 
of the scenery. Their intercourse with the north was useful in 
giving them new ideas, and showing them what rapid progress 
civilization is making there ; but they have been deterred from 
traveling there of late, owing, as they tell me, to the conduct of 
the abolitionists toward the negro servants whom they take with 
them, 

Sometimes a writ of Habeas Corpus is served, and the colored 
servant is carried before a magistrate, on the plea that he or she 
are detained against their will. Even where they have firmly 
declared their wish to return to their owners, they have been 
often unsettled in their ideas, and less contented afterward with 
their condition. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

Savannah to Darien. Anti-Slavery Meetings discussed. War with En 
gland. Landing at Darien. Crackers. Scenery on Altamaha River. 
Negro Boatmen singing. Marsh Blackbird in Rice Grounds. Hospi 
tality of Southern Planters. New Clearing and Natural Rotation of 
Trees. Birds. Shrike and Kingfisher. Excursion to St. Simon s 
Island. Butler s Island and Negroes. Stumps of Trees in Salt Marshes 
proving Subsidence of Land. Alligator seen. Their Nests and Habits. 
Their Fear of Porpoises. Indian Shell Mound on St. Simon s Island. 
Date-palm, Orange, Lemon, and Olive Trees. Hurricanes. Visit to 
outermost Barrier Island. Sea Shells on Beach. Negro Maid-Servants. 

Dec. 31, 1845. ON the last day of the year we sailed in a 
steamer from Savannah to Darien, in Georgia, about 125 miles 
farther south, skirting a low coast, and having the Gulf-stream 
about sixty miles to the eastward of us. Our fellow-passengers 
consisted of planters, with several mercantile men from northern 
states. The latter usually maintained a prudent reserve on 
politics ; yet one or two warm discussions arose, in which not 
only the chances of war with England, and the policy of the 
party now in power, but the more exciting topic of slavery, and 
the doings at a recent anti-slavery meeting in Exeter Hall, 
London, were spoken of. I was told by a fellow-passenger, that 
some of the Georgian planters who are declaiming most vehe 
mently against Mr. Polk for so nearly drawing them into a war 
with Great Britain, were his warmest supporters in the late 
presidential election. " They are justly punished," he said, " for 
voting against their principles. Although not belonging to the 
democratic party, they went for Polk in order that Texas might 
be annexed ; and now that they have carried that point, their 
imaginations are haunted with the image of the cotton trade 
paralyzed, an English fleet ravaging the coast and carrying away 
their negroes, as in the last war, and, worst of all, the abolition 
ists of the north looking on with the utmost complacency at their 
ruin." One of the most moderate of the planters, with whom I 
conversed apart, told me that the official avowal of the English 



CHAP. XVIII.] ANTI-SLAVERY MEETINGS. 241 

government, that one of the reasons for acknowledging the inde 
pendence of Texas was its tendency to promote the abolition of 
slavery, had done much to alienate the planters, and increase the 
anti-English feeling in the south. He also observed, that any 
thing like foreign dictation or intermeddling excited a spirit of 
resistance, and asked whether I thought the emancipation of the 
West Indian slaves would have been accelerated by meetings in 
the United States or Germany to promote that measure. He 
then adverted to the letters lately published by Mr. Colman, on 
English agriculture, in which the poverty, ignorance, and sta 
tionary condition of the British peasantry are painted in most 
vivid colors. He also cited Lord Ashley s speeches on the mise 
ries endured underground by women and boys in coal-mines, and 
said that the parliamentary reports on the wretched state of the 
factory children in England had been largely extracted from in 
their papers, to show that the orators of Exeter Hall might find 
abuses enough at home to remedy, without declaiming against 
the wrongs of their negroes, whose true condition and prospects 
of improvement were points on which they displayed consummate 
ignorance. Finding me not disposed to controvert him, he 
added, in a milder tone, that, for his part, he thought the south 
ern planters owed a debt of gratitude to England for setting the 
example to American philanthropists of making pecuniary com 
pensation to those whose slaves they set free. 

When I had leisure to think over this conversation, and the 
hint conveyed to my countrymen, how they might best devote 
their energies toward securing the progress of the laboring classes 
at home, it occurred to me that some of Channing s discourses 
against slavery might be useful to a minister who should have 
the patriotism to revive the measure for educating the factory 
children, proposed in 1843 by Sir James Graham, and lost in 
consequence of the disputes between the Church and the Dissent 
ers. It would be easy to substitute employer for owner, and 
laborer for slave, and the greater part of the eloquent appeal of 
the New England orator would become appropriate : 

" Mutato nomine de te 
Fabula narratur." 
VOL. I. L 



242 WAR WITH ENGLAND. [CHAP. XV111. 

" Every man," says Charming, in his argument against slavery, 
" has a right to exercise and invigorate his intellect, and who 
ever obstructs or quenches the intellectual life in another, inflicts 
a grievous and irreparable wrong."* " Let not the sacredness 
of individual man be forgotten in the feverish pursuit of property. 
It is more important that the individual should respect himself, 
and be respected by others, than that national wealth, which is 
not the end of society, should be accumulated. ! " He (the 
slave) must form no plans for bettering his condition, whatever 
be his capacities ; however equal to great improvements of his 
lot, he is chained for life to the same unwearied toil. That he 
should yield himself to intemperance we must expect, unused to 
any pleasures but those of sense." " We are told," says the 
same author, "that they are taught religion, that they hear the 
voice of Christ, and read in his cross the unutterable worth of 
their spiritual nature ; but the greater part are still buried in 
heathen ignorance.":}: 

"They may be free from care, and sure of future support, but 
their future is not brightened by images of joy ; it stretches be 
fore them sterile and monotonous, sending no cheering whisper of 
a better lot." 

An inhabitant of one of the six New England States, or of 
New York, where, in a population of five millions of souls, one 
teacher is now supplied for every thirty children, may be en 
titled to address this language to the southern slave owner ; 
but does the state of the working classes, whether in Great 
Britain or the West Indies, authorize us to assume the same 
tone ? 

A merchant from New York told me, that in The Union," a 
semi-official journal published at Washington, and supposed to 
represent the views of the cabinet, an article had just appeared, 
headed, " The whole of Oregon or none," which for the first time 
gave him some uneasiness. " A war," he said, might seem too 
absurd to be possible ; but a few months ago he had thought the 
election of Mr. Polk equally impossible, and the President might 

* Channing s Works, vol. ii, p. 35. t Vol. ii. p. 44. 

t Vol. ii, p. 94, Vol. ii. p. 89, 



CHAP. XVIIL] LANDING AT DARIEN. 243 

go on tampering with the popular passions, till he could not con 
trol them. The presidential election would have ended differ 
ently," he affirmed, " but for 5000 fraudulent votes given in the 
city of New York." I asked if he thought the people would 
enter with spirit into a war for which they had made no prep 
aration. " It would depend," he said, " on the policy of En 
gland. If she made predatory and bucaniering descents upon 
the coast, as in the last war, or attacked some of the great east 
ern sea-ports, she might stir up the whole population to a state 
of frenzied energy, and cause them to make great sacrifices ; but 
if she put forth the whole strength of her fleets against the com 
merce of the Union, and stood on the defensive in Canada, so as 
to protract the campaign, and cripple their revenues derived from 
customs, the people, remembering that when the war commenced, 
the cabinet of St. James s and the English press were pacific 
and willing to come to a compromise about Oregon, would be 
come impatient of direct taxation, and turn against the party 
which had plunged them into hostilities." 

Dec, 31. At the end of a long day s sail, our steamer land 
ed us safely at the village of Darien, on the sandy banks of 
the river Altamaha (which is pronounced Altamaha, the a s 
broad). The sky was clear, and the air mild, but refreshing, 
and we were told that we must walk to the inn, not far off. 
Five negroes were very officious in offering their services, and 
four of them at length adjusted all our packages on their backs. 
The other, having nothing else to do, assumed the command of 
the party, having first said to me, "If you not ready, we will 
hesitate for half an hour." We passed under some of the noblest 
evergreen oaks I had yet seen, their large picturesque roots spread 
ing on all sides, half out of the loose, sandy soil, and their boughs 
hung with unusually long weepers of Spanish moss. When I had 
paid our four porters, the one who had gone first, assuming an 
air of great importance, " hoped I would remember the pilot." 
As the inn was almost in sight from the landing, and our course 
a direct one in a bright moonlight night, and all the men quite 
familiar with every step of the way, we were not a little diverted 
at the notion of paying for a guide, bxit the good-humored coun- 



244 SCENERY ON ALTAMAHA. [CHAP. XVIII. 

tenance of the pilot made his appeal irresistible. The bed at our 
humble inn was clean, but next morning we were annoyed by 
having to sit down to breakfast with a poor white family, to 
whom the same compliment could not be paid a man and his 
wife and four children, belonging to the class called " crackers" 
in Georgia. The etymology of this word is rather uncertain, 
some deriving it from the long whips used by the wagoners. 
They are a class of small proprietors, who seem to acquire slov 
enly habits from dependence on slaves, of whom they can main 
tain but few. 

The next morning, while we were standing on the river s 
bank, we were joined by Mr. Hamilton Couper, with whom I 
had corresponded on geological matters, and whom I have already 
mentioned as the donor of a splendid collection of fossil remains 
to the museum at Washington, and, I may add, of other like 
treasures to that of Philadelphia. He came down the river to 
meet us in a long canoe, hollowed out of the trunk of a single 
cypress, and rowed by six negroes, who were singing loudly, and 
keeping time to the stroke of their oars. He brought us a packet 
of letters from England, which had been sent to his house, a 
welcome New Year s gift ; and when we had glanced over their 
contents, we entered the boat and began to ascend the Alta- 
maha. 

The river was fringed on both sides with tall canes and with 
the cypress (Cupressus disticha), and many other trees, still 
leafless, which, being hung with gray moss, gave a somber tone 
to the scenery at this season, in spite of the green leaves of sev 
eral species of laurel, myrtle, and magnolia. But wherever there 
was a break in the fringe of trees, which flourished luxuriantly 
in the swamps bordering the river, a forest of evergreen pines 
was seen in the back ground. For many a mile we saw no 
habitations, and the solitude was profound ; but our black oars 
men made the woods echo to their song. One of them taking 
the lead, first improvised a verse, paying compliments to his mas 
ter s family, and to a celebrated black beauty of the neighbor 
hood, who was compared to the red bird." The other five 
then joined in chorus, always repeating the same words Occa- 



CHAP. XVIIL] SOUTHERN PLANTERS. 245 

sionally they struck up a hymn, taught them by the Methodists, 
in which the most sacred subjects were handled with strange 
familiarity, and which, though nothing irreverent was meant, 
sounded oddly to our ears, and, when following a love ditty, al 
most profane. 

Darien is on the left or northern bank of the Altamaha. 
About fifteen miles above it, on the opposite bank, we came to 
Hopetori, the residence of Mr. II. Couper, having first passed 
from the river into a canal, which traversed the low rice fields. 
Here we put up prodigious flights of the marsh blackbird (Aje- 
laius phceniceus), sometimes called the red-winged starling, be 
cause the male has some scarlet feathers in the upper part of his 
wing. When several thousands of them are in rapid motion at 
once, they darken the air like a cloud, and then, when the whole 
of them suddenly turn their wings edgeways, the cloud vanishes, 
to reappear as instantaneously the next moment. Mr. Couper 
encourages these birds, as they eat up all the loose grains of rice 
scattered over the field after the harvest has been gathered in. 
If these seeds are left, they spring up the year following, pro 
ducing what is called volunteer rice, always of inferior quality to 
that which is regularly sown. From the rice grounds we walked 
up a bank to a level table land, composed of sand, a few yards 
above the river, and covered with pines and a mixture of scrub 
oa,k. Here, in this genial climate, there are some wild flowers 
in bloom every day of the year. On this higher level, near the 
slope which faces the rice fields and the river, stands the house 
of Hopeton, where we spent our time very agreeably for a fort 
night. Much has been said in praise of the hospitality of the 
southern planter, but they alone who have traveled in the south 
ern states, can appreciate the perfect ease and politeness with 
which a stranger is made to feel himself at home. Horses, car 
riages, boats, servants, are all at his disposal. Even his little 
comforts are thought of, and every thing is done as heartily and 
naturally as if no obligation were conferred. When northerners 
who are not very rich receive guests in the country, where do 
mestic servants are few and expensive, they are often compelled, 
if they would insure the comfort of their visitors, to perform me- 



246 ROTATION OF TREES. [CHAP. XVIII. 

nial offices themselves. The sacrifices, therefore, made by the 
planter, are comparatively small, since he has a well-trained es 
tablishment of servants, and his habitual style of living is so free 
and liberal, that the expense of a few additional inmates in the 
family is scarcely felt. Still there is a warm and generous open 
ness of character in the southerners, which mere wealth and a 
retinue of servants cannot give ; and they have often a dignity of 
manner, without stiffness, which is most agreeable. 

The landed proprietors here visit each other in the style of 
English country gentlemen, sometimes dining out with their 
families and returning at night, or, if the distance be great, re 
maining to sleep and coming home the next morning. A con 
siderable part of their food is derived from the produce of the 
land ; but, as their houses are usually distant from large towns, 
they keep large stores of groceries and of clothing, as is the 
custom in country houses in some parts of Scotland. 

Near the house of Hopeton there was a clearing in the forest, 
exhibiting a fine illustration of that natural rotation of crops, 
which excites, not without reason, the surprise of every one who 
sees it for the first time, and the true cause of which is still im 
perfectly understood. The trees which had been cut down were 
full-grown pines (Pinus australis), of which the surrounding 
wood consists, and which might have gone on for centuries, one 
generation after another, if their growth had not been interfered 
with. But now they are succeeded by a crop of young oaks, 
and we naturally ask, whence came the acorns, and how were 
they sown here in such numbers ? It seems that the jay (G-ar- 
rulus cristatus) has a propensity to bury acorns and various 
grains in the ground, forgetting to return and devour them. The 
rook, also (Corvus americanus), does the same, and so do some 
squirrels and other Rodentia ; and they plant them so deep, that 
they will not shoot unless the air and the sun s rays can pene 
trate freely into the soil, as when the shade of the pine trees has 
been entirely removed. It must occasionally happen, that birds 
or quadrupeds, which might otherwise have returned to feed on 
the hidden treasure, are killed by some one of their numerous 
enemies. But as the seeds of pines must be infinitely more 



CHAP. XVIII.] SHRIKE AND KINGFISHER. 247 

abundant than the acorns, we have still to explain what prin 
ciple in vegetable life favors the rotation. Liebig adopts De 
Candolle s theory, as most probable. He supposes that the roots 
of plants imbibe soluble matter of every kind from the soil, and 
absorb many substances not adapted for their nutrition, which 
are subsequently expelled by the roots, and returned to the soil 
as excrements. Now, as excrements cannot be assimilated by 
the plant which ejected them, the more of these matters the soil 
contains, the less fertile must it become for plants of the same 
species. These exudations, however, may be capable of assimi 
lation by another perfectly different kind or family of plants, 
which would flourish while taking them up from the soil, and 
render the soil, in time, again fertile for the first plants. " Dur 
ing a fallow," says Liebig, " the action of the sun and atmos 
phere, especially if not intercepted by the growth of weeds, 
causes the decomposition of the excrementitious matters, and 
converts the soil into humus or vegetable mold, restoring fer 
tility."* 

In one part of the pine forest I saw the Liquidambar tree 
growing vigorously fifty feet high, with a bark resembling cork. 
The bird of brightest plumage was the one called the red bird, 
or red cardinal (Loxia cardinalis), which has a full, clear, and 
mellow note, though no variety of song. It frequents bushes, in 
the neighborhood of houses, where it comes to be fed, but will 
not thrive in captivity. One day, a son of Mr. Couper s brought 
us a hen cardinal bird and a wild partridge, both taken unin 
jured in a snare. It was amusing to contrast the extreme fierce 
ness of the cardinal with the mildness and gentleness of the 
partridge. That insects, birds, and quadrupeds, of the same 
genera, but of distinct species, discharge similar functions in 
America arid Europe, is well known. My attention was called 
here to some thorny bushes, on which the shrike or loggerhead 
(Lanius ludovicianus) had impaled small lizards, frogs, and 
beetles, just as I have seen mice and insects fixed on thorns by 
our English shrikes. Here, also, the marshes near the river are 
frequented by the belted kingfisher (Alcedo alcyori), resembling 
* Liebig s Organic Chemistry, pt. i. ch. 8. 



248 VISIT TO ST. SIMON S. [CHAP. XVIII. 

in plumage, though not so brilliant as the English kingfisher, 
which yet lingers, in spite of persecution, in the reedy islands of 
the Thames above London. Mr. Couper tells rne, that the 
American bird dives after its prey, like that of Europe, and will 
often carry a fish, not much smaller than itself, and beat it 
against the stump of a tree, first on one side, then on the other, 
till every bone in its body is broken ; it can then swallow it. in 
spite of its size. 

A few days after our arrival (January 4, 1846), Mr. Couper 
took us in a canoe down the river from Hopeton to one of the 
sea-islands, called St. Simon s, fifteen miles distant, to visit his 
summer residence, and to give me an opportunity of exploring 
the geology of the coast and adjoining low country. We saw, 
on the banks of the river, the Magnolia glauca, attaining a 
height of thirty feet, instead- of being only ten feet high, as in 
the swamps of New England. The gum tree (Nyssa aquatica), 
out of leaf at this season, was conspicuous, from the manner in 
which the smooth trunk swells out at the base, being partially 
hollow in the interior, so that it is often used by the negroes 
for bee-hives. Jays and blue-birds were very abundant, and 
there were several large hawks nests on the tops of tall dead 
trees. 

Among the zoological characteristics of the North American 
rivers, none is more remarkable than the variety of species of 
shells of the genus Unio, or fresh- water mussel, which inhabit 
them. Every great stream yields some new forms, and Mr. 
Couper has already discovered in the Altamaha no less than 
sixteen species before unknown ; one of these, Unio spinoszis, 
has a singular appearance, being armed with spines, standing 
out horizontally from the shell, and probably acting as a defense 
against some enemy. 

On our way we landed on Butler s Island, where the banks 
of the river, as is usual in deltas, are higher than the ground 
immediately behind them. They are here adorned with orange 
trees, loaded with golden fruit, and very ornamental. We saw 
ricks of rice raised on props five feet high, to protect them from 
the sea, which, during hurricanes, has been known to rise five or 



CHAP. XVIII. ] BUTLER S ISLAND. 249 

six feet. The negro houses were neat, and whitewashed, all 
floored with wood, each with an apartment called the hall, two 
sleeping-rooms, and a loft for the children ; but it is evident that 
on these rice farms, where the negroes associate with scarcely 
any whites, except the overseer and his family, and have but 
little intercourse with the slaves of other estates, they must re 
main far more stationary than where, as in a large part ot 
Georgia, they are about equal in number to the whites, or even 
form a minority. The negroes, moreover, in the interior, are 
healthier than those in rice plantations, and multiply faster, al 
though the rice grounds are salubrious to the negroes as com 
pared to the whites. In this lower region the increase of the 
slaves is rapid, for they are w r ell fed, fitted for a southern cli 
mate, and free from care, partly, no doubt, because of their low 
mental development, and partly because they and their children 
are secured from want. Such advantages, however, would be 
of no avail, in rendering them prolific, if they were overworked 
and harshly treated. 

As we approached the sea and the brackish water, the wood 
bordering the river began first to grow dwarfish, and then, 
lowering suddenly, to give place entirely to reeds ; but still we 
saw the buried stumps and stools of the cypress and pine con 
tinuing to show themselves in every section of the bank, main 
taining the upright position in which they originally grew. The 
occurrence of these in the salt marshes clearly demonstrates that 
trees once flourished where they would now be immediately killed 
by the salt water. There must have been a change in the rel 
ative level of land and sea, to account for their growth, since, 
even above the commencement of the brackish water, similar 
stumps are visible at a lower level than the present high tide, 
and covered by layers of sedimentary matter, on which tall cy- 
prosses and other trees are now standing. From such phenomena 
we may infer the following sequence of events : first, an ancient 
forest was submerged several feet, and the sunk trees were killed 
by the salt water ; they then rotted away down to the water 
level (a long operation), after which layers of sand were thrown 
down upon the stumps ; and finally, when the surface had been 

L* 



950 TREES IN SALT MARSHES. [CHAP. XVIII. 



raised "by fluviatile sediment, as in a delta, a new forest grew up 
over the ruins of the old one. 

I have said that the decay of such timber is slow, for I saw 
cypresses at Hopeton, which had been purposely killed by girdling 
or cutting away a ring of bark, which stood erect on the borders 
of the rice grounds after thirty years, and bid fair to last for 
many a year to come. It does no small credit to the sagacity 
of Bartram, the botanist, that he should have remarked, when 
writing in 1792, that the low, flat islands on the coast, as well 
as the salt marshes arid adjoining sandy region, through which 
so many rivers wind, and which afford so secure a navigation for 
schooners, boats, and canoes, may be a step in advance gained 
by the continent on the Atlantic in modern times. " But if so," 
he adds, "it is still clear that, at a period immediately preceding, 
the same region of low land stretched still farther out to sea." 
On the latter subject his words are so much to the point, as to 
deserve being quoted : 

" It seerns evident, even to demonstration, that those salt 
marshes adjoining the coast of the main, and the reedy and 
grassy islands and marshes in the rivers, which are now over 
flowed at every tide, were formerly high swamps of firm land, 
affording forests of cypress, tupelo, magnolia grandiflora, oak, 
ash, sweet bay, and other timber trees, the same as are now 
growing on the river swamps, whose surface is two feet or more 
above the spring tides that flow at this day. And it is plainly 
to be seen by every planter along the coast of Carolina, Georgia, 
and Florida, to the Mississippi, when they bank in these grassy 
tide marshes for cultivation, that they can not sink their drains 
above three or four feet below the surface, before they come to 
strata of cypress stumps and other trees, as close together as they 
now grow in the swamps."* 

When our canoe had proceeded into the brackish water, where 
the river banks consisted of marsh land covered with a tall reed- 
like grass, we came close up to an alligator, about nine feet long, 
basking in the sun. Had the day been warmer, he would not 

* W. Bartram s Travels through North and South Carolina, Georgia, 
&c. London, 1792. 



CHAP. XVIII.] ALLIGATOR S NEST AND HABITS. 251 

have allowed us to approach so near to him ; for these reptiles 
are much shyer than formerly, since they have learnt to dread 
the avenging rifle of the planter, whose stray hogs and sporting 
dogs they often devour. About ten years ago, Mr. Couper tells 
us, that he saw 200 of them together in St. Mary s River, in 
Florida, extremely fearless. The oldest and largest individuals 
on the Altamaha have been killed, and they are now rarely 
twelve feet long, and never exceed sixteen and a half feet. As 
almost all of them have been in their winter retreats ever since 
the frost of last month, I was glad that we had surprised one in 
his native haunts, and seen him plunge into the water by the 
side of our boat. When I first read Bartram s account of alli 
gators more than twenty feet long, and how they attacked his 
boat and bellowed like bulls, and made a sound like distant 
thunder, I suspected him of exaggeration ; but all my inquiries 
here and in Louisiana convinced me that he may be depended 
upon. His account of the nests which they build in the marshes 
is perfectly correct. They resemble haycocks, about four feet 
high, and five feet in diameter at their bases, being constructed 
with mud, grass, arid herbage. First they deposit one layer of 
eggs on a floor of mortar, and having covered this with a second 
stratum of mud and herbage eight inches thick, lay another set 
of eggs upon that, and so on to the top, there being commonly 
from one hundred to two hundred eggs in a nest. With their 
tails they then beat down round the nest the dense grass and 
reeds, five feet high, to prevent the approach of unseen enemies. 
The female watches her eggs until they are all hatched by the 
heat of the sun, and then takes her brood under her care, de 
fending them, and providing for their subsistence.* Dr. Luzen- 
berger, of New Orleans, told me that he once packed up one of 
these nests, with the eggs, in a box for the Museum of St. Peters- 
burgh, but was recommended, before he closed it, to see that there 
was no danger of any of the eggs being hatched on the voyage. 
On opening one, a young alligator walked out, arid was soon after 
followed by all the rest, about a hundred, which he fed in his house, 
where they went up and down the stairs, whining and barking 
* Bartram, p. 126, 



INDIAN SHELL MOUND. [CHAP. XVIII 



like young puppies. They ate voraciously, yet their growth was 
so slow, as to confirm him in the common opinion, that individ 
uals which have attained the largest size are of very great age ; 
though whether they live for three centuries, as some pretend, 
must be decided by future observations. 

Mr. Couper told me that, in the summer of 1845, he saw a 
shoal of porpoises coming up to that part of the Altamaha where 
the fresh and salt water meet, a space about a mile in length, 
the favorite fishing ground of the alligators, where there is brack 
ish water, which shifts its place according to the varying strength 
of the river and the tide. Here were seen about fifty alligators, 
each with head and neck raised above water, looking down the 
stream at their enemies, before whom they had fled, terror- 
stricken, and expecting an attack. The porpoises, no more than 
a dozen in number, moved on in two ranks, and were evidently 
complete masters of the field. So powerful, indeed, are they, 
that they have been known to chase a large alligator to the bank, 
and, putting their snouts under his belly, toss him ashore. 

We landed on the northeast end of St. Simon s Island, at Can 
non s Point, where we were gratified by the sight of a curious 
monument of the Indians, the largest mound of shells left by the 
aborigines in any one of the sea islands. Here are no less than 
ten acres of ground elevated in some places ten feet, and on an 
average over the whole area, five feet above the general level, 
composed throughout that depth of myriads of cast-away oyster- 
shells, with some mussels, and here and there a modiola and 
helix. They who have seen the Monte Testaceo near Rome, 
know what great results may proceed from insignificant causes, 
where the cumulative power of time has been at work, so that a 
hill may be formed out of the broken pottery rejected by the pop 
ulation of a large city. To them it will appear unnecessary to 
infer, as some antiquaries have done, from the magnitude of these 
Indian mounds, that they must have been thrown up by the sea. 
In refutation of such an hypothesis, we have the fact, that flint 
arrow-heads, stone axes, and fragments of Indian pottery have 
been detected throughout the mass. The shell-fish heaped up at 
Cannon s Point, must, from their nature, have been caught at a 



CHAP. XVIII.] MR. COUPER S VILLA. 253 

distance, on one of the outer islands ; and it is well known that 
the Indians were in the habit of returning with what they had 
taken, from their fishing excursions on the coast, to some good 
hunting ground, such as St. Simon s afforded. 

We found Mr. Couper s villa, near the water s edge, shaded 
by a verandah and by a sago tree. There were also many lemon 
trees, somewhat injured by the late frost ; but the olives, of 
which there is a fine grove here, are unharmed, and it is thought 
they may one day be cultivated with profit in the sea islands. 
We also admired five date palms, which bear fruit. They were 
brought from Bussora in Persia, and have not suffered by the 
cold. The oranges have been much hurt. Some of the trees 
planted by Oglethorpe s troops in 1742, after flourishing for ninety- 
three years, were cut off in February, 1835, and others, about a 
century and a half old, shared the same fate at St. Augustine in 
Florida. So long a period does it require to ascertain whether the 
climate of a new country is suitable to a particular species of plant. 

The evergreen or live oaks are truly magnificent in this island ; 
some of them, 73 feet in height, have been found to stretch with 
their boughs over an area 63 feet in diameter. I measured one 
which was thirty-five years old, and found the trunk to be just 
35 inches in diameter near the base, showing an annual gain of 
three inches in circumference. Another, growing in a favorable 
situation, forty-two years old, was nine feet six inches in girth at 
the height of one and a half foot above the ground. 

The island of St. Simon s is so low, that the lower part of it 
was under water in 1804 and 1824, when hurricanes set in 
with the wind from the northeast. Nearly the entire surface 
was submerged in 1756. In that year the sea rose, even as far 
north as Charleston, to the height of six feet above its ordinary 
level, and that city might have been destroyed, had the gale last 
ed in the same direction a few hours longer. 

I went with Mr. Couper to Long Island, the outermost bar 
rier of land between St. Simon s and the ocean, four miles long, 
and about half a mile wide, of recent formation, and consisting of 
parallel ranges of sand dunes, marking its growth by successive 
additions. Some of the dunes on this coast have been raised by 



254 LONG ISLAND. [CHAP. XVIII, 

the wind to the height of 40 or 50 feet, and inclose evergreen 
oaks ( Quercus virens), the upper branches of which alone pro 
trude above the surface. Between the parallel sand dunes were 
salt marshes, where we collected the plant-eating shell called 
Auricula bidentata, of a genus peculiar to such littoral situa 
tions. On the sea-beach, we gathered no less than twenty -nine 
species of marine shells, and they were of peculiar interest to me, 
because they agreed specifically with those which I had obtained 
from the strata lying immediately below the megatherium and 
other fossils in Skiddaway Island, and which occur below similar 
remains presently to be mentioned near Hopeton. In some places 
we found bivalves only of the genera Pholas, Lutraria, Sole- 
curtus, Petricola, Tellina, Donax, Venus, Cardium, Area, 
Pinna, and Mytilus, just as in the fossil group. On other parts 
of the beach there was a mixture of univalves, Oliva, Pyrula 
(Fulgur), JBuccinum, &c. Besides these shells we found, scat 
tered over the sands, a scutella and cases of the king crab (Li- 
mulus"), and fragments of turtles, with bones of porpoises. 

Every geologist who has examined strata consisting of alter 
nations of sandstone and shale, must occasionally have observed 
angular or rounded pieces of the shale imbedded in the sand 
stones, a phenomenon which seems at first sight very singular, 
because we might almost say that the formation is in part made 
up of its own ruins, and not derived wholly from pre-existing 
rocks. On the exposed coast of this " frontier island," I saw a 
complete explanation of the manner in which this structure orig 
inates. Deposits of sand and beds of clay are formed alternately 
at different seasons, arid at the time of our visit the sea was 
making great inroads on an argillaceous mass, washing out 
pieces of the half-consolidated clay, and strewing them over the 
sands, some flat, others angular, or rolled into various sized peb 
bles. These, when carried out into the adjoining parts of the 
sea, must be often included in the sand, which may be eventually 
converted into sandstone. 

Among the numerous sea birds, I particularly admired one called 
the sheer-water, with its shrill clear note, and most rapid flight. 

On my return to Cannon s Point, I found, in the well-stored 



CHAP. XVIII.] MENDICITY. 255 

library of Mr. Couper, Audubon s Birds, Michaud s Forest Trees, 
and other costly works on natural history ; also Catherwood s 
Antiquities of Central America, folio edition, in which the supe 
rior effect of the larger drawings of the monuments of Indian 
architecture struck me much, as compared to the reduced ones, 
given in Stephens s Central America, by the same artist, although 
these also are very descriptive. 

During our excursion to the sea-beach, my wife had been vis 
ited by some ladies well acquainted with relations of her own, 
who formerly resided in this part of Georgia, and who, when 
they returned to England, had taken back with them an old 
negress. One of the colored maid-servants of the ladies, feeling 
no doubt that Mrs. W , although she had recrossed the At 
lantic, would be as much interested as ever in her history, sent 
innumerable messages, beginning with, "Pray tell her that Mrs. 
A. has given me and my children to Mrs. B." They were all 
very curious to know about their former friend, Delia, the black 
maid, and how she had got on in England. On being told that 
she had been shocked at seeing so many beggars, and had scold 
ed them for not working, they laughed heartily, saying it was so 
like her to scold ; but they also expressed astonishment at the 
idea of a white mendicant, there being none, so far as they knew, 
white or colored, in Georgia. One of the ladies explained the 
term " beggar" to signify in England, a " mean white person ;" 
and said to an attendant who had once accompanied her to the 
north, " Do you not remember some mean white men, who asked 
me for money ?" Talking over this story in Alabama, I was 
told that mendicity is not so entirely unknown in the south ; that 
a superannuated negress, having a love of rambling, and wishing 
to live by begging, asked her master to set her free, "for when I 
beg, every one asks me why I do not go to my owner." " What 
will you do in winter," said he, " when you can not travel about ?" 
" I will come back to you then," she replied, " and you will take 
care of me in the cold weather." 

The sea islands produce the finest cotton, and we saw many 
women employed in separating the cotton from the seeds with 
their fingers, a neat and clean occupation. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

Rivers made turbid by the Clearing of Forests. Land rising in successive 
Terraces. Origin of these. Bones of extinct Quadrupeds in Lower 
Terrace. Associated Marine Shells. Digging of Brunswick Canal. 
Extinction of Megatherium and its Contemporaries. Dying out of rare 
Species. Gordonia Pubescens. Life of Southern Planters. Negroes 
on a Rice Plantation. Black Children. Separate Negro Houses. 
Work exacted. Hospital for Negroes. Food and Dress. Black 
Driver. Prevention of Crimes. African Tom. Progress of Negroes 
in Civilization. Conversions to Christianity. Episcopalian, Baptist, and 
Methodist Missionaries. Amalgamation and Mixture of Races. 

WE returned from St. Simon s to Hopeton, much pleased with 
our expedition. As our canoe was scudding through the clear 
waters of the Altamaha, Mr. Couper mentioned a fact which 
shows the effect of herbage, shrubs, and trees in protecting the 
soil from the wasting action of rain and torrents. Formerly, 
even during floods, the Altamaha was transparent, or only stained 
of a darker color by decayed vegetable matter, like some streams 
in Europe which flow out of peat mosses. So late as 1841, a 
resident here could distinguish on which of the two branches of 
the Altamaha, the Oconee or Ocmulgee, a freshet had occurred, 
for the lands in the upper country, drained by one of these (the 
Oconee) had already been partially cleared and cultivated, so that 
that tributary sent down a copious supply of red mud, while the 
other (the Ocmulgee) remained clear, though swollen. But no 
sooner had the Indians been driven out, and the woods of their 
old hunting-grounds begun to give way before the ax of the new 
settler, than the Ocmulgee also became turbid. I shall have 
occasion, in the sequel, to recur to this subject, when speaking of 
some recently-formed ravines of great depth and width in the 
red mud of the upland country near Milledgeville in Georgia. 

The low region bordering the Atlantic, comprising the sea- 
islands, such as St. Simon s, and the flat or nearly level plains 



CHAP. XIX ] SUCCESSION OF TERRACES. 257 

of the main land immediately adjoining, has an average height 
of from ten to twenty feet, although there are a few places where 
it reaches forty feet, above the sea. It extends twenty miles in 
land, and consists of sand and clay of very modern formation, as 
shown by the included marine shells, which are like those of 
Skiddaway, before mentioned,^ all identical with living species. 
This superficial deposit, although chiefly marine, contains, in some 
parts, beds of fresh-water origin, in which the bones of extinct 
mammalia occur. The whole group would be called by geolo 
gists fluvio-marine, and is of small depth, resting immediately on 
Eocene, or lower tertiary strata, as I ascertained by examining 
the shells brought up from several wells. Going inland twenty 
miles, we corne to the termination of this lower terrace, and as 
cend abruptly to an upper platform, seventy feet above the lower 
one, the strata composing which belong to the Eocene period. 
This upper terrace also runs back about twenty miles to the ab 
rupt termination of a third table-land, which is also about seventy 
feet higher, and consists of Eocene strata, by the denudation of 
which all these terraces arid escarpments (or ancient sea-cliffs) 
have been formed. Bartram has, with his usual accuracy, al 
luded to these steps, or succession of terraces, as an important 
geographical feature of the country, each of them being marked 
by its own botanical characters, the prevailing forest-trees, as well 
as the smaller plants, being different in each. 

To return to the first platform, or lowest land, from ten to 
forty feet above the level of the sea, it consists of a modern de 
posit, which extends 400 miles northward to the Neuse in North 
Carolina, and probably farther, in the same direction, along the 
Atlantic border. How far it stretches southward, I am not in 
formed. I conceive it to have been accumulated in a sea, into 
which many rivers poured during a gradual subsidence of the 
land, and that the strata, whether fresh-water or marine, formed 
during the sinking of the bottom of the sea, have been since 
brought up again to their present elevation. Throughout this 
low, flat region, the remains of extinct quadrupeds are occasion 
ally met with, and the deposit appears to be very analogous to 
* Ante, p. 234. 



258 BRUNSWICK CANAL. [CHAP. XIX. 

the great Pampean formation on the borders of the Atlantic in 
South America, as described by Mr. Darwin. Here and in the 
Pampas the skeletons of many quadrupeds of the same genera, 
such as the Megatherium, Megalonyx, Mylodon, Mastodon, 
and Equm occur. In both cases it has been proved that tlio 
mammalia, all of which differ specifically, and most of them gener- 
ically, from those now living, nourished, nevertheless, at a time 
when the Atlantic was inhabited by the existing species of mol- 
lusca, and when the climate, therefore, of the ocean at least, 
could not have varied materially from that now prevailing in 
these latitudes. 

Through part of the region occupied by the modern deposits 
above mentioned, a canal was cut in 183839, nine miles in 
length, called the Brunswick Canal, to unite the navigation of 
the Altamaha and Turtle rivers ; a rash undertaking of some 
speculators from the northern states, which, had the work been 
completed, could not have repaid the outlay. About 200,000/. 
(900,000 dollars) were expended, a sum which might have gone 
far toward obtaining geological surveys of many of the southern 
states, whereas the only good result was the discovery of some 
valuable fossil remains ; and even these fruits of the enterprise 
would never have been realized, but for the accidental presence, 
energy, and scientific knowledge of Mr. Hamilton Couper. Part 
of the skeleton of a megatherium, dug out in cutting the canal, 
was so near the surface, that it was penetrated by the roots of a 
pine-tree. It occurred in clay, apparently a fresh-water deposit, 
and underneath it were beds of sand, with marine shells of recent 
species. It was also covered with sand, probably marine, but 
without shells. So many parts of the same skeleton were found 
in juxtaposition as to suggest the idea that a whole carcass had 
been floated by the river to the spot, and even where the bones 
were slightly scattered they were not injured by being rolled. 
The remains of other quadrupeds associated with this gigantic 
sloth, consisted of mylodon, mastodon, elephant, equus, and bos, 
besides a fossil, to which Mr. Owen has given the name of Har- 
lanus americanus, a new genus, intermediate between Lophiodon 
and Toxodon. It had been supposed that the hippopotamus and 



CHAP. XIX.] FOSSIL REMAINS. 259 

BUS were among this assemblage of fossil genera : but this was a 
mistake ; nor have either of these genera been as yet met with, 
fossil or recent, in any part of America, although the swine intro 
duced by man, have multiplied so fast. The horse {Equus curv- 
idens) was a species having teeth in the upper jaw more curved 
than any living horse, ass, zebra, or quagga ; and it is singular 
that, although there was no wild representative of the horse tribe 
on the American continent, north or south, when discovered by 
the Europeans, yet two other fossil horses were found by Mr. 
Nuttall on the banks of the Neuse, fifteen miles below Newbern, 
in North Carolina.^ The shells and bones of a large extinct 
species of tortoise were also found to accompany the above-men 
tioned fossil quadrupeds of Georgia ; and I myself picked up 
many fragments of this Chelonian strewed over the banks of 
earth cast up from the Brunswick Canal. 

In another part of the excavations made in digging the canal, 
the ribs and vertebrae of a whale much rolled, and with barnacles 
attached to them, were discovered belonging to the subjacent 
marine formation. In this sand the shells, as before stated, are 
of recent species, and Mr. Hamilton Couper has collected no less 
than forty-five distinct species exclusive of Echinoderms. 

In what manner, then, has the destruction of these quadrupeds, 
once so widely spread over the American continent, been brought 
about ? That they were exterminated by the arrows of the In 
dian hunter, is the first idea presented to the mind of almost 
every naturalist. But the investigations of Lund and Clausen 
in the limestone caves of Brazil have established the fact, that 
with the large mammalia there were associated a great many 
smaller quadrupeds, some of them as diminutive as field mice, 
which have all died out together, while the land shells, once their 
contemporaries, still continue to exist in the same countries. We 
must look, therefore, to causes more general and powerful than 
the intervention of man, to account for the disappearance of the 
ancient fauna, an event the more remarkable, as many of the 

* Mr. Conrad intrusted me with Mr. Nuttall s collection, and Mr. Owen 
has found among them the three species of Equidse here alluded to, Equus 
curvidens, E. plicidens^ and a third species of the size of E. asinus. 



260 EXTERMINATING CAUSES. [CHAP. XIX. 

species had a very wide range, and must therefore have been 
capable of accommodating themselves to considerable variations 
of temperature. The same species of megatherium, for example, 
ranged from Patagonia and the river Plata in South America, 
between latitudes 31 and 50 south, to corresponding latitudes 
of the northern continent, and was also an inhabitant of the in 
termediate country of Brazil, in the caves of which its fossil re 
mains are met with. The extinct elephant also of Georgia (Ele- 
yrfias primigenius) has been traced in a fossil state northward 
from the Altamaha to the Polar regions, and then south westward 
through Siberia to the south of Europe. 

As to the exterminating causes. I agree with Mr. Darwin, 
that it is the height of presumption for any geologist to be aston 
ished that he can not render an account of them. No naturalist 
can pretend to be so well acquainted with all the circumstances 
on which the continuance upon the earth of any living species 
depends, as to be entitled to wonder if it should diminish rapidly 
in number or geographical range. But if his speculations should 
embrace a period in which considerable changes in physical geog 
raphy are known to have occurred, as is the case in North and 
South America since the megatherium flourished, how much 
more difficult would it be to appreciate all the effects of local 
modifications of climate, and changes in the stations of contempo 
rary animals and plants, on all which, and many other condi 
tions, the permanence of a species must depend. Until we un 
derstand the physiological constitutions of organic beings so well 
that we can explain why an epidemic or contagious disease may 
rage for months or years, and cut off a large proportion of the 
living individuals of one species while another is spared, how can 
we hope to explain why, in the great struggle for existence, some 
species are multiplying, while others are decreasing in number ? 
" If," says Darwin, " two species of the same genus, and of closely 
allied habits, people the same district, and we can not say why 
one of them is rare and the other common, what right have we to 
wonder if the rarer of the two should cease to exist altogether ?" 

In illustration of this principle, I may refer to two beautiful 
evergreens flourishing in this part of Georgia, species of Gordonia 



CHAP. XIX.] GORDONIA FUBESCENS. 261 



(or Franklinia of Bartram), a plant allied to the camellia. One 
of these I saw every where in the swamps near the Altamaha, 
where it is called the loblolly bay (Gordonia lasianthus), forty 
feet high, and even higher, with dark green leaves, and covered, 
T am told, in the flowering season, with a profusion of milk- 
white, fragrant blossoms. This plant has a wide range in the 
southern states, whereas the other, G. pitbcscens, often seen in 
greenhouses in England, about thirty feet high, is confined, as I 
am informed by Mr. Couper, to a very limited area, twenty 
miles in its greatest length, the same region where Bartram first 
discovered it, seventy years ago, near Barrington Ferry, on the 
Altamaha.^ In no other spot in the whole continent of Amer 
ica has it ever been detected. If we were told that one of these 
two evergreens was destined in the next 2000 or 3000 years to 
become extinct, how could we conjecture Avhich of them would 
endure the longest ? We ought to know first whether the area 
occupied by the one has been diminishing, and that of the other 
increasing, and then which of the two plants has been on the 
advance. But even then we should require to foresee a count 
less number of other circumstances in the animate and inanimate 
world affecting the two species, before we could make a probable 
guess as to their comparative durability. A single frost more 
severe than that before alluded to, which cut off the orange-trees 
in Florida after they had lasted a century and a half, might 
baffle all our calculations ; or the increase of some foe, a minute 
parasitic insect perhaps, might entirely alter the conditions on 
which the existence of these or any other trees, shrubs, or quad 
rupeds depend. 

During a fortnight s stay at Hopeton, we had an opportunity 
of seeing how the planters live in the south, and the condition 
and prospects of the negroes on a well-managed estate. The 
relation of the slaves to their owners resembles nothing in the 
northern states. There is an hereditary regard and often attach 
ment on both sides, more like that formerly existing between 
lords and their retainers in the old feudal times of Europe, than 
to any thing now to be found in America. The slaves identify 
* Bartram, pp. 159, 465, 



262 NEGROES ON A RICE PLANTATION. [CHAP. XIX. 

themselves with the master, and their sense of their own import 
ance rises with his success in life. But the responsibility of 
the- owners is felt to be great, and to manage a plantation with 
profit is no easy task ; so much judgment is required, and such a 
mixture of firmness, forbearance, and kindness. The evils of 
the system of slavery are said to be exhibited in their worst light 
when new settlers come from the free states ; northern men, who 
are full of activity, and who strive to make a rapid fortune, will 
ing to risk their own lives in an unhealthy climate, and who can 
not make allowance for the repugnance to continuous labor of 
the negro race, or the diminished motive for exertion of the slave. 
To one who arrives in Georgia direct from Europe, with a vivid 
impression on his mind of the state of the peasantry there in 
many populous regions, their ignorance, intemperance, and im 
providence, the difficulty of obtaining subsistence, and the small 
chance they have of bettering their lot, the condition of the black 
laborers on such a property as Hopeton, will afford but small 
ground for lamentation or despondency. I had many opportu 
nities, while here, of talking with the slaves alone, or seeing 
them at work. I may be told that this was a favorable speci 
men of a well-managed estate ; if so, I may at least affirm that 
mere chance led me to pay this visit, that is to say, scientific 
objects wholly unconnected with the " domestic institutions" of 
the south, or the character of the owner in relation to his slaves ; 
arid I may say the same in regard to every other locality or pro 
prietor visited by me in the course of this tour. I can but relate 
what passed under my own eyes, or what I learnt from good 
authority, concealing nothing. 

There are 500 negroes on the Hopeton estate, a great many 
of whom are children, and some old and superannuated. The 
latter class, who would be supported in a poor-house in England, 
enjoy here, to the end of their days, the society of their neigh 
bors arid kinsfolk, and live at large in separate houses assigned 
to them. The children have no regular work to do till they are 
ten or twelve years old. We see that some of them, at this 
season, are set to pick up dead leaves from the paths, others to 
attend the babies When the mothers are at work, the young 



CHAP. XIX.] NEGRO HOUSES. 263 

children are looked after by an old negress, called Mom Diana. 
Although very ugly as babies, they have such bright, happy 
faces when three or four years old, and from that age to ten or 
twelve have such frank and confiding manners, as to be very en 
gaging. Whenever we met them, they held out their hands to 
us to shake, and when my wife caressed them, she was often 
asked by some of the ladies, whether she would not like to bring 
up one of the girls to love her, and wait upon her. The parents 
indulge their own fancies in naming their children, and display 
a singular taste ; for one is called January, another April, a third 
Monday, and a fourth Hard Times. The fisherman on the estate 
rejoices in the appellation of " Old Bacchus." Quash is the name 
of the favorite preacher, and Bulally the African name of another 
negro. 

The out-door laborers have separate houses provided for them ; 
even the domestic servants, except a few who are nurses to the 
white children, live apart from the great house an arrangement 
not always convenient for the masters, as there is no one to an 
swer a bell after a certain hour. But if we place ourselves in 
the condition of the majority of the population, that of servants, 
we see at once how many advantages we should enjoy over the 
white race in the same rank of life in Europe. In the first place, 
all can marry ; and if a mistress should lay on any young woman 
here the injunction so common in English newspaper advertise 
ments for a maid of all work, " no followers allowed," it would 
be considered an extraordinary act of tyranny. The laborers 
begin work at six o clock in the morning, have an hour s rest at 
nine for breakfast, and many have finished their assigned task by 
two o clock, all of them by three o clock. In summer they di 
vide their work differently, going to bed in the middle of the day, 
then rising to finish their task, and afterward spending a great 
part of the night in chatting, merry-making, preaching, and 
psalm-singing. At Christmas they claim a week s holidays, 
when they hold a kind of Saturnalia, and the owners can get 
no work done. Although there is scarcely any drinking, the 
master rejoices when this season is well over without mischief. 
The negro houses are as neat as the greater part of the cottages 



264 HOSPITAL FOR NEGROES. [CHAP. XIX. 

in Scotland (no flattering compliment it must be confessed), are 
provided always with a back door, and a hall, as they call it, in 
which is a chest, a table, two or three chairs, arid a few shelves 
for crockery. On the door of the sleeping apartment they keep 
a large wooden padlock, to guard their valuables from their 
neighbors when they are at work in the field, for there is much 
pilfering among them. A little yard is often attached, in which 
are seen their chickens, and usually a yelping cur, kept for their 
amusement. 

The winter, when the whites enjoy the best health, is the 
trying season for the negroes, who are rarely ill in the riqe- 
grounds in summer, which are so fatal to the whites, that when 
the planters who have retreated to the sea-islands revisit their 
estates once a fortnight, they dare not sleep at home. Such is 
the indifference of the negroes to heat, that they are often found 
sleeping with their faces upward in a broiling sun, instead of 
lying under the shade of a tree hard by. We visited the hos 
pital at Hopeton, which consists of three separate wards, all per 
fectly clean and well- ventilated. One is for men, another for 
women, and a third for lying-in women. The latter are always 
allowed a month s rest after their confinement, an advantage 
rarely enjoyed by hard-working English peasants. Although 
they are better looked after and kept more quiet, on these occa 
sions, in the hospital, the planters are usually baffled ; for the 
women prefer their own houses, where they can gossip with their 
friends without restraint, and they usually contrive to be taken 
by surprise at home. 

The negro mothers are often so ignorant or indolent, that they 
can not be trusted to keep awake and administer medicine to 
their own children ; so that the mistress has often to sit up all 
night with a sick negro child. In submitting to this, they are 
actuated by mixed motives- a feeling of kindness, and a fear of 
losing the services of the slave; but these attentions greatly at 
tach the negroes to their owners. In general, they refuse to 
take medicine from any other hands but those of their master or 
mistress. The laborers are allowed Indian meal, rice, and milk, 
and occasionally pork and soup, As their rations are more than 



CHAP. XIX.J WORK EXACTED. 265 

they can eat, they either return part of it to the overseer, who 
makes them an allowance of money for it at the end of the week, 
or they keep it to feed their fowls, which they usually sell, as 
well as their eggs, for cash, to buy molasses, tobacco, and other 
luxuries. When disposed to exert themselves, they get through 
the day s task in five hours, and then amuse themselves in fish 
ing, and sell the fish they take ; or some of them employ their 
spare time in making canoes out of large cypress trees, leave 
being readily granted them to remove such timber, as it aids the 
landowner to clear the swamps. They sell the canoes for about 
four dollars, for their own profit. 

If the mistress pays a visit to Savannah, the nearest town, 
she is overwhelmed with commissions, so many of the slaves 
wishing to lay out their small gains in various indulgences, espe 
cially articles of dress, of which they are passionately fond. The 
stuff must be of the finest quality, and many instructions are 
given as to the precise color or fashionable shade. White mus 
lin, with figured patterns, is the rage just now. 

One day, when walking alone, I came upon a " gang" of ne 
groes, who were digging a trench. They were superintended by 
a black " driver," who held a whip in his hand. Some of the 
laborers were using spades, others cutting away the roots and 
stumps of trees which they had encountered in the line of the 
ditch. Their mode of proceeding in their task was somewhat 
leisurely, and eight hours a day of this work are exacted, though 
they can accomplish the same in five hours, if they undertake it 
by the task. The digging of a given number of feet in length, 
breadth, and depth is, in this case, assigned to each ditcher, and 
a deduction made when they fall in with a stump or root. The 
names of gangs and drivers are odious, and the sight of the whip 
was painful to me as a mark of degradation, reminding me that 
the lower orders of slaves are kept to their work by mere bodily 
fear, and that their treatment must depend on the individual 
character of the owner or overseer. That the whip is rarely 
used, and often held for weeks over them, merely in terrorem, is, 
I have no doubt, true on all well governed estates ; and it is not 
that formidable weapon which I have seen exhibited as formerly 

VOL. I M 



266 AFRICAN TOM. [CHAP. XIX. 

iri use in the West Indies. It is a thong of leather, half an inch 
wide and a quarter of an inch thick. No ordinary driver is 
allowed to give more than six lashes for any offense, the head 
driver twelve, and the overseer twenty-four. When an estate 
is under superior management, the system is remarkably effective 
in preventing crime. The most severe punishment required in 
the last forty years, for a body of 500 negroes at Hopeton, was 
for the theft of one negro from another. In that period there 
has been no criminal act of the highest grade, for which a delin 
quent could be committed to the penitentiary in Georgia, and 
there have been only six cases of assault and battery. As a race, 
the negroes are mild and forgiving, and by no means so prone to 
indulge in drinking as the white man or the Indian. There 
were more serious quarrels, and more broken heads, among the 
Irish in a few years, when they came to dig the Brunswick 
Canal, than had been known among the negroes in all the sur 
rounding plantations for half a century. The murder of a hus 
band by a black woman, whom he had beaten violently, is the 
greatest crime remembered in this part of Georgia for a great 
length of time. 

Under the white overseer, the principal charge here is given 
to " Old Tom," the head driver, a man of superior intelligence 
and higher cast of feature. He was the son of a prince of the 
Foulah tribe, and was taken prisoner, at the age of fourteen, near 
Timbuctoo. The accounts he gave of what he remembered of 
the plants and geography of Africa, have been taken down in 
writing by Mr. Couper, and confirm many of the narratives of 
modern travelers. He has remained a strict Mahometan, but his 
numerous progeny of jet-black children and grandchildren, all of 
them marked by countenances of a more European cast than 
those of ordinary negroes, have exchanged the Koran for the Bible. 

During the last war, when Admiral Cockburn was off this 
coast with his fleet, he made an offer of freedom to all the slaves 
belonging to the father of my present host, and a safe convoy to 
Canada. Nearly all would have gone, had not African Tom, to 
whom they looked up with great respect, declined the proposal. 
He told them he had first known what slavery was in the West 



CHAP. XIX.] BLACK MECHANICS. 267 



Indies, and had made up his mind that the English were 
masters than the Americans. About half of them, therefore, 
determined to stay in St. Simon s Island, and not a few of the 
others who accepted the offer and emigrated, had their lives 
shortened by the severity of the climate in Canada. 

The slave trade ceased in 1796, and but few negroes were 
afterward smuggled into Georgia from, foreign countries, except 
indirectly for a short time through Florida before its annexation ; 
yet one fourth of the population of this lower country is said to 
have come direct from Africa, and it is a good sign of the prog 
ress made in civilization by the native-born colored race, that 
they speak of these " Africanians" with much of the contempt 
with which Europeans talk of negroes. v 

I was agreeably surprised to see the rank held here by the 
black mechanics. One day I observed a set of carpenters put 
ting up sluices, and a lock in a canal of a kind unknown in this 
part of the world. The black foreman was carrying into execu 
tion a plan laid down for him on paper by Mr. Couper, who had 
observed it himself many years ago in Holland. I also saw a 
steam-engine, of fifteen horse power, made in England by Bolton 
and Watt, and used in a mill for threshing rice, which had bee,: 
managed by a negro for more than twelve years without an acci 
dent. When these mechanics come to consult Mr. Couper 01 
business, their manner of speaking to him is quite as independen 
as that of English artisans to their employers. Their aptitude 
for the practice of such mechanical arts may encourage every 
philanthropist who has had misgivings in regard to the progress 
ive powers of the race, although much time will be required to 
improve the whole body of negroes, and the movement must be / 
general. One planter can do little by himself, so long as educa 
tion is forbidden by law. I am told that the old colonial statutes 
against teaching the slaves to read were almost in abeyance, and 
had become a dead letter, until revived by the reaction against 
the Abolition agitation, since w r hich they have been rigorously 
enforced and made more stringent. Nevertheless, the negroes 
are often taught to read, and they learn much in Sunday schools, 
and for the most part are desirous of instruction. 



268 PROGRESS OF NEGROES. [CHAP. XIX. 

In the hope of elevating the character of some of his negroes, 
and giving them more self-dependence, Mr. Couper, by way of 
experiment, set apart a field for the benefit of twenty -five picked 
men, and gave up to them half their Saturday s labor to -till it. 
In order that they might know its value, they were compelled to 
work on it for the first year, and the product, amounting to 1500 
dollars, was divided equally among them. But when, at length, 
they were left to themselves, they did nothing, and at the end of 
two years the field was uncultivated. But there appears to me 
nothing disheartening in this failure, which may have been chiefly 
owing to their holding the property in common, a scheme which 
was found not to answer even with the Pilgrim Fathers when 
they first colonized Plymouth men whom certainly none will 
accuse of indolence or a disposition to shrink from continuous 
labor. The " dolee far niente" is doubtless the negro s paradise, 
and I once heard one of them singing with much spirit at Will- 
iamsburg an appropriate song : 

" Old Virginia never tire. 
Eat hog and hominy, and lie by the fire ;" 

and it is quite enough that a small minority should be of this 
mind, to make all the others idle and unwilling to toil hard for 
the benefit of the sluggards. 

When conversing with different planters here, in regard to 
the capabilities and future progress of the black population, I find 
them to agree very generally in the opinion that in this part of 
Georgia they appear under a great disadvantage. In St. Simon s 
island it is admitted, that the negroes on the smaller estates are 
more civilized than on the larger properties, because they asso 
ciate with a greater proportion of whites. In Glynn County, 
where we are now residing, there are no less than 4000 negroes 
to 700 whites ; whereas in Georgia generally there are only 
281,000 slaves in a population of 691,000, or more whites than 
colored people. Throughout the upper country there is a large 
preponderance of Anglo-Saxons, and a little reflection will satisfy 
the reader how much the education of a race which starts orig 
inally from so low a stage of intellectual, social, moral, and 



CHAP. XLX.] CONVERSION OF NEGROES. 269 

spiritual development, as the African negro, must depend not on 
learning to read and write, but on the amount of familiar inter 
course which they enjoy with individuals of a more advanced 
race. So long as they herd together in large gangs, and rarely 
come into contact with any whites save their owner and over 
seer, they can profit little by their imitative faculty, and can 
not even make much progress in mastering the English language, 
that powerful instrument of thought and of the communication 
of ideas, which they are gaining in exchange for the limited vo 
cabulary of their native tribes. Yet, even in this part of Georgia, 
the negroes are very far from stationary, and each generation is 
acquiring habits of greater cleanliness and propriety of behavior, 
while some are learning mechanical arts, and every year many 
of them becoming converts to Christianity. 

Although the Baptist and Methodist missionaries have been 
the most active in this important work, the Episcopalians have 
not been idle, especially since Dr. Elliott became Bishop of 
Georgia, and brought his talents, zeal, and energy to the task. 
As he found that the negroes in general had no faith in the effi 
cacy of baptism except by complete immersion, he performed the 
ceremony as they desired. Indeed, according to the old English 
rubric, all persons were required to be immersed in baptism, ex 
cept when they were sick, so that to lose converts by not com 
plying with this popular notion of the slaves, would hardly have 
been justifiable. It may be true that the poor negroes cherish a 
superstitious belief that the washing out of every taint of sin de 
pends mainly on the particular manner of performing the rite, 
and the principal charm to the black women in the ceremony of 
total immersion consists in decking themselves out in white robes, 
like brides, and having their shoes trimmed with silver. They 
well know that the waters of the Altamaha are chilly, and that 
they and the officiating minister run no small risk of catching 
cold, but to this penance they most cheerfully submit. 

Of dancing and music the negroes are passionately fond. On 
the Hopeton plantation above twenty violins have been silenced 
by the Methodist missionaries, yet it is notorious that the slaves 
were not given to drink or intemperance in their merry-makings. 



270 SEPARATION OF CHURCHES. [CHAP. XIX. 

At the Methodist prayer-meetings, they are permitted to move 
round rapidly in a ring, joining hands in token of brotherly love, 
presenting first the right hand and then the left, in which ma- 
nceuvre, I am told, they sometimes contrive to take enough exer 
cise to serve as a substitute for the dance, it being, in fact, a kind 
of spiritual boulanger, while the singing of psalms, in and out of 
chapel, compensates in no small degree for the songs they have 
been required to renounce. 

However much we may feel inclined to smile at some of these 
outward tokens of conversion, and however crude may be the no 
tions of the Deity which the poor African at first exchanges for 
his belief in the evil eye and other superstitious fears, it is never 
theless an immense step in his progress toward civilization that 
he should join some Christian sect. Before he has time to ac 
quire high conceptions of his Creator, or to comprehend his own 
probationary state on earth, and his moral and religious duties, it 
is no small gain that he should simply become a member of the 
same church with his master, and should be taught that the 
white and colored man are equal before God, a doctrine calcu 
lated to raise him in his own opinion, and in that of the dominant 
race. 

Until lately the humblest slave who joined the Methodist or 
Baptist denomination could feel that he was one of a powerful 
association of Christians, which numbered hundreds of thousands 
of brethren in the northern as well as in the southern states. 
He could claim many schools and colleges of high repute in New 
England as belonging to his own sect, and feel proud of many 
celebrated writers whom they have educated. Unfortunately, a 
recent separation, commonly called " the north and south split," 
has severed these bonds of fellowship and fraternity, and for the 
sake of renouncing brotherhood with slave-owners, the northern 
churches have repudiated all communion with the great body of 
their negro fellow Christians. What effect can such estrange 
ment have on the mind, whether of master or slave, favorable to 
the cause of emancipation ? The slight thrown on the aristo 
cracy of planters has no tendency to conciliate them, or lead them 
to assimilate their sentiments to those of their brethren in the 



CHAP. XIX.] MIXTURE OF RACES. 271 

faith, with whom formerly, throughout the northern and free 
states, they had so intimate a connection ; and as for the slaves, 
it is to them a positive loss to be thus rejected and disowned. 
The rank and position of-the negro preachers in the south, whether 
Baptist or Methodist, some of them freemen, and of good abili 
ties, is decidedly lowered by the severance of the northern churches, 
which is therefore adverse to the gradual advancement of the 
African race, which can alone fit them for manumission. 

Some of the planters in Glynn County have of late permitted 
the distribution of Bibles among their slaves, and it was curious 
to remark that they who were unable to read were as anxious to 
possess them as those who could. Besides Christianizing the 
blacks, the clergy of all sects are doing them incalculable service, 
by preaching continually to both races that the matrimonial tie 
should be held sacred, without respect to color. To the domi 
nant race one of the most serious evils of slavery is its tendency 
to blight domestic happiness ; and the anxiety of parents for their 
sons, and a constant fear of their licentious intercourse with slaves, 
is painfully great. We know but too much of this evil in free 
countries, wherever there is a vast distance between the rich and 
poor, giving a power to wealth which insures a frightful amount 
of prostitution. Here it is accompanied with a publicity which 
is keenly felt as a disgrace by the more refined of the white 
women. The female slave is proud of her connection with a 
white man, and thinks it an honor to have a mulatto child, hop 
ing that it will be better provided for than a black child. Yet 
the mixed offspring is not very numerous. The mulattoes alone 
represent nearly all the illicit intercourse between the white man 
and negro of the living generation. I am told that they do not 
constitute more than two and a half per cent, of the whole popu 
lation. If the statistics of the illegitimate children of the whites 
born here could be compared with those in Great Britain, it might 
lead to conclusions by no means favorable to the free country. 
Here there is no possibility of concealment, the color of the child 
stamps upon him the mark of bastardy, and transmits it to great- 
grand-children born in lawful wedlock ; whereas if, in Europe, 
there was some mark or indelible stain betraying all the delin- 



272 MORAL CONDITION OF NEGROES. [CHAP. XIX. 

quencies and frailties, not only of parents, but of ancestors for 
three or four generations back, what unexpected disclosures should 
we not witness ! 

There are scarcely any instances of mulattoes born of a black 
father and a white mother. The colored women who become the 
mistresses of the white men are neither rendered miserable nor 
degraded, as are the white women who are seduced in Europe, 
and who are usually abandoned in the end, and left to be the 
victims of want and disease. In the northern states of America 
there is so little profligacy of this kind, that their philanthro 
pists may perhaps be usefully occupied in considering how the 
mischief may be alleviated south of the Potomac ; but in Great 
Britain there is so much need of reform at home, that the whole 
thoughts and energies of the rich ought to be concentrated in such 
schemes of improvement as may enable us to set an example of 
a higher moral standard to the slave-owning aristocracy of the 
Union. 

On one of the estates in this part of Georgia, there is a mulatto 
mother who has nine children by a full black, and the difference 
of shade between them and herself is scarcely perceptible. If the 
white blood usually predominates in this way in the second gen 
eration, as I am told is the case, amalgamation would proceed 
very rapidly, if marriages between the races were once legal 
ized ; for we see in England that black men can persuade very 
respectable white women to marry them, when all idea of the 
illegality and degradation of such unions is foreign to their 
thoughts. 

Among the obstacles which the Christian missionaries encount 
er here when they teach the virtue of chastity, I must not omit 
to mention the loose code of morality which the Africans have in 
herited from their parents. My wife made the acquaintance of 
a lady in Alabama, who had brought up with great care a col 
ored girl, who grew up modest and well-behaved, till at length 
she became the mother of a mulatto child. The mistress re 
proached her very severely for her misconduct, and the girl at 
first took the rebuke much to heart ; but having gone home one 
day to vi?it her mother, a native African, she returned, saying, 



CHAP. XIX.] MORAL CONDITION OF NEGROES. 273 

that her parent had assured her she had done nothing wrong, and 
had no reason to feel ashamed. When we are estimating, there 
fore, the amount of progress made by the American negroes since 
they left their native country, we ought always to bear in mind 
from how low a condition, both morally and intellectually consia- 
ered, they have had to mount up. 



END Or THE FIRST VOLUME. 



A SECOND VISIT 



THE UNITED STATES 



NORTH AMERICA. 



BY SIR CHARLES LYELL, F.R.S., 

PRESIDENT OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OK LONDON, AUTHOR OF "THE PRINCIPLES 
OF GEOLOGY," AND "TRAVELS IN NORTH AMERICA." 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 
VOL. II. 



NE W YORK: 

HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS. 
LONDON: JOHN MURRAY. 

1849. 



CONTENTS 



THE SECOND VOLUME. 



CHAPTER XX. 

PA(3E 

Darien to Savannah. Black Baptist Church and Preacher. Negro 
Prayer. Negro Intelligence. Bribery of Irish Voters. Dirt-Eaters. 
Railway Expedition on Hand-Car. Geology of Georgia. Negroes 
more progressive in Upper Country. Indifference of Georgians to 
Winter Cold. Want of Elbow-Room in Pine-Barrens 13 



CHAPTER XXL 

Indian Mounds and Block-house at Macon, Georgia. Fashionists. 
Funeral of Northern Man. Geology and silicified Corals and Shells 
Stage Traveling to Milledgeville. Negro Children. Home-made 
Soap. Decomposition of Gneiss. Deep Ravines recently excavated 
after clearing of Forest. Man shot in a Brawl. Disappointed Place- 
Hunter. Lynch Law in Florida. Repeal of English Corn-Laws. 
War Spirit abating .......... 



CHAPTER XXII. 

Macon to Columbus by Stage. Rough Traveling 

River. Columbus. Recent Departure of Creek Indians. Falls of the 
Chatahoochie. Competition of Negro and White Mechanics. Age 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

of Pine Trees. Abolitionist "Wrecker" in Railway Car. Runaway 
Slave. Sale of Novels by News-boys. Character of Newspaper 
r Press. Geology and Cretaceous Strata, Montgomery. Curfew. Sun- 
xlay School for Negroes. Protracted Meeting 34 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

Voyage from Montgomery to Mobile. Description of a large River 
Steamer. Shipping of Cotton at Bluffs. Fossils collected at Land 
ings. Collision of Steamer with the Boughs of Trees. Story of a Ger 
man Stewardess. Emigration of Stephanists from Saxony. Perpetu 
ation of Stephanist and Mormon Doctrines. Distinct Table for Colored 
and White Passengers. Landing at Claiborne by Torchlight. Fossil 
Shells. . 44 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

Claiborne, Alabama. Movers to Texas. State Debts and Liabilities. 
Lending .Money to half-settled States.---Rumors of War with England. 
Macon, Alabama. Sale of Slaves] Drunkenness in Alabama. 
Laws against Dueling. Jealousy of Wealth. Emigration to the West. 
Democratic Equality of Whites. Skeleton of Fossil Whale or Zeu- 
glodon. Voyage to Mobile 



CHAPTER XXV. 

Voyage from Mobile to Tuscaloosa. Visit to the Coal-field of Alabama. 
Its Agreement in Age with the ancient Coal of Europe. Absen 
teeism in Southern States. Progress of Negroes. Unthriftiness of 
Slave-Labor. University of Tuscaloosa. Churches. Bankruptcies. 
Judges and Law Courts. Geology on the Tombeckbee River. 
Artesian Wells. Limestone Bluff of St. Stephens. Negro shot by 
Overseer. Involuntary Efforts of the Whites to civilize the Negroes. 
New Statute in Georgia against Black Mechanics. The Effects of 
speedy Emancipation and the free Competition of White and Black 
Laborers considered .......... 67 



CONTENTS. vii 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

PAGE 

Return to Mobile. Excursion to the Shores of the Gulf of Mexico. 
View from Lighthouse. Mouth of Alabama River. Gnathodon in 
habiting Brackish Water. Banks of these Fossil Shells far Inland. 
Miring of Cattle. Yellow Fever at Mobile in 1839. Fire in same 
Year. Voyage from Mobile to New Orleans. Movers to Texas. 
Lake Pontchartrain. Arrival at New Orleans. St. Louis Hotel. 
French Aspect of City. Carnival. Procession of Masks . . 84 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

Catholic Cathedral, New Orleans. French Opera. Creole Ladies. 
v Quadroons. Marriage of Whites with Quadroons. St. Charles 
Theater. English Pronunciation. Duelist s Grave, Ladies Ordina 
ry . Procession of Fire Companies. Boasted Salubrity of New Orleans. 
Goods selling at Northern Prices. Mr. W ilde. Roman Law. 
Shifting of Capital to Baton Rouge. Debates in Houses of Legisla- 
lature. Convention and Revision of the Laws. Policy of Periodical 
State Conventions. Judges cashiered. Limitation of their Term of 
Office . , 93 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

Negroes not attacked by Yellow Fever. History of Mr. Wilde s Poem. 
The Market, New Orleans. Motley Character of Population. Levee 
and Steamers. First sight of Mississippi River. View from the Cupola 
of the St. Charles. Site of new Orleans. Excursion to Lake Pont 
chartrain. Shell Road. Heaps of Gnathodou. Excavation for Gas- 
Works. Buried upright Trees. Pere Antoine s Date-palm . . 102 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

Excursion from New Orleans to the Mouths of the River. Steamboat 
Accidents. River Fogs. Successive growths of Willow on River 
Bank. Pilot-Station of the Balize. Lighthouse destroyed by Hurri 
cane. Reeds, Shells, and Birds on Mud-banks. Drift-wood. Diffi 
culty of estimating the annual Increase of Delta. Action of Tides and 



viii CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

Currents. Tendency in the old Soundings to be restored. Changes 
of Mouths in a Century inconsiderable. Return to New Orleans. 
Battle-ground. Sugar-Mill. Contrast of French and Anglo-American 
Races. Causes of Difference. State and Progress of Negroes in Lou 
isiana ..... .... .111 



CHAPTER XXX. 

Voyage from New Orleans to Port Hudson. The Coast, Villas, and 
Gardens. Cotton Steamers. Flat Boats. Crevasses, Inundations. 
Decrease of Steamboat Accidents. Snag-Boat. Musquitoes. Natural 
Rafts. Bartram on buried Trees at Port Hudson. Dr. Carpenter s 
Observations. Landslip described. Ancient Subsidence in the Delta 
followed by an upward Movement, deducible from the buried Forest 
at Port Hudson . . . . . . . . . .129 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

Fontania near Port Hudson. Lake Solitude. Floating Island. Bony 
Pike. Story of the Devil s Swamp. Embarking by Night in Steam- 
Boat. Literary Clerk. Old Levees undermined. Succession of up 
right Trees in Bank. Raccourci Cut-off. Bar at Mouth of Red River. 
Shelly Fresh- water Loam of Natchez. Recent Ravines in Table- 
Land. Bones of extinct Quadrupeds. Human Fossil Bone. Ques 
tion of supposed co-existence of Man with extinct Mammalia discussed. 
Tornado at Natchez. Society, Country Houses, and Gardens. 
Landslips. Indian Antiquities 148 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

Natchez. Vidah a and Lake Concordia. Hybernations of Aligator. 
Bonfire on Floating Raft. Grand Gulf. Magnolia Steamer. Vicks- 
burg to Jackson (Mississippi) by Railway. Fossils on Pearl River. 
Ordinary at Jackson. Story of Transfer of State-House from Natchez. 
Vote by Ballot. Popular Election of Judges. Voyage from Vicks- 
burg to Memphis. Monotony of River Scenery. Squall of Wind. 
Actors on Board. Negro mistaken for White. Manners in the Back 
woods. Inquisitiveness. Spoilt Children. Equality and Leveling. 
Silence of English Newspapers on Oregon Question. . . .155 



CONTENTS. ix 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

PAGE 

Bluffs at Memphis. New Madrid. No Inn. Undermining of River 
Bank. Examination of Country shaken by Earthquake of lSll-1 2. 
Effects of Passage of Waves through Alluvial Soil. Circular Cavities 
or Sand-Bursts. Open Fissures. Lake Eulalie drained by Shocks. 
Borders of Sunk Country, west of New Madrid. Dead Trees stand 
ing erect. A slight Shock felt. Trade in Peltries increased by Earth 
quake. Trees erect in new formed Lakes. Indian Tradition of 
Shocks. Dreary Forest Scene. Rough Quarters. Slavery in Mis* 1 
souri . 171 



CHAPTER XXXIV, 

Alluvial Formations of the Mississippi, ancient and modern. Delta de 
nned. Great Extent of Wooded Swamps. Deposits of pure Veget 
able Matter. Floors of Blue Clay with Cypress Roots. Analogy to 
Ancient Coal-measures. Supposed " Epoch of existing Continents." 
Depth of Fresh-water Strata in Deltas. Time required to bring down 
the Mud oft he Mississippi. New Experiments and Observations re 
quired. Great Age of buried and living Cypress-trees. Older and 
newer Parts of Alluvial Plain. Upraise i Terraces of Natchez, &c., 
and the Ohio, the Monuments of an older Alluvial Formation. Grand 
Oscillation of Level. The ancient Valleys inhabited by Quadrupeds 
now extinct. Land shells not changed. Probable Rate of Subsidence 
and Upheaval. Relative Age of the ancient Alluvium of the Missis 
sippi, and the Northern Drift 183 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

Departure from New Madrid. Night-watch for Stecimers. Scenery of 
the Ohio River. Mount Vernon, Ornithology. No Undergrowth in 
Woods. Spring Flowers. Visit to Dr. Dale Owen, New Harmony. 
Fossil Forest of erect Trees in Coal-measures. Movers migrating 
Westward. Voyage to Louisville. Professional Zeal of one of " the 
Pork Aristocracy." Fossil Coral-reef at the Falls of the Ohio, Louis 
ville. Fossil Zoophites as perfect as recent Stone-corals . . . 200 



CONTEXTS. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

PACK 

Louisville. Noble Site for a Commercial City. Geology. Medical 
Students. Academical Rotation in Office. Episcopal Church. 
Preaching against the Reformation. Service in \Black Methodist 
Church. Improved Condition of Negroes in KefK^cky. A colored 
Slave married as a free White/ Voyage to Cincinnati. Naturalized 
English Artisan gambling. Sources of Anti-British Antipathies. 
Progress of Cincinnati. Increase of German Settlers. Democracy of 
Romanists. Geology of Mill Creek. Land Tortoises. Observatory. 
Cultivation of the Vine. Sculp ture by Hiram Powers . . .210 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

Cincinnati to Pittsburg. Improved Machinery of Steamer. Indian 
Mound. Gravel Terraces. Pittsburg Fire. Journey to Greensburg. 
Scenery like England. Oregon War Question. Fossil Foot-prints of 
Air-breathing Reptile in Coal Strata. Casts of Mud-cracks. Foot 
prints of Birds and Dogs sculptured by Indians. Theories respecting 
the Geological Antiquity of highly organized Vertebrata. Prejudices 
opposed to the Reception of Geological Truths. Popular Education 
the only Means of preventing a Collision of Opinion between the 
Multitude and the Learned 223 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

Greensburg to Philadelphia. Crossing the Alleghany Mountains. 
Scenery. Absence of Lakes. Harrisburg. African Slave-trade. 
Railway Meeting at Philadelphia. Borrowing Money for Public 
Works. Negro Episcopal Clergyman. Washington. National Fair 
and Protectionist Doctrines. Dog-wood in Virginia. Excursion with 
Dr. Wyman. Natural History. Musk-rats. Migration of Humming 
birds to New Jersey 239 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

New York, clear Atmosphere and gay Dresses. Omnibuses. Naming of 
Streets. Visit to Audubon. Croton Aqueduct. Harpers Printing 
Establishment. Lar^e Sale of Works by English and American 



CONTENTS. xi 



PAGE 

Authors. Cheapness of Books. International Copyright. Sale of 
Eugene Sue s Wandering Jew. Tendency of the Work. Mr. Galla- 
tin on Indian Corn. War with Mexico. Facility of raising Troops. 
Dr. Dewey preaching against War. Cause of Influence of Unitarians. 
Geological Excursion to Albany. Helderberg War. Voting Thanks 
to the Third House. Place-hunting. Spring Flowers. Geology and 
Taconic System 248 



CHAPTER XL. 

Construction and Management of Railways in America. Journey by 
Long Island from New York to Boston. Whale Fishery in the Pacific. 
Chewing Tobacco. Visit to Wenham Lake. Cause of the superior " 
Permanence of Wenham Lake Ice. Return to Boston. Skeletons of 
Fossil Mastodon. Food of these extinct Quadrupeds. Anti-war De 
monstration. Voyage to Halifax. Dense Fog. Large Group of Ice 
bergs seen on the Ocean. Transportation of Rocks by Icebergs. 
Danger of fast Sailing among Bergs. Aurora Borealis. Connection 
of this Phenomenon with Drift Ice. Pilot with English Newspapers. 
Return to Liverpool. ... 264 



/** 

Li&rwn 

u --" \, 



A SECOND VISIT 

TO 

THE UNITED STATES, 



CHAPTER XX. 

Darien to Savannah. Black Baptist Church and Preacher. Negro Prayer. 
Ne^ro Intelligence. Bribery of Irish Voters. Dirt Eaters. Railway 
Expedition on Hand-Car. Geology of Georgia. Negroes more pro 
gressive in Upper Country. Indifference of Georgians to Winter Cold. 
Want of Elbow-Room in Pine-Barrens. 

Jan. 9, 1846. WHEN I had finished my geological exami 
nation of the southern and maritime part of Georgia, near the 
mouth of the Altamaha river, I determined to return northward 
to Savannah, that I might resume my survey at the point where 
I left off in 1842,* and study the tertiary and cretaceous strata 
between the Savannah and Alabama rivers. 

On our way back from Hopeton to Darien, Mr. Couper and 
his son accompanied us in a canoe, and we passed through the 
General s Cut. a canal so called because, according to tradition, 
Oglethorpe s soldiers cut it out with their swords in one day. 
We met a great number of negroes paddling their canoes on their 
way back from Darien, for it was Saturday, when they are gen 
erally allowed a half holiday, and they had gone to sell on their 
own account their poultry, eggs, and fish, and were bringing back 
tobacco, clothes, and other articles of use or luxury. 

Having taken leave of our kind host, we waited some hours at 
Darien for a steamer, which was to touch there on its way from 
St. Augustine in Florida, and which conveyed us speedily to Sa- 
* See "Travels in North America," vol. i. pp. 155-174. 



14 BLACK BAPTIST PREACHER. [Cn^p. XX. 

vannah. Next day, I attended afternoon service in a Baptist 
church at Savannah, in which I found that I was the only white 
man, the congregation consisting of about COO negroes, of various 
shades, most of them very dark. As soon as I entered I was 
shown to a seat reserved for strangers, near the preacher. First 
the congregation all joined, both men and women, very harmoni 
ously in a hymn, most of them having evidently good ears for 
music, and good voices. The singing was followed by prayers, 
not read, but delivered without notes by a negro of pure African 
blood, a gray-headed venerable-looking man, with a fine sonor 
ous voice, named Marshall. He, as I learnt afterward, has the 
reputation of being one of their best preachers, and he concluded 
by addressing to them a sermon, also without notes, in good style, 
and for the most part in good English ; so much so, as to make 
me doubt w r hether a few ungramrnatical phrases in the negro 
idiom might not have been purposely introduced for the sake of 
bringing the subject home to their family thoughts. He got very 
successfully through one flight about the gloom of the valley of 
the shadow of death, and, speaking of the probationary state of 
a pious man left for a while to his own guidance, and when in 
danger of failing saved by the grace of God, he compared it to an 
eagle teaching her newly fledged offspring to fly, by carrying it 
up high into the air, then dropping it, and, if she sees it falling 
to the earth, darting with the speed of lightning to save it before 
it reaches the ground. Whether any eagles really teach their 
young to fly in this manner, I leave the ornithologist to decide ; 
but when described in animated and picturesque language, yet by 
no means inflated, the imagery was well calculated to keep the 
attention of his hearers awake. He also inculcated some good 
practical maxims of morality, and told them they were to look to 
a future state of rewards and punishments in which God would 
deal impartially with " the poor and the rich, the black man and 
the w r hite." 

I went afterward, in the evening, to a black Methodist church, 
where I and two others were the only white men in the whole 
congregation ; but I was less interested, because the service and 
preaching was performed by a white minister. Nothing in my 



CHAP. XX.] NEGRO BAPTISTS. 15 



whole travels gave me a higher idea of the capabilities of the 
negroes, than the actual progress which they have made, even in 
a part of a slave state, where they outnumber the whites, than 
this Baptist meeting. To see a body of African origin, who had 
joined one of the denominations of Christians, and built a church 
for themselves who had elected a pastor of their own race, and 
secured him an annual salary, from whom they were listening to 
a good sermon, scarcely, if at all, below the average standard of 
the compositions of white ministers to hear the whole service 
respectably, and the singing admirably performed, surely marks 
an astonishing step in civilization. 

The pews were well fitted up, and the church well ventilated, 
and there was no disagreeable odor in either meeting-house. It 
was the winter season, no doubt, but the room was warm and 
the numbers great. The late Mr. Sydney Smith, when he had 
endeavored in vain to obtain from an American of liberal views, 
some explanation of his strong objection to confer political and 
social equality on the blacks, drew from him at length the reluc 
tant confession that the idea of any approach to future amalga 
mation was insufferable to any man of refinement, unless he had 
lost the use of his olfactory nerves. On hearing which Mr. 
Smith exclaimed 

" Et si non alium late jactaret odorem 
Civis erat ! * 

And such, then, are the qualifications by which the rights of 
suffrage and citizenship are to be determined !" 

A Baptist, missionary, with whom I conversed on the capacity 
of the negro race, told me that he was once present when one of 
their preachers delivered a prayer, composed by himself, for the or 
dination of a minister of his sect, which, said he, was admirable 
in its conception, although the sentences were so ungrammatical, 
that they would pass, with a stranger, for mere gibberish. The 
prayer ran thus : 

" Make he good, like he say, 
Make he say, like he good, 
Make he say, make he good, like he God." 

* Virgil, Georg. ii. 133. 



16 NEGRO INTELLIGENCE. [CHAP. XX. 

Which may be thus interpreted : Make him good as his doc 
trine, make his doctrine as pure as his life, and may both be in 
the likeness of his God. 

This anecdote reminds me of another proof of negro intelli 
gence, related to me by Dr. Le Conte, whose black carpenter 
came to him one day, to relate to him, with great delisrht, a grand 
discovery he had made, namely, that each side of a hexagon was 
equal to the radius of a circle drawn about it. When informed 
that this property of a hexagon had long been known, he re 
marked that if it had been taught him, it would have been prac 
tically of great use to him in his business. 

There had been " a revival" in Savannah a short time before 
my return, conducted by the Methodists, in the course of which 
a negro girl had been so much excited, as to be thrown into a 
trance. The physician who attended her gave me a curious de 
scription of the case. If the nerves of only one or two victims 
are thus overwrought, it is surely more than questionable whether 
the evil does not counterbalance all the good done, by what is 
called "the awakening" of the indifferent. 

I inquired one day, when conversing with some of the citizens 
here, whether, as New York is called the Empire State, Penn 
sylvania the Keystone State, Massachusetts the Bay State, and 
Vermont, when the question of its separation from New Hamp 
shire was long under discussion, " the Future State," in short, as 
almost all had some name, had they any designation for Georgia ? 
It ought, they said, to be styled the Pendulum state, for the 
Whigs and Democrats get alternately possession of power ; so 
that each governor is of opposite politics to his predecessor. The 
metropolis, they added, imitates the example of the State, elect 
ing the mayor and aldermen of Savannah one year from the Dem 
ocratic and the next from the Whig party. It has been of late 
a great point, in electioneering tactics, to secure the votes of fifty 
or sixty Irish laborers, who might turn the scale here, as they 
have so often done in New York, in the choice of city officers. 
In the larger city they were conciliated for some years by em 
ployment in the Croton waterworks, so that " pipe-laying" be 
came the slang term for this kind of bribery ; here, it ought to 



CHAP. XX.] DIRT-EATERS. 17 

be called " reed-cutting," for they set the Hibernians to cut down 
a dense crop of tall reeds (Sesbania vesicaria), which covers the 
canal and the swamps round the city, growing to the height of 
fifteen feet, and, like the city functionaries, renewed every year. 
Some members of the medical college, constituting a board of 
health, have just come out with a pamphlet, declaring, that by 
giving to the sun s rays, in summer, free access to the mud in 
the bogs, and thus promoting the decay of vegetable matter, the 
cutting down of these reeds has caused malaria. 

In the course of all my travels, I had never seen one opossum 
in the woods, nor a single racoon, their habits being nocturnal, 
yet we saw an abundant supply of both of them for sale in the 
market here. The negroes relish them much, though their flesh 
is said to be too coarse and greasy for the palate of a white 
man. The number of pine-apples and bananas in the market, 
reminded us of the proximity of the West Indies. We ob 
served several negroes there, whose health had been impaired 
by dirt-eating, or the practice of devouring aluminous earth a 
diseased appetite, which, as I afterward found, prevails in sev 
eral parts of Alabama, where they eat clay. I heard various 
speculations on the origin of this singular propensity, called 
" geophagy" in some medical books. One author ascribes it to 
the feeding of slaves too exclusively on Indian corn, which is too 
nourishing, and has not a sufficiency in it of inorganic matter, 
so that when they give it to cattle, they find it best to grind up 
the cob and part of the stalk with the grain. But this notion 
seems untenable, for a white person was pointed out to me, who 
was quite as sickly, and had a green complexion, derived from 
this same habit ; and I was told of a young lady in good circum 
stances, who had never been stinted of her food, yet who could 
not be broken of eating clay. 

Jan. 13. From Savannah we went by railway to Macon in 
Georgia, a distance of 191 miles, my wife going direct in a 1 
train which carried her in about twelve hours to her destination, 
accompanied by one of the directors of the railway company, I 
who politely offered to escort her. The same gentleman sup- \ 
plied me with a hand-car and three negroes, so that I was able ! 
to perform the journey at my leisure, stopping at all the recent 



18 EXPEDITION ON HAND-CAR. [CHAP. XX. 



cuttings, and examining the rocks and fossils on the way. I 
was desirous of making these explorations, because this line of 
road traverses the entire area occupied by the tertiary strata be 
tween the sea and the borders of the granitic region, which com 
mences at Macon, and the section was parallel to that previously 
examined by me on the Savannah river in 1842. When I 
came to low swampy grounds, or pine-barrens, where there were 
no objects of geological interest, my black companions propelled 
me onward at the rate of ten or twelve miles an hour, by turning 
a handle connected with the axis of the wheels. Their motions 
were like those of men drawing water from a well. Through 
out the greater part of the route, an intelligent engineer accom 
panied me. As there Avas only one line of rail, and many 
curves, and as the negroes can not be relied on for caution, he 
was anxious for my safety, while I was wholly occupied with 
my geology. I saw him frequently looking at his watch, and 
often kneeling down, like "Fine-ear" in the fairy tale, so as to 
place his ear in contact with the iron rails to ascertain whether 
a passenger or luggage-train w r ere within a mile or two. We 
went by Parramore s Hill, where the sandstone rocks detained 
me some time, and, at the ninety-fifth mile station from Savan 
nah, I collected fossils, consisting of marine shells and corals. 
These were silicified in the burr-stone, of which mill-stones are 
manufactured. Near Sandersville I saw a limestone from which 
Eocene shells and corals are procured, as well as the teeth of 
sharks and the bones of the huge extinct cetacean called Zeug- 
lodon. Here I had ample opportunities of confirming the opin 
ion I had previously announced as the result of my labors in 
1842, that this burr-stone, with its red, yellow, and white sands, 
and its associated porcelain clays or kaolin, constitutes one of the 
members of the Eocene group, overlying the great body of cal 
careous rock, once supposed by some to be cretaceous, but which 
really belongs to the same tertiary period.^ Although the sum 
mit level of the railway attains an elevation of about 500 feet, 
descending afterward somewhat abruptly to Macon, which is 
only 300 feet above the sea, it is surprising how we stole imper 
ceptibly up this ascent, as if on a perfectly level plain, every 
* See Quarterly Journ. of Geol. Society, 1845, p. 563. 



CHAP. XX.] NEGROES IN UPPER COUNTRY. 19 

where covered with wood, following chiefly the swampy valley 
of the Ogeechee River, in such a manner as to miss seeing all 
the leading features in the physical geography of the country. 
Had I not, when at Hopeton, seen good examples of that suc 
cession of steps, or abrupt escarpments, by which a traveler in 
passing from the sea-coast to the granite region ascends from one 
great terrace to another, I should have doubted the accuracy of 
Bartram s description.* 

I had many opportunities, during this excursion, of satisfying 
myself of the fact for which I had been prepared by the plant 
ers " on the sea-board," that the intelligence of the colored race 
increased in the interior and upland country in proportion as 
they have more intercourse with the whites. Many of them 
were very inquisitive to know my opinion as to the manner in 
which marine shells, sharks teeth, sea-urchins, and corals could 
have been buried in the earth so far from the sea and at such a 
height. The deluge had occurred to them as a cause, but they 
were not satisfied with it, observing that they procured these 
remains not merely near the surface, but from the bottom of 
deep wells, and that others were in flint stones. In some 
places, when I left the railway and hired a gig to visit planta 
tions far from the main road, the proprietor would tell me he 
was unable to answer my questions, his well having been sunk 
ten or twelve years ago. In that period the property had 
changed hands two or three times, the former owners having 
settled farther south or southwest ; but the estate had remained 
under the management of the same head negro, to whom I was 
accordingly referred. This personage, conscious of his import 
ance, would begin by enlarging, with much self-complacency, on 
the ignorance of his master, who had been too short a time in 
those parts to understand any thing I wished to know. When 
at length he condescended to come to the point, he could usually 
give me a clear account of the layers of sand, clay, and limestone 
they had passed through, and of fishes teeth they had found, 
some of which had occasionally been preserved. In proportion 
as these colored people fill places of trust, they are involuntarily 
treated more as equals by the whites. The prejudices which 
# Ante, vol. i. p. 257. 



20 NEGROES IN UPPER COUNTRY. [CHAP. XX 

keep the races asunder would rapidly diminish, were they no1 
studiously kept up by artificial barriers, unjust laws, and the re 
action against foreign interference. In one of the small farms, 
where I passed the night, I was struck with the good manners 
and pleasant expression of countenance of a young woman of 
color, who had no dash of white blood in her veins. She man 
aged nearly all the domestic affairs of the house, the white chil 
dren among the rest, and, when next day I learnt her age, from 
the proprietor, I expressed surprise that she had never married. 
" She has had many offers," said he, " but has declined all, for 
they were quite unworthy of her, rude and uncultivated coun 
try people. I do not see how she is to make a suitable match 
here, though she might easily do so in a large town like Savan 
nah." He spoke of her just as he might have done of a white 
free maid-servant. 

If inter-marriages between the colored and white races were 
not illegal here, how can we doubt that as Englishwomen some 
times marry black servants in Great Britain, others, who came 
out here as poor emigrants, would gladly accept an offer from a 
well-conducted black artisan or steward of an estate, a man of 
intelligence and sober habits, preferable in so many respects to 
the drunken and illiterate Irish settlers, who are now so unduly 
raised above them by the prejudices of race ! 

In one family, I found that there were six white children and 
six blacks, of about the same age, and the negroes had been taught 
to read by their companions, the owner winking at this illegal 
proceeding, and seeming to think that such an acquisition would 
rather enhance the value of his slaves than otherwise. Unfor 
tunately, the whites, in return, often learn from the negroes to 
speak broken English, and, in spite of losing much time in un 
learning ungrammatical phrases, well-educated people retain some 
of them all their lives. 

As I stopped every evening at the point where my geological 
work for the day happened to end, I had sometimes to put up 
with rough quarters in the pine-barrens. It was cold, and none 
of my hosts grudged a good fire, for large logs of blazing pine- 
wood were freely heaped up on the hearth, but the windows and 
doors were kept wide open. One morning, I was at breakfast 



CHAP. XX.] INDIFFERENCE TO COLD. 21 

with a large family, at sunrise, when, the frost was so hard, that 
every pool of water in the road was incrusted with ice. In the 
course of the winter, some ponds, they said, had borne the weight 
of a man and horse, and there had been a coroner s inquest on 
the body of a man, lately found dead on the road, where the 
question had been raised whether he had been murdered or frozen 
to death. They had placed me in a thorough draught, and, un 
able to bear the cold any longer, I asked leave to close the win 
dow. My hostess observed, that " I might do so, if I preferred 
sitting in the dark." On looking up, I discovered that there was 
no glass in the windows, and that they were furnished with large 
shutters only. For my own part, I would willingly have been 
content with the light which the pine-wood gave us, but seeing 
the women and girls, with bare necks and light clothing, perfectly 
indifferent to the cold, I merely asked permission to put on my 
great coat and hat. These Georgians seemed to me, after their 
long summer, to be as insensible to the frost as some Englishmen 
the first winter after their return from India, who come back 
charged, as it were, with a superabundant store of caloric, and 
take time, like a bar of iron out of a furnace, to part with their 
heat. 

A farmer near Parramore s Hill, thinking I had come to settle 
there, offered to sell me some land at the rate of two dollars an 
acre. It was well timbered, and I found that the wood growing 
on this sandy soil is often worth more than the ground which it 
covers. Another resident in the same district, told me he had 
bought his farm at two and a half dollars (or about half-a-guinea) 
an acre, and thought it dear, and would have gone off to Texas, 
if he were not expecting to reap a rich harvest from a thriving 
plantation of peach trees and nectarines, just coming into full 
bearing. A market for such fruit had recently been opened by 
the new railway, from Macon to Savannah. He complained of 
want of elbow-room, although I found that his nearest neighbor 
was six or seven miles distant ; but, he observed, that having a 
large family of children, he wished to lay out his capital in the 
purchase of a wider extent of land in Texas, and so be the better 
able to provide for them. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

Indian Mounds and Block-house at Macon, Georgia. Fashionists. Fune 
ral of Northern Man. Geology and silicified Corals and Shells. Stage 
traveling to Milledgeville. Negro Children. Home-made Soap. De 
composition of Gneiss. Deep Ravines recently excavated after clearing 
of Forest. Man shot in a Brawl. Disappointed Place-Hunter. Lynch 
Law in Florida. Repeal of English Corn-Laws. War Spirit abating. 

Jan. 15, 1846. WHEN I was within twenty miles of Macon, 
I left the hand-car and entered a railway-train, which carried me 
in one hour into the town. About a mile south of the place we 
passed the base of two conical Indian mounds, the finest monu 
ments of the kind I had ever seen. The first appearance of a 
large-steam vessel ascending one of the western tributaries of the 
Mississippi, before a single Indian has been dispossessed of his 
hunting grounds, or a single tree of the native forest has been 
felled, scarcely affords a more striking picture of a wilderness in 
vaded by the arts of civilized life, than Macon, in Georgia, re 
sounding to the sound of a locomotive engine. On entering 1 the 
town, my eye was caught by a striking object, a wooden edifice 
of very peculiar structure and picturesque form, crowning one of 
the hills in the suburbs. This, I was told, on inquiry, was a 
block-house, actually in use against the Indians only twenty-five 
years ago, before any habitations of the white men were to be 
seen in the forest here. It was precisely one of those wooden 
forts so faithfully described by Cooper in the " Path-finder." 
After the mind has become interested with such antiquities, it is 
carried back the next moment to the modern state of things by 
an extraordinary revulsion, when a fellow-passenger, proud of the 
sudden growth of his adopted city, tells you that another large 
building, also conspicuous on a height, is a female seminary lately 
established by the Methodists, " where all the young ladies take 
degrees ;" and then, as you pace the streets with your baggage 
to the hotel, another says to you, " There go two of our fashion- 



CHAP. XXL] FUNERAL OF NORTHERN MAN. 23 

ists," pointing to two gayly-dressed ladies, in the latest Parisian 
costume. 

I had seen, in the pale countenances of the whites in the pine- 
woods I had lately traveled through, the signs of much fever and 
ague prevalent in the hot season in Georgia, but at Macon we 
heard chiefly of consumptive patients, who have fled from the 
northern states in the hope of escaping the cold of winter. The 
frost, this year, has tried them severely in the south. Two days 
before I reached Macon, a young northern man had died in the 
hotel where my wife was staying, a melancholy event, as none 
of his friends or relatives were near him. Lucy, the chamber 
maid of the hotel, an intelligent bright mulatto, from Maryland, 
who expressed herself as well as any white woman, carne to tell 
my wife that the other ladies of the house were to be present at 
the funeral, and invited her to attend. She found the two 
drawing-rooms thrown into one, and the coffin placed on a table 
between the folding doors, covered with a white cloth. There 
were twenty or thirty gentlemen on the one side, and nearly as 
many ladies and children on the other, none of them in mourn 
ing. The Episcopal clergyman who officiated, before reading 
the usual burial service, delivered a short and touching address, 
alluding to the stranger cut off in his youth, far from his kindred, 
and exhorting his hearers not to defer the hour of repentance to 
a death-bed, when their reason might be impaired or taken from 
them. After the prayers, six of the gentlemen came forward to 
carry the coffin down stairs, to put it into a small hearse drawn 
by a single horse, and three carriages followed with as many as 
they could hold, to the cemetery of Rose Hill. This burial- 
ground is in a beautiful situation on a wooded hill, near the banks 
of the Ocmulgee arid overlooking the Falls. 

These falls, like so many of those on the rivers east of the Alle- 
ghanies, are situated on the line of junction of the granitic and 
tertiary regions.^ The same junction may also be seen at the 
bridge over the Ocmulgee, at Macon, the red loam of the tertiary 
formation resting there on mica schist. At the distance of one 
mile southeast of the town, a railway cutting has exposed a series 
* See "Travels in N. America," vol. i. p. 132. -jrf 



24 SILICIFIED SHELLS AND CORAL. [CHAP. XXI. 

of beds of yellow and red clay, with accompanying- sands of ter 
tiary formation, and, at the depth of forty feet, I observed a large 
fossil tree converted into lignite, the concentric rings of annual 
growth being visible. Receding from the granitic rocks, six or 
eight miles still farther to the southeast, I found at Brown Mount 
ain, a bluff on the Ocmulgee River, and at other places in the 
neighborhood, a great many siliceous casts of fossil shells and 
corals, and among others a large nautilus, the whole indicating 
that these beds of cherty sandstone and impure limestone belong 
to the Eocene period. 

As there is much kaolin in this series of chert and burr-stone 
strata, I have little doubt that the petrifaction of fossil- wood, and 
of shells and corals, has taken place in consequence of the decom 
position of the imbedded felspathic rocks and crystals of felspar, 
taking place simultaneously with the putrefaction of the organic 
bodies. The silex, just set free from its chemical combination in 
the felspar, would replace each organic particle as fast as it de 
cayed or was resolved into its elements. 

From Macon I went to Milledgeville, twenty-five miles to the 
northeast, the capital of Georgia. Instead of taking the direct 
road, we made a detour, going the first thirty miles on the Sa 
vannah railway, to a station called Gordon, where we found a 
stage-coach ready to drag us through the deep sands of the pine- 
barrens, or to jolt us over corduroy roads in the swamps. As 
we were traversing one of the latter, at the rate of half a mile 
an hour, I began to contrast the speed of the new railway with 
stage-traveling. Our driver maintained that he could go as fast 
as the cars. " How do you make that out ?" said I. " Put a 
locomotive," he replied, " on this swamp, and. see which will get 
on best. The most you can say is, that each kind of vehicle runs 
fastest on its own line of road." 

We were passing some cottages on the way-side, when a group 
of children rushed out, half of them white and half negro, shout 
ing at the full stretch of their lungs, and making the driver fear 
that his horses would be scared. They were not only like chil 
dren in other parts of the world, in their love of noise and mis 
chief, but were evidently all associating on terms of equality, and 



CHAP. XXI.] THE "EXECUTIVE MANSION." 25 

had not yet found out that they belonged to a different caste in. 
society. One of our passengers was a jet black youth, about ten 
years old, who got down at a lone house in the woods, from the 
door of which two mulatto boys a year or two younger ran out. 
There was much embracing and kissing, and mutual caressing, 
with more warmth of manner than is usually shown by the 
whites. We were glad to see the white mistress of the house, 
probably the owner of them and their parents, looking on with 
evident pleasure and interest at the scene. 

Milledgeville, a mere village, though the capital of the state, 
is provided with four neat and substantial wooden churches, clus 
tered together, the Presbyterian, Baptist, Methodist, and Episco 
palian. In the latter we found there was to be no service, as 
the clergyman had been recently " called" to a larger church, 
newly built, at Savannah. The Presbyterian minister was from 
New England, and an excellent preacher. He exhorted his con 
gregation to take the same view of their short sojourn on this 
globe, which the emigrant takes of his journey to the far west, 
bearing patiently great hardships and privations, because, how 
ever severe at the time, he knows they will soon end, and prove 
momentary in their duration, in comparison with the longer period 
which he hopes to spend in a happier land. 

At our hotel apologies were made to us by a neatly-dressed 
colored maid, for the disorderly state of our room, the two beds 
having been recently occupied by four members of the Legisla 
ture, who, according to her, " had turned the room into a hog 
pen, by smoking and spilling their brandy and wine about the 
floor." 

While I was geologizing in the suburbs, the Governor s lady 
called on my wife and took her to her residence, called here the 
" Executive Mansion," as appears by the inscription over the 
door. It contained some handsome reception-rooms newly fur 
nished by the last governor, but the white ground of a beautiful 
Axminster carpet had been soiled and much damaged the first 
evening after it was put down, at a levee, attended by several 
hundred men, each walking in after a heavy rain with his shoes 
covered with mud. 
VOL. IT. B 



26 HOME-MADE SOAP. [CHAP. XXI. 

When the governor s wife paid us a second visit, our landlady 
made herself one of the party just as if we were all visitors at 
her house. She was very much amused at my wife s muff, hav 
ing never seen one since she was a girl, half a century before, at 
Baltimore, yet the weather was now cold enough to make such 
an article of dress most comfortable. Among other inquiries, she 
said to my wife, " Do tell me how you make your soap in En 
gland." Great was her surprise to hear that ladies in that coun 
try were in the habit of buying the article in shops, and would 
be much puzzled if called upon to manufacture it for themselves. 
As it was evident she had never studied Adam Smith on the Di 
vision of Labor, she looked upon this fine-lady system of purchas 
ing every article at retail stores, as very extravagant. " That s- 
the way they do in the north," said she, " though I never could 
understand where all their money comes from." She then ex 
plained how economically she was able to supply herself with 
soap. " First, there is the wood, which costs nothing but the 
trouble of felling the trees ; and, after it has served for fuel, it 
yields the ashes, from which we get the potash. This is mixed 
with the fat of sixty hogs, which costs nothing, for what else 
could I do with all this fat at killing time ? As for the labor, it 
is all done by my own people. I have nine maids, and they 
make almost every thing in the house, even to the caps I wear." 
Touching the soap, she observed, we must be careful to select the 
ashes of the oak, hickory, ash, and other hard wood, for the pines 
yield no potash ; a remark which led me to speculate on the lux 
uriant growth of the long-leaved pines in the purely siliceous ter 
tiary soils, from which it would have been difficult to conceive 
how the roots of the trees could extract any alkaline matter, 
whereas the soil of the " hickory grounds" is derived from the 
disintegration of granitic rocks, which are very felspathic here, 
and are decomposing in situ. 

Having occasion to hire a horse, I found that the proprietor 
of the livery stables was a colored man, who came himself to 
bargain about the price, which was high compared to that asked 
in the north. 

The site of Milledgeville is 577 feet above the level of the 



CHAP. XXI. J BLOCKS OF GRANITE AND GNEISS. 27 

sea, and, like Macon, it stands on the boundary of the tertiary 
and granitic region. Dr. J. R. Cotting, who had been employ 
ed by the state to make a geological survey of part of Georgia, 
showed me in the State House some fossils collected by him, and 
he accompanied me in an excursion into the neighborhood of the 
capital. It is well worthy of remark, that here, as every where 
in Georgia and Alabama, there are loose blocks of granite and 
gneiss strewed over the granitic area ; but no fragments of them 
are ever seen to cross the boundary into the area composed of the 
tertiary strata, where small pebbles only are seen washed out of 
the sands. Farther to the north, in Massachusetts, for example, 
and the island of Martha s Vineyard, we see enormous erratics of 
granite, twenty-five and thirty feet in diameter, which must have 
come from the north, probably from the mountains of New Hamp 
shire, resting on the tertiary clays and rocks ;* and in Long 
Island (New York), a variety of transported blocks repose upon, 
or are interstratified with very modern deposits. In the south 
ern states the same causes have not been in action, and if we 
suppose icebergs to have been the transporting power in the north, 
it seems natural that their action should not have extended to 
the southern states, so as to carry fragments of crystalline rocks 
out of the granitic region. Yet it is striking around Milledge- 
ville, to see so many large detached and rounded boulders of 
granite lying on the surface of the soil, and all strictly confined 
within the limits of the granitic region. One of these, on the 
slope of a hill three miles from the town, resting on gneiss, meas 
ured twelve feet in its longest diameter, and was four feet high. 
I presume that these boulders are nearly in situ ; they may have 
constituted " tors" of granite, like those in Cornwall, fragments 
of masses, once more extensive, left by denudation at a period 
when the country was rising out of the sea, and fragments may 
have been occasionally thrown down by the waves, and swept 
to a small distance from their original sites. The latitude of 
Milledgeville is 32 20 north, or considerably to the south of 
the most southern limits to which the northern drift with its 
erratics has hitherto been traced in the United States. 
* Travels in N. America, vol. i. p. 259, chap. xii. 



23 MODERN RAVINES. [CHAP. XXI. 

Another most singular phenomenon in the environs of Milledge- 
ville is the depth to which the gneiss and mica schist have de 
composed iii situ. Some very instructive sections of the disinte 
grated rocks have been laid open in the precipices of recently 
formed ravines. Were it not that the original intersecting veins 
of white quartz remain unaltered to show that the layers of sand, 
clay, and loam are mere laminae of gneiss and mica schist, re 
solved into their elements, a geologist would suppose that they 
were ordinary alternations of sandy arid clayey beds with occa 
sional cross stratification, the whole just in the state in which 
they were first deposited. Now and then, as if to confirm the 
deception, a large crystal of felspar, eight or ten inches long, is 
seen to retain its angles, although converted into kaolin. Simi 
lar crystals, almost as perfect, may be seen washed into the ter 
tiary strata south of the granitic region, where white porcelain 
clays, quartzose gravel, sand, and micaceous loam are found, evi 
dently derived from the waste of decomposed crystalline rocks. I 
am not surprised, therefore, that some geologists should have con 
founded the ancient gneiss of this district, thus decomposed in 
situ, with the tertiary deposits. Their close resemblance con 
firms me in the opinion, that the arrangement of the gneiss and 
mica schist in beds with subordinate layers, both horizontal and 
oblique, was originally determined, in most cases at least, by 
aqueous deposition, although often modified by subsequent crys 
talline action. 

The surprising depth of some of the modem ravines, in the 
neighborhood of Milledgeville, suggests matter of curious specula 
tion. At the distance of three miles and a half due west of the 
town, on the direct road to Macon, on the farm of Pomona, is 
the ravine represented in the annexed wood-cut (p. 29). Twenty 
years ago it had no existence ; but when the trees of the forest 
were cut down, cracks three feet deep were caused by the sun s 
heat in the clay ; and, during the rains, a sudden rush of water 
through these cracks, caused them to deepen at their lower ex 
tremities, from whence the excavating power worked backward, 
till, in the course of twenty years, a chasm, measuring no less 
than 55 feet in depth, 300 yards in length, and varying in width 



CHAP. XXL] RAVINE NEAR MILLEDGEVTLLE. 



Fig- 7. 




Ravine on the Farm of Pomona, near Milledgeville, Georgia. January, 184G. 
Excavated in the last twenty years, 55 feet deep, and 180 feet broad. 



30 MODERN RAVINES. [CHAP. XXL 

from 20 to 180 feet was the result. (See fig. 7, p. 29.) The 
high road has been several times turned to avoid this cavity, the 
enlargement of which is still proceeding, and the old line of road 
may be seen to have held its course directly over what is now 
the widest part of the ravine. In the perpendicular walls of this 
great chasm appear beds of clay and sand, red, white, yellow, 
and green, produced by the decomposition in situ of hornbleridic 
gneiss, with layers and veins of quartz, as before-mentioned, and 
of a rock consisting of quartz and felspar, which remain entire to 
prove that the whole mass was once crystalline. 

In another place I saw a bridge thrown over a recently formed 
gulley, and here, as in Alabama, the new system of valleys and 
of drainage, attendant on the clearing away of the woods, is a 
source of serious inconvenience and loss. 

I infer, from the rapidity of the denudation caused here by 
running water, after the clearing or removal of wood, that this 
country has been always covered with a dense forest, from the 
remote time when it first emerged from the sea. However long 
may have been the period of upheaval required to raise the ma 
rine tertiary strata to the height of more than 600 feet, we rnay 
conclude that the surface has been protected by more than a mere 
covering of herbage from the effects of the sudden flowing off of 
the rain water. 

I know it may be contended that, when the granite and gneiss 
first rose as islands out of the sea, they may have consisted en 
tirely of hard rock, which resisted denudation, and therefore that 
we can only affirm that the forest has been continuous from the 
time of the decomposition and softening of the upper portion of 
these rocks. But I may reply, that similar effects are observable, 
even on a grander scale, in recently excavated ravines seventy or 
eighty feet deep, in some newly cleared parts of the tertiary re 
gions of Alabama, as in Clarke County, for example, and also in 
some of the cretaceous strata of loose gravel, sand, and clay, in 
the same state at Tuscaloosa. These are at a much greater 
height above the sea, and must, from the first, have been as de 
structible as they are now. 

We returned to Macon by our former route, through the pine 



CHAP. XXT.] DISAPPOINTED PLACE-HUNTER. 31 

woods, and when we stopped to change horses, a lady, who was 
left for a time alone in the coach with my wife, informed her, 
that a young man who had been sitting opposite to them, had, 
the day before, shot an Irishman in a tavern, and was flying 
from justice. A few days later we learnt that the wounded 
man had not died, but as it was a Penitentiary offense, it was 
prudent for the culprit to keep out of the way for a time. On 
hearing this, I asked one of my companions how it was possible, 
when such affairs were occurring, and the police was so feeble, 
we could travel night and day, and feel secure from personal 
violence. {i There is no danger here," he said, " of robbery, as 
in Europe, for we have none who are poor, or rendered vicious 
and desperate by want. No murders are committed here except 
in personal quarrels, and are almost always the act of restless 
and unquiet spirits, who seek excitement in gambling and drink. 
The wars in Texas relieved us of many of these dare-devils." 

One of our fellow-travelers seemed to be a disappointed place- 
hunter, who had been lobbying the House of Legislature in vain 
for the whole session. He was taking his revenge by telling 
many a story against an assembly, which had been so obtuse as 
not to discover his merits. Twelve of them, he said, from the 
upper country, could not even read, and one of these happening, 
when in the House, to receive an invitation to the Governor s 
annual dinner, rose, and, holding the card in his hand, with the 
writing upside down, said, " Mr. Speaker, I am determined to 
oppose this resolution." Another, when they were debating 
whether they should move the Capital, or seat of legislature, 
from Milledgeville to Macon, went out, and, on resuming his 
seat, declared they were wasting their time, for he had measured, 
and made a rough estimate of the weight of the building (which 
was of stone), and found, on calculation, that all the oxen in 
Georgia could not drag it a single mile ! 

There was much talk here of a recent exhibition on the frori 
tiers of Georgia, of what is commonly called Lynch law, which 
invalidated the assertion of my companion in regard to the ab 
sence of robbers. Many people having been plundered of their 
property, especially their negroes, organized a private association 



32 LYNCH LAW IN FLORIDA. [CHAP. XXI. 

for putting down the thieves, who came from Florida, and hav 
ing arrested one of them, named Yoermans, they appointed a 
committee of twelve to try him. Witnesses having been sworn, 
a verdict of guilty was returned, and the punishment of death 
decided upon, by a vote of six to one. They then crossed from 
Georgia into Florida, where the prisoner confessed, under the 
gallows, that he was a murderer and robber, and called upon a 
preacher of the gospel, three or four of whom were present, as 
well as a justice of the peace, to pray for him, after which he 
was hung. 

I expressed my horror at these transactions, observing that 
Florida, if in so rude and barbarous a state, ought not to have 
been admitted into the Union. My companions agreed to this, 
but said they believed the man had fair play on his trial, and 
added, " If you were a settler there, and had no other law to 
defend you, you would be glad of the protection of Judge 
Lynch." 

The news had just reached Milledgeville and Macon of the 
English premier s speech in favor of the free importation of 
foreign corn, a subject discussed here with as much interest as 
if it were a question of domestic policy. The prospect of in 
creased commercial intercourse with England, is regarded by all 
as favorable to peace, especially as the western states, the most 
bellicose in the whole Union, will be the chief gainers. Even 
before this intelligence arrived, the tone of the public mind was 
beginning to grow somewhat less warlike. The hero in a new 
cornic piece, on the stage at New York, personifies the member 
for Oregon, and talks big about " our destiny," and " the whole 
of Oregon or none." "We also observe an extract from the 
" North American Review" going the round of the newspapers, 
in which the Oregon dispute is compared to Dandie Dinrnont s 
famous law-suit with Jock o Dawston about the marches of their 
farms, and Counsellor Pleydell s advice to his client is recom 
mended for imitation. 

" We should have a war to-morrow," said a Whig politician 
to me at Macon, " if your democracy were as powerful as ours, 
for the most radical of your newspapers are the most warlike. 



CHAP. XXL] WAR SPIRIT ABATING. 33 

Your ministers seem more free from anti- American prejudices 
than the ordinary writers of travels, reviews, or newspaper 
articles, and they have a great advantage over our government 
at Washington. One of our statesman, a late candidate for the 
presidentship, is said to have declared, that when so many mil 
lions are admitted into the cabinet, it is scarcely possible to 
manage a delicate point of foreign policy with discretion." 



CHAPTER XXII. 

Macon to Columbus by Stage. Rough Traveling. Passage of Flint River. 
Columbus. Recent Departure of Creek Indians. Falls of the Chata- 
hoochie. Competition of Negro and White Mechanics. Age of Pine 
Trees. Abolitionist "Wrecker" in Railway Car. Runaway Slave. 
Sale of Novels by Newsboys. Character of Newspaper Press. Geology 
and Cretaceous Strata, Montgomery. Curfew. Sunday School for 
Negroes. Protracted Meeting. 

Jan. 21, 1846. HITHERTO we had traveled from the north 
by railway or steam ship, but from Macon, on our way south, 
we were compelled to resort to the stage coach, and started first 
for Columbus. For the first time we remarked that our friends, 
on parting, wished us a safe journey, instead of a pleasant one, 
as usual. There had been continued rains, and the roads were 
cut up by wagons bringing heavy bales of cotton to the Savannah 
railroad. We passed Knoxville, a small and neat town, and, 
after dark, supped at a small roadside inn, on pork chops, waffles, 
and hominy, or porridge made of Indian meal. Here we were 
told that the stage of the night before had been water-bound by 
the rising of the rivers. We went on, however, to the great 
Flint River, where the stage drove into a large flat-boat or raft. 
The night was mild, but dark, and the scene which presented 
itself very picturesque. A great number of negroes were stand 
ing on both banks, chattering incessantly, and holding in their 
hands large blazing torches of pine-wood, which threw a red 
light on the trees around. The river was much swollen, but we 
crossed without impediment. It was the first stream we had 
come to of those flowing into the Gulf of Mexico. 

Our coach was built on a plan almost universal in America, 
and like those used in some parts of France, with three seats, 
the middle one provided with a broad leather strap, to lean back 
upon. The best places are given to the ladies, and a husband 
is seated next his wife. There are no outside passengers, except 



CHAP. XXIL] ROUGH TRAVELING. 35 



occasionally one sitting by the driver s side. We were ofter 
called upon, on a sudden, to throw our weight first on the right, 
and then on the left side, to balance the vehicle and prevent an 
upset, when one wheel was sinking into a deep rut. Sometimes 
all the gentlemen were ordered to get out in the dark, and walk 
in the wet and muddy road. The coachman would then whip 
on his steeds over a fallen tree or deep pool, causing tremendous 
jolts, so that my wife was thrown first against the roof, and then 
against the sides of the lightened vehicle, having almost reason 
to envy those who were merely splashing through the mud. To 
sleep was impossible, but at length, soon after daybreak, we found 
ourselves entering the suburbs of Columbus ; and the first sight 
we saw there was a long line of negroes, men, women, and boys, 
well dressed and very merry, talking and laughing, who stopped 
to look at our coach. On inquiry, we were told that it was a 
gang of slaves, probably from Virginia, going to the market to 
be sold. 

Columbus, like so many towns on the borders of the granitic 
and tertiary regions, is situated at the head of the navigation of 
a large river, and the rapids of the Chatahoochie are well seen 
from the bridge by which it is here spanned. The vertical rise 
and fall of this river, which divides Georgia from Alabama, 
amounts to no less than sixty or seventy feet in the course of the 
year ; and the geologist should visit the country in November, 
when the season is healthy and the river low, for then he may 
see exposed to view, not only the horizontal tertiary strata, but 
the subjacent cretaceous deposits, containing ammonites, baculites, 
and other characteristic fossils. These organic remains are met 
with some miles below the town, at a point called " Snake s 
Shoals ;" and Dr. Boykin showed us a collection of the fossils, 
at his agreeable villa in the suburbs. In an excursion which I 
made with Mr. Pond to the Upotoy Creek, I ascertained that 
the cretaceous beds are overlaid every where by tertiary strata, 
containing fossil wood and marine shells. 

The last detachment of Indians, a party of no less than 500, 
quitted Columbus only a week ago for Arkansas, a memorable 
event in the history of the settlement of this region, and part 



35 NEGRO AND WHITE MECHANICS. [CHAP. XXII. 

of an extensive and systematic scheme steadily pursued by the 
Government, of transferring the aborigines from the eastern states 
to the far west. 

Here, as at Milledgeville, the clearing away of the woods, 
where these Creek Indians once pursued their game, has caused 
the soil, previously level and unbroken, to be cut into by torrents, 
so that deep gulleys may every where be seen ; and I am assured 
that a large proportion of the fish, formerly so abundant in the 
Chatahoochie, have been stifled by the mud. 

r The water-power at the rapids has been recently applied to 
some newly-erected cotton mills, and already an anti-free-trade 
party is beginning to be formed. The masters of these factories 
hope, by excluding colored men or, in other words, slaves 
from all participation in the business, to render it a genteel 
employment for white operatives ; a measure which places in a 
strong light the inconsistencies entailed upon a community by 
slavery and the antagonism of races, for there are numbers of 
colored mechanics in all these southern states very expert at 
trades requiring much more skill and knowledge than the func 
tions of ordinary work-people in factories. Several New England- 
ers, indeed, who have come from the north to South Carolina and 
Georgia, complain to me that they can not push on their children 
here, as carpenters, cabinet makers, blacksmiths, and in other 
such crafts, because the planters bring up the most intelligent of 
their slaves to these occupations. The landlord of an inn con 
fessed to me, that, being a carrier, he felt himself obliged to have 
various kinds of work done by colored artisans, because they were 
the slaves of planters who employed him in his own line. " They 
interfere," said he, " with the fair competition of white mechan 
ics, by whom I could have got the work better done." 

These northern settlers are compelled to preserve a discreet 
silence about such grievances when in the society of southern 
slave-owners, but are open and eloquent in descanting upon them 
to a stranger. They are struck with the difficulty experienced 
in raising money here, by small shares, for the building of mills. 
" Why," say they, " should all our cotton make so long a journey 
to the north, to be manufactured there, arid come back to us at 



CHAP. XXII.] AGE OF PINE TREES. 37 

so high a price ? It is because all spare cash is sunk here in 
purchasing negroes. In order to get a week s work done for you, 
you must buy a negro out and out for life." 

From Columbus we traveled fifty-five miles west to Chehaw, 
to join a railway, which was to carry us on to Montgomery. 
The stage was drawn by six horses, but as it was daylight we 
were not much shaken. We passed through an undulating 
country, sometimes on the tertiary sands covered with pines, 
sometimes in swamps enlivened by the green palmetto and tall 
magnolia, and occasionally crossing into the borders of the grani 
tic region, where there appeared immediately a mixture of oak, 
hickory, and pine. There was no grass growing under the pine 
trees, and the surface of the ground was every where strewed 
with yellow leaves, and the fallen needles of the fir trees. The 
sound of the wind in the boughs of the long-leaved pines always 
reminded me of the waves breaking on a distant sea-shore, and it 
was agreeable to hear it swelling gradually, and then dying away, 
as the breeze rose and fell. Observing at Chehaw a great many 
stumps of these firs in a new clearing, I was curious to know 
how many years it would take to restore such a forest if once de 
stroyed. The first stump I examined measured two feet five 
inches in diameter at the height of three feet from the ground, 
and I counted in it 1 2 rings of annual growth ; a second meas 
ured less by two inches in diameter, yet was 260 years old ; a 
third, at the height of tAVO feet above the ground, although 180 
years old, was only two feet in diameter ; a fourth, the oldest I 
could find, measured, at the height of three feet above its base, 
four feet, and presented 320 rings of annual growth ; and I could 
liave counted a few more had the tree been cut down even with 
the soil. The height of these trees varied from 70 to 120 feet. 
From the time taken to acquire the above dimensions, we may 
confidently infer that no such trees will be seen by posterity, after 
the clearing of the country, except where they may happen to be 
protected for ornamental purposes. I once asked a surveyor in 
Scotland why, in planting woods with a view to profit, the oak 
was generally neglected, although I had found many trunks of 
very large size buried in peat-mosses. He asked if I had ever 



58 RUNAWAY SLAVE. [CHAP. XXII. 

counted the rings of growth in the buried trees, to ascertain their 
age, and I told him I had often reckoned up 300, and once up 
ward of 800 rings ; to which he replied, " Then plant your shil 
lings in the funds, and you will see how much faster they would 
grow." 

Before reaching Chehaw, we stopped to dine at a small log- 
house in the woods, and had prepared our minds, from outward 
appearances, to put up with bad fare ; but, on entering, we saw 
on the table a wild turkey roasted, venison steaks, and a part 
ridge-pie, all the product of the neighboring forest, besides a large 
jug of delicious milk, a luxury not commonly met with so far 
south. 

The railway cars between Chehaw and Montgomery consisted, 
like those in the north, of a long apartment, with cross benches 
and a middle passage. There were many travelers, and among 
them one rustic, evidently in liquor, who put both his feet on one 
of the cushioned benches, and began to sing. The conductor 
told him to put his feet down, and afterward, on his repeating the 
offense, lifted them off. On his doing it a third time, the train 
was ordered to stop, and the man was told, in a peremptory tone, 
to get out immediately. He was a strong-built laborer, and 
would have been much more than a match for the conductor, 
had he resisted ; but he instantly complied, knowing, doubtless, 
that the officer s authority would be backed by the other passen 
gers, if they were appealed to. We left him seated on the 
ground, many miles from any habitation, and with no prospect 
of another train passing for many a long hour. As we go south 
ward, we see more cases of intoxication, and hear more swearing. 

At one of the stations we saw a runaway slave, who had been 
caught and handcuffed ; the first I had fallen in with in irons in 
the course of the present journey. On seeing him, a New En- 
glander, who had been with us in the stage before we reached 
Chehaw, began to hold forth on the miserable condition of the 
negroes in Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, and some other states 
which I had not yet visited. For a time I took for granted all 
he said of the sufferings of the colored race in those regions, the 
cruelty of the overseers, theijr opposition to the improvement and 



CHAP. XXII.] ABOLITIONIST " WRECKER." 39 

education of the blacks, and especially to their conversion to 
Christianity. I began to shudder at what I was doomed to wit 
ness in the course of my further journeyings in the south arid 
west. He was very intelligent, and so well informed on politics 
and political economy, that at first I thought myself fortunate in 
meeting with a man so competent to give me an unprejudiced 
opinion on matters of which he had been an eye-witness. At 
length, however, suspecting a disposition to exaggerate, and a 
party-feeling on the subject, I gradually led him to speak of dis 
tricts with which I was already familiar, especially South Caro 
lina and Georgia. I immediately discovered that there also he 
had every where seen the same horrors and misery. He went 
so far as to declare that the piny woods all around us were full 
of hundreds of runaways, who subsisted on venison and wild 
hogs ; assured me that I had been deceived if I imagined that 
the colored men in the upper country, where they have mingled 
more with the whites, were more progressive ; nor was it true 
that the Baptists and Methodists had been successful in making 
proselytes. Few planters, he affirmed, had any liking for their 
negroes ; and, lastly, that a war with England about Oregon, un 
principled as would be the measure on the part of the democratic 
faction, would have at least its bright side, for it might put an 
end to slavery. " How in the world," asked I, " could it effect 
this object ?" " England," he replied, " would declare all the 
slaves in the south free, and thus cripple her enemy by promoting 
a servile war. The negroes would rise, and although, no doubt, 
there would be a great loss of life and property, the south would 
nevertheless be a gainer by ridding herself of this most vicious 
and impoverishing institution." This man had talked to me so 
rationally on a variety of topics so long as he was restrained by 
the company of southern fellow-passengers from entering on the 
exciting question of slavery, that I now became extremely curious 
to know what business had brought him to the south, and made 
him a traveler there for several years. I w r as told by the con 
ductor that he was " a wrecker ;" and I learnt, in explanation 
of the term, that he was a commercial agent, and partner of a 
northern house which had great connections in the south. To 



40 NEWS-BOYS. [CHAP. XXII. 

him had been assigned the unenviable task, in those times of 
bankruptcy and repudiation which followed the financial crisis of 
183940, of seeking out and recovering bad debts, or of seeing 
what could be saved out of the wreck of insolvent firms or the 
estates of bankrupt planters. He had come, therefore, into con 
tact with many adventurers who had been overtrading, and spec 
ulators who had grown unscrupulous, when tried by pecuniary 
difficulties. Every year, on revisiting the free states, he had 
contrasted their progress with the condition of the south, which 
by comparison seemed absolutely stationary. His thoughts had 
been perpetually directed to the economical and moral evils of 
slavery, especially its injuriousness to the fortunes and characters 
of that class of the white aristocracy with which he had most to 
do. In short, he had seen what was bad in the system through 
the magnifying and distorting medium of his own pecuniary losses, 
and had imbibed a strong anti-negro feeling, which he endeavor 
ed to conceal from himself, under the cloak of a love of freedom 
and progress. While he was inveighing against the cruelty of 
slavery, he had evidently discovered no remedy for the mischief 
but one, the hope of which he confessedly cherished, for he was 
ready to precipitate measures which would cause the Africans to 
suffer that fate which the aboriginal Indians have experienced 
throughout the Union. 

When I inquired if, in reality, there were hundreds of runa 
way slaves in the woods, every one laughed at the idea. As a 
general rule, they said, the negroes are well fed, and, when they 
are so, will very rarely attempt to escape unless they have com 
mitted some crime : even when some punishment is hanging over 
them, they are more afraid of hunger than of a whipping. 

Although we had now penetrated into regions where the 
schoolmaster has not been much abroad, we observe that the rail 
way cars are every where attended by news-boys, who, in some 
places, are carried on a whole stage, walking up and down " the 
middle aisle" of the long car. Usually, however, at each station, 
they, and others who sell apples and biscuits, may be seen calcu 
lating the exact speed at which it is safe to jump off, and taking, 
with the utmost coolness, a few cents in chansre a moment before 



CHAP. XXII.] CRETACEOUS STRATA. 41 

they know that the rate acquired by the train will be dangerous. 
T never witnessed an accident, but as the locomotive usually runs 
only fifteen miles an hour, and is some time before it reaches half 
that pace, the urchins are not hurried as they would be in En 
gland. One of them was calling out, in the midst of the pine- 
barren between Columbus and Chehaw, " A novel, by Paul le 
Koch, the Bulwer of France, for twenty-five cents all the go ! 
more popular than the Wandering Jew," &c. Newspapers 
for a penny or two-pence are bought freely by the passengers ; and, 
having purchased them at random wherever we went in the 
northern, middle, southern, arid western states, I came to the 
conclusion that the press of the United States is quite as respect 
able as our own. In the present crisis the greater number of 
prints condemn the war party, expose their motives, and do jus 
tice to the equitable offers of the English ministry in regard to 
Oregon. A large portion of almost every paper is devoted to lit 
erary extracts, to novels, tales, travels, and often more serious 
works. Some of them are specially devoted to particular relig 
ious sects, and nearly all of this class are against war. There 
are also some " temperance," and, in the north, " anti-slavery" 
papers. 

We at length arrived at Montgomery, on the river Alabama, 
where I staid a few days to examine the geology of the neighbor 
hood. From the high ground near the town there is a distant 
view of the hills of the granitic region around Wetumpka. But 
the banks of the river at Montgomery are composed of enormous 
beds of unconsolidated gravel, thirty feet thick, alternating with 
red clay and sand, which I at first supposed to be tertiary, from 
their resemblance to strata near Macon and Augusta in Georgia. 
The fossil shells, however, of the accompanying marls (Inocera- 
mus and Rostellaria arenarum), soon convinced me that they 
belonged to the cretaceous formation. About three miles south 
of the town there is a broad zone of calcareous marl, constituting 
what is called the prairie, or cane-brake country, bare of natural 
wood, and where there is so great a want of water, that it was 
at first difficult for settlers to establish themselves upon it, until, 
by aid of the Artesian auger, they obtained an abundant supply 



42 CRKTACEOUS STRATA. CURFEW. [CHAP. XXII. 



from a depth of 300, and often 500 feet, derived from the un 
derlying gravelly and sandy beds. Farther from the outcrop of 
these gravelly beds borings have been made 800 feet deep with 
out success. The temperature of the water was found to increase 
in proportion to the depth of the wells. A proprietor told me 
he had found it very difficult to get trees to grow on the prairie 
land, but he had succeeded, with great care, in rearing a few 
mulberries. 

The common name for the marlite, of which this treeless soil 
is composed, is " rotten limestone." I found many lumps on the 
surface, much resembling white chalk, and containing shells of 
the genera, Inoceramus, Baculite, Ammonite, Hippurite, and that 
well-known fossil of the English chalk, Ostrea vesicularis. 

In the market-place of Montgomery, I saw an auctioneer sell 
ing slaves, and calling out, as I passed, "Going for 300 dollars." 
The next day another auctioneer was selling horses in the same 
place. Nearly the same set of negroes, men, women, and boys, 
neatly dressed, were paraded there, day after day. I was glad 
to find that some settlers from the north, who had resided here 
many years, were annoyed at the publicity of this exhibition. 
Such traffic, they say, might as well be carried 011 quietly in a 
room. Another resident, who had come from Kentucky, was 
forming a party, who desire to introduce into Alabama a law, 
like one now in force in Kentucky, that no negroes shall hence 
forth be imported. By that statute, the increase of slaves has, 
he says, been checked. A case had lately occurred, of a dealer 
who tried to evade the law by bringing forty slaves into Ken 
tucky, and narrowly escaped being fined 600 dollars for each, 
but had the ingenuity to get off by pretending that he was ignor 
ant of the prohibition, and was merely passing through with them 
to Louisiana. " By allowing none to come in, while so many 
are emigrating to the west and Texas, we may hope," he said, 
" very soon to grow white." 

Every evening, at nine o clock, a great bell, or curfew, tolls in 
the market-place of Montgomery, after which no colored man is 
permitted to be abroad without a pass. This custom has, I un 
derstand, continued ever since some formidable insurrections, 



CHAP. XXII.] PROTRACTED MEETING. 43 



which happened many years ago, in Virginia and elsewhere. I 
was glad to find that the Episcopal clergyman at Montgomery 
had just established a Sunday school for the negroes. I also hear 
that a party in. this church, already comprising a majority of the 
clergy, are desirous that the negro congregations should be rep 
resented in their triennial conventions, which would be an im 
portant step toward raising the black race to a footing of equality 
with the whites. In these times when many here are entertain 
ing a hostile feeling toward Great Britain, and when the gov 
ernment is lending itself to the excitement, I find the ministers 
of the Episcopal Church peculiarly free from such a spirit, and 
cherishing a desire for peace and a friendly disposition toward the 
English. The Methodists had just been holding a protracted 
meeting in Montgomery, and such is the effect of sympathy and 
of the spirit of competition, that the religious excitement had 
spread to all the other sects. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

Voyage from Montgomery to Mobile. Description of a large River Steam 
er. Shipping of Cotton at Bluffs. Fossils collected at Landings. Col 
lision of Steamer with the Boughs of Trees. Story of a German Stew- 
nrdess. Emigration of Stephanists from Saxony. Perpetuation of Ste- 
phaiiist and Mormon Doctrines. Distinct Table for Colored and White 
Passengers. Landing at Claiborne by Torchlight. Fossil Shells. 

Wednesday, Jan. 28, 1846. THE steamer Amaranth was 
lying at the bluff at Montgomery on the Alabama River, and was 
advertised to sail for Mobile, a navigation of more than 300 
miles, at ten o clock in the morning. From information obtained 
here, I had determined to follow up my geological inquiries by 
going next to Tuscaloosa, on the Black Warrior River, about 100 
miles distant by land, in a northwesterly direction. Every one 
agreed, however, that it was better for me to go 800 miles by 
water, half of it against the stream, instead of taking the direct 
road ; so I determined to go first to Mobile, due south, and then 
up the Tombecbee to the capital of Alabama, being assured that 
I should gain, both in time and money, by this great detour. 
Should I attempt the straight road at this season, no one could 
insure my making two miles an hour, so tenaciously does the 
marlite of the cretaceous formation, when it is wet, hold the car 
riage wheels which sink into it. 

Accustomed to the punctuality of northern steamers, we got 
down with our luggage to the landing at the hour appointed, but 
were told they were not ready. I re-examined a good geological 
section in the bluff, till a friend came to me, and regretted I had 
come down to the boat so early, for perhaps she might not sail 
till the next day. I was much annoyed at this intelligence, 
although I had been forewarned that much less value was set on 
time in the southern states than in the north. At length we 
went on board, and, having engaged a good private cabin, made 
up our minds to read and write there, arid consider it as our inn. 



CHAP. XXIII.] SOUTHERN STEAMBOAT. 45 

It was the first of these magnificent southern river boats \ve had 
seen, fitted up for the two-fold purpose of carrying as many bales 
of cotton as can be heaped upon them without their sinking, and 
taking in as many passengers as can enjoy the luxuries which 
southern mariners and a hot climate require, especially spacious 
cabins, abundance of fresh air, and protection from the heat of 
the sun. We afterward saw many larger steam vessels, arid some 
of them fitted up in finer style, but none which made such an 
impression on our minds as the Amaranth. A vessel of such 
dimensions makes a grand appearance in a river so narrow as the 
Alabama at Montgomery ; whereas, if she were a third longer, 
she would be comparatively insignificant on the Mississippi. The 
principal cabins run the whole length of the ship on a deck above 
that on which the machinery is placed, and where the cotton is 
piled up. This upper deck is chiefly occupied with a handsome 
saloon, about 200 feet long, the ladies cabin at one end, opening 
into it with folding doors. Sofas, rocking-chairs, tables, and a 
stove are placed in this room, which is lighted by windows from 
above. On each side of it is a row of sleeping apartments, each 
communicating by one door with the saloon, while the other leads 
out to the guard, as they call it, a long balcony or gallery, cov 
ered with a shade or verandah, which passes round the whole 
boat. The second class, or deck passengers, sleep where they 
can on the lower floor, where, Jbesides the engine and the cotton, 
there are prodigious heaps of w r ood, which are devoured with 
marvelous rapidity by the furnace, and are as often restored at 
the different landings, a set of negroes being purposely hired for 
that work. 

These steamers, notwithstanding their size, draw very little 
water, for they are constructed for rivers which rise and fall very 
rapidly. They can not quite realize the boast of a western cap 
tain, " that he could sail wherever it was damp ;" but I was 
assured that some of them could float in two feet water. The 
high-pressure steam escapes into the air, by a succession of explo 
sions alternately from the pipes of the two engines. It is a most 
unearthly sound, like that of some huge monster gasping for 
breath ; and when they clear the boilers of the sediment collected 



46 SHIPPING COTTON AT BLUFFS. [Cn^p. XXIII. 

from the river-water, it is done by a loud and protracted discharge 
of steam, which reminded us of the frightful noise made by the 
steam gun exhibited at the Adelaide Gallery in London. Were 
it not for the power derived from the high-pressure principle, of 
blowing out from the boilers the deposit collected in them, the 
muddiness of the American rivers would soon clog the machinery. 
Every stranger who has heard of fatal accidents by the bursting 
of boilers believes, the first time he hears this tremendous noise, 
that it is all over with him, and is surprised to see that his com 
panions evince no alarm. Habit soon reconciled us to the sound ; 
and I was amused afterward to observe that the \vild birds 
perched on the trees which overhung the river, looked on with 
indifference while the paddle-wheels were splashing in the water, 
and the steam-pipes puffing and gasping loud enough to be heard 
many miles off. 

After we had been on board a great part of the day, \ve at 
length got under weigh in the afternoon ; but what was my sur 
prise when I actually discovered that we were ascending the 
stream instead of sailing down toward Mobile. On asking the 
meaning of this proceeding, the mate told me, very coolly, that 
the captain had just heard of some cotton ready for exportation 
some miles above Montgomery. To this higher landing we re 
paired ; but news being sent that a rival steamboat was making 
her way up the river, the Amaranth set off down stream in good 
earnest, moving by aid of her powerful engines and the force of 
the mid-current with such velocity, that I could readily believe 
that 800 miles by river was shorter than 100 by land. 

The pilot put into my hands a list of the landings on the Ala 
bama River from Wetumpka to Mobile, no less than 200 of them 
in a distance of 434 miles. A small part only of these consisted 
of bluffs, or those points where the high land comes up to the 
river s edge in other words, where there is no alluvial plain be 
tween the great stream and the higher country. These spots, 
being the only ones not liable to inundation, and which can there 
fore serve as inland ports when the river is full, or when the 
largest boats can sail up and down, are of great importance in 
the inland navigation of the country. A proprietor whose farm 



CHAP. XXIII.] FOSSILS COLLECTED AT LANDINGS. 47 



is thus advantageously situated, usually builds a warehouse, not 
only for storing up for embarkation the produce of his own land, 
but large enough to take in the cotton of his neighbors. A long 
and steeply-inclined plane is cut in the high bank, down which 
one heavy bale after another is made to slide. The negroes show 
great dexterity in guiding these heavy packages ; but occasionally 
they turn over and over before reaching the deck of the boat, and 
sometimes, though rarely, run off the course and plunge into the 
river, where they float till recovered. Had I not been engaged 
in geological inquiries, I should probably have had my patience 
severely tried by such repeated stoppings at every river cliff; but 
it. so happened that the captain always wanted to tarry at the 
precise points where alone any sections of the cretaceous and ter 
tiary strata were visible, and was often obliged to wait long 
enough to enable me to make a tolerably extensive collection of 
the most characteristic fossils. In the present instance and I 
shall have by-and-by to mention other similar ones Captain 
Bragdon was not only courteous, but perfectly understood, and 
entered into my pursuits, and had himself collected organic re 
mains for a friend in the college of Louisville, Kentucky ; so that 
while the cotton or wood were taking on board, he would often 
assist me in my labors. Were it not for one serious drawback, 
a cruise in a cotton steamer would be the paradise of geologists. 
Unfortunately, in the season when the water is high, and when 
the facilities of locomotion are greatest, the base of every bluff is 
many feet, and sometimes fathoms, under water, and the lo\ver 
portion of a series of horizontal strata is thus entirely concealed 
from view. The bluffs which I first examined consisted of a 
marlite divided into horizontal layers as regular as those of the 
lias of Europe, and which might have been taken for lias but for 
the included fossils, which prove them to belong to the creta 
ceous formation. At Centerport these unctuous marls or calca 
reous clays are called by the people soap-stone, and form cliffs 
150 feet in perpendicular height, in which, as well as at Selma, 
I collected the large Gryphcea costata and the Ostrea falcata, 
more than one species of Inoceramus, and other characteristic 
fossil shells. At White Bluff, where the blue marlite whitens 



48 COLLISION WITH TREES. [CHAP. XXIII. 

when exposed to the air, a fine range of precipices covered with 
wood forms a picturesque feature in the scenery ; but I obtained 
the richest harvest of cretaceous fossils far below, at a landing 
called Prairie Bluff. 

The banks of the Alabama, like those of the Savannah and 
Altarnaha rivers, are fringed with canes, over which usually tow 
ers the deciduous cypress, covered with much pendent moss. The 
mistletoe enlivens the boughs of several trees, still out of leaf, and 
now and then, through an opening in the thicket bordering the 
river, the evergreen pine-forest appears in the back-ground. Some 
of the largest trees on the banks are sycamores (Platanus occi- 
dentalis), called button-wood, one of which I measured, and found 
it to be eighteen feet in circumference. The old bark is contin 
ually peeling off, and the new is as white as if the trunk of the 
tree had been painted. 

When it was growing dusk, and nearly all had retired to their 
cabins, and some to their beds, we were startled by a loud crash, 
as if parts of the woodwork of the steamer were giving way over 
our heads. At the same moment a shower of broken glass came 
rattling down on the floor of the cabin. As I expected to land 
in the course of the night at Claiborne, I had not taken off my 
clothes, so I rushed immediately on deck, and learnt from the 
captain that there was no danger. I then went down to tell the 
passengers, especially the women, who were naturally in no small 
alarm, that all was safe. I found them, in great consternation, 
crowded together at the door of the ladies cabin, several mothers 
with children in their arms. When I returned to see what had 
happened, a most singular and novel scene presented itself. Crash 
after crash of broken spars and the ringing of shattered window- 
glasses were still heard, and the confusion and noise were inde 
scribable. " Don t be alarmed ; we have only got among the 
trees," said the captain. This, I found, was no uncommon oc 
currence when these enormous vessels are sweeping down at full 
speed in the flood season. Strange as it may seem, the higher 
the waters rise the narrower is the river channel. It is true that 
the adjoining swamps and low lands are inundated far and wide ; 
but the steamers must all pass between two rows of tall trees 



CHAP. XXIIL] CABIN PASSENGERS. 49 

which adorn the opposite banks, and as the branches of these 
table trees stretch half way over the stream, the boat, when the 
river has risen forty or sixty feet, must steer between them. In 
the dark, when they are going at the rate of sixteen miles an hour 
or more, and the bends are numerous, a slight miscalculation car 
ries the woodwork of the great cabin in among the heads of the 
trees. In this predicament I found the Amaranth when I got 
on deck. Many a strong bough had pierced right through the 
cabin windows on one side, throwing down the lights, and smash 
ing the wooden balustrade and the roof of the long gallery, and 
tearing the canvas awning from the verandah. The engine had 
been backed, or its motion reversed, but the steamer, held fast 
by the trees, was swinging round with the force of the current. 
A large body of men were plying their axes freely, not only cut 
ting off boughs, but treating with no respect the framework of the 
cabin itself. I could not help feeling thankful that no branch had 
obtruded itself into our berths. At length we got off, and the 
carpenters and glaziers set to work immediately to make repairs. 
The evening before this adventure we had been sitting for 
some hours enjoying the privacy of our own state-room, from the 
windows of which we had a good view of the river s bank, when 
at length my wife had thought it polite to visit the ladies cabin, 
as they might otherwise think her unsociable. She found there 
a young Irish milliner who had come out from the county of 
Monaghan, and was settled at Selma, one of the towns on this 
river, where she said she was getting on extremely well. There 
was also a cracker family, consisting of a squalling child and its 
two parents, who were " moving to the Washita river in Louisi 
ana." The young mother was smoking a pipe, which her husband, 
a rough-looking back-woodsman, had politely lighted for her. As 
this practice was against the regulations, my wife joined the 
other ladies in remonstrating, and she immediately went out to 
smoke in the open air on the guard. I had been before amused 
by seeing a girl, about nine years old, employed, by way of imi 
tating her elders, in smoking a paper cigar on the deck, and a 
mother, after suckling an infant of two years, give it some to 
bacco to chew. 
VOL. n. C 



50 EMIGRATION OF STEPHANISTS. [CHAP. XXIII. 

Another inmate of the ladies cabin was a German stewardess, 
who soon found out that my wife understood her mother tongue, 
and, being in great want of sympathy, poured out her tale of suf 
fering in the New World with the simplicity of character and 
unreservedness of her countrywomen. Seven years ago she had 
been a happy and contented peasant at Chemnitz in Saxony, one 
of a united family of Lutherans, when she was persuaded by a 
priest to embrace the opinions of Martin Stephan, a preacher of 
Dresden, who taught that all theological study should be confined 
to the Bible ; that literature and the fine arts, being of human 
origin and worldly in their nature, ought to be despised ; that no 
one could enjoy freedom of conscience in Germany ; and that the 
only path to salvation was to follow him, and emigrate to North 
America. He himself was to be their temporal and spiritual 
chief, and to him they were to deliver up all their property. In 
November, 1838, 700 victims of this impostor embarked from 
Bremen, including six pastors and four schoolmasters. One of 
the transports, the Amelia, carrying about sixty emigrants, in 
cluding children, a crazy old ship, was never heard of again, and 
doubtless foundered on the Atlantic. The other carried Stephan 
and the rest of his followers to New Orleans, from whence they 
ascended the Mississippi, and founded a settlement, called Witt 
enberg, on a rich, aguish flat, bordering the Missouri, above St. 
Louis. Here one-fourth of their number were swept off by fever, 
and Stephan, who had deserted a wife and nine children in Ger 
many, was detected carrying on a licentious intercourse with some 
of the women of the new community. Before, however, this 
scandal became notorious, he contrived to make off with all the 
money which had been intrusted to him to buy land for the new 
colony. Hanne Rottgen, the young woman who related this 
story, went, as soon as she recovered from the ague, to St. Louis, 
her eyes having at length been opened, like those of many other 
Stephanists, to the fraud of which they had been the dupes. She 
was immediately employed to attend a hospital filled with num 
bers of her poor country people of both sexes, who had been 
scalded by the bursting of the boiler of a large steam-boat. After 
witnessing the terrible sufferings and death of not a few of these 



CHAP. XXIII.] STEPHANISTS AND MORMONS. 51 



emigrants, she had engaged herself as stewardess in several ves 
sels, and at length in the Amaranth. " But what became of 
Stephan ?" asked my wife. " He escaped entirely," she said, 
" for you know, madam, there is no law in this country as there 
i-s in Saxony ; but for all that, this is the land for the poor to 
thrive in. They pay me twenty dollars a month, and I am sav 
ing money fast ; for, though home-sick, I can not, after all my 
follies, return and throw myself penniless on my relations." Here 
she began to shed tears and to be much affected, wondering 
whether her mother was still alive. She had written to ask her 
forgiveness, as she had been her darling, and in spite of her pray 
ers and entreaties had left her almost heart-broken. " I thought 
it my duty to go ; for how should we poor peasants not be de 
ceived when so many of our clergy were led astray by the cun 
ning of that artful man ? I have written to my two sisters to 
tell them how bitterly I repent, and to ask them to pardon me." 

When I afterward talked of this adventure in a steamer on 
the Mississippi, a fellow traveler exclaimed, " But would you be 
lieve it, there are still many Stephanists ?" " Why not," said I, 
" are there not also many thousand Mormons ? The fraud of 
Stephan was not more transparent than that of Joseph Smith or 
his vision, and the story he related so circumstantially of records 
engraven on metallic plates, shining like gold, which were deliv 
ered to him by the angel of the Lord on the 22d day of Septem 
ber, 1827." 

Are we then to despair of the progress of the human mind in 
inquiries in which it must ever take the deepest interest, because 
in a land where there are so many schools, and so many millions 
of readers, a free press, and religious toleration, it is so hard to 
extinguish a belief in the grossest impostures ? By no means 
in the doctrines taught by Stephan and Smith there was a mix 
ture of some fiction with much truth; they adopted nearly all 
the highest truths of theology common to the prevailing religions 
of the world, with the addition of nearly all which Christians be 
lieve. In each sect the difficulty consists in clearing away a 
greater or less amount of human error and invention from the di 
vine truths which they obscure or conceal. The multitude are 



52 DEMOCRACY AND SLAVERY. [CHAP. XXIII 

taught by their spiritual guides in three-fourths of Christendom, 
that they are riot to inquire for themselves. Even of the Protest 
ant minority, who profess that it is their right and duty to exer 
cise their own judgment, how many are there who annex the 
condition "provided they arrive at the conclusions to which the 
Church has come, without which they cannot be saved !" What 
more would a Stephanist or a Mormon preacher ask, than the 
privilege of borrowing and inculcating these maxims ? and how, 
if the use of them be freely granted, and they have motives for 
perpetuating some peculiar sectarian dogmas, is the delusion ever 
to end ? 

In a southern steamer abundant opportunities are afforded of 
witnessing the inconveniences arising out of the singular relation 
subsisting between the negroes, whether free or slave, and the 
white race. The succession of breakfasts, dinners, and suppers 
entailed by it appears endless. In a northern boat, after the 
passengers and officers of the ship have dined, the few servants 
who waited on them have their meal ; but here \ve had five dis 
tinct repasts set out, one after the other. First, the cabin passen 
gers dine ; then come the white nurses, children, and officers of 
the ship ; thirdly, the deck passengers, being white, answering to 
our steerage ; fourthly, the white waiters, waited upon by colored 
men ; fifthly, colored passengers, free or slave, and colored wait 
ers. It sometimes happens that a free negro who has made a 
good deal of money is on board ; he must wait till all the white 
aristocracy, including the waiters, are served, and then take his 
turn with the lowest of the blacks. To a European this exclu- 
siveness seems the more unnatural and offensive in the southern 
states, because they make louder professions even than the north 
erners of democratic principles and love of equality. I must do 
them the justice, however, to admit, that they are willing to carry 
out their principles to great lengths when the white race alone is 
concerned. I heard of a newly-arrived Irish ditcher at Chehaw, 
who was astonished when invited to sit down at table with his 
employer, a proprietor in the neighborhood, who thought it neces 
sary to recognize him as an equal. On one occasion when I 
visited a lawyer at his country-house in Alabama one accus- 



CHAP. XXITI.] LANDING AT CLAIBORNE. 51 

tomed to the best society of a large city, and the ladies of whose 
family were refined and cultivated he felt it incumbent on him, 
to my great discomfiture, to invite the driver of my gig, a half- 
caste Indian, who traveled without any change of clothes, to sit 
down with us at table. He was of a dark shade, but the blood 
was Indian not African, ancHie was therefore one of the southern 
aristocracy. TJje man was modest and unobtrusive, and scarce 
ly spoke ; but it need scarcely be said, that his presence checked 
the freedom of conversation, and I was glad when his duties in 
the stable called him away. 

In the course of the night we were informed that the Ama 
ranth had reached Claiborne. Here we found a flight of wooden 
steps, like a ladder, leading up the nearly perpendicular bluff, 
which was 150 feet high. By the side of these steps was a 
framework of w r ood, forming the inclined plane down which the 
cotton bales were lowered by ropes. Captain Bragdon politely gave 
his arm to my wife, and two negroes preceded us with blazing 
torches of pine- wood, throwing their light on the bright shining 
leaves of several splendid magnolias which covered the steep. 
We were followed by a long train of negroes, each carrying some 
article of our baggage. Having ascended the steps, we came to 
a flat terrace, covered with grass, the first green sward we had 
seen for many weeks, and found there a small, quiet inn, where 
we resolved to spend some days, to make a collection of the fossil 
tertiary shells, so well known to geologists as abounding in the 
strata of this cliff. About 400 species, belonging to the Eocene 
formation, derived from this classic ground, have already been 
named, and they agree, some of them specifically, and a much 
greater number in their generic forms, with the fossils of the mid 
dle division of the deposits of the same age of London and Hamp 
shire.* 

The remains of the zeuglodon have been also found by Mr. 
Hale in this cliff; but, although I met with many leaves of ter 
restrial plants, I could neither obtain here, nor in any part of the 
United States, a single bone of any terrestrial quadruped, although 

* They correspond with the middle or Bracklesham series of Prestwich s 
triple division. See "Quart. Journ. of Geol. Soc." vol. iii. May, 1847. 



54 FOSSIL REMAINS. [CHAP. XXIII. 

we know that many of that class inhabited Europe at this period. 
That some of these may be discovered in America, I can hardly 
doubt ; but the fact is worthy of remark, as connected with the 
weight due to negative evidence. When strata have been form 
ed far from land, so as to afford few, if any, indications of land 
plants, we must not look for indications of air-breathing quadru 
peds, nor infer their non-existence, if it be so difficult to discover 
them even at Claibome, where the land at the period of the de 
position of the marine strata, can not have been far distant.* 

* Since writing the above, I hear that Mr. Hale, of Mobile, has met with 
some bones of land quadrupeds in these strata. For remarks on the strata 
at Claiborne, see a paper by the author, " Quart. Journ. of Geol. Society of 
London," vol. iv. p. 10, June, 1848. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

Claiborne, Alabama. Movers to Texas. State Debts and Liabilities. 
Lending money to half-settled States. Rumors of war with England. 
Macon, Alabama. Sale of Slaves. Drunkenness in Alabama. Laws 
against Dueling. Jealousy of Wealth. Emigration to the West. 
Democratic Equality of Whites. Skeleton of Fossil Whale or Zeuglo- 
don. Voyage to Mobile. 

THE morning 1 after our arrival at Claiborne, we found at the 
inn, a family of " movers" on their way to Texas, sitting- in the 
verandah enjoying the warm sunshine after a shower of rain. 
At this season, January 29th, the thermometer stood at 80 
Fahrenheit in the shade, and the air was as balmy as on an 
English summer day. The green sward was covered with an 
elegant flower, the Houstonia serpyllifolia, different from the 
H. cerulia, so common in the New England meadows. Before 
the house stood a row of Pride-of-India trees (Melia azedarach), 
laden with bunches of yellow berries. I had been often told by 
the negroes that the American robin (Turdus migratorius) "got 
drunk" on this fruit, and we had now an opportunity of witness 
ing its narcotic properties ; for we saw some children playing 
with one of these birds before the house, having caught it after 
it had been eating freely of the berries. My wife seeing that 
the robin was in no small danger of perishing, bought it of the 
children for some sugar-plums, and it soon revived in our room, 
and flew out of the window. In the evening we enjoyed a sight 
of one of those glorious sunsets, the beauty of which in these lat 
itudes is so striking, when the clouds and sky are lighted up with 
streaks of brilliant red, yellow, and green, which, if a painter 
should represent faithfully, might seem as exaggerated and gaudy 
as would the colors of an American forest in autumn when com 
pared with European woods. 

The movers, who were going to Texas, had come down 200 miles 
from the upper country of Alabama, and were waiting for some 



MOVERS TO TEXAS. [CHAP. XXIV. 



others of their kindred who were to follow with their heavy wagons. 
One of these families is carrying away no less than forty negroes, 
and the cheerfulness with which these slaves are going, they 
know not where, with their owners, notwithstanding their usual 
dislike to quit the place they have been brought up in, shows a 
strong bond of union between the master and " his people." In 
the last fifteen months 1300 whites, and twice that number of 
slaves, have quitted Alabama for Texas and Arkansas, and they 
tell me that Monroe County has lost 1500 inhabitants. "Much 
capital," said one of my informants, " is leaving this state, and 
no wonder ; for if we remain here, we are reduced to the alter 
native of high taxes to pay the interest of money so improvidently 
borrowed from England, or to suffer the disgrace of repudiation, 
which would be doubly shameful, because the money was received 
in hard cash, and lent out, often rashly, by the state, to farmers 
for agricultural improvements. Besides," he added, " all the 
expenses of Government were in reality defrayed during several 
years by borrowed money, and the burthen of the debt thrown 
on posterity. The facility with which your English capitalists, 
in 1821, lent their cash to a state from which the Indians were 
not yet expelled, without reflecting on the migratory nature of 
the white population, is astonishing ! The planters who got 
grants of your money, and spent it, have nearly all of them 
moved off and settled beyond the Mississippi. 

" First, our Legislature negotiates a loan; then borrows to pay 
the interest of it ; then discovers, after some years, that five out 
of the sixteen millions lent to us have evaporated. Our demo 
crats then stigmatize those who vote for direct taxes to redeem 
their pledges as * the high taxation men. Possibly the capital 
and interest may eventually be made good, but there is some 
risk at least of a suspension of payment. At this moment the 
state is selling land forfeited by those to whom portions of the 
borrowed money were lent on mortgage, but the value of prop 
erty thus forced into the market, is greatly depreciated." 

Although, since my departure in 1846, Alabama has not re 
pudiated, I was struck with the warning here conveyed against 
lending money to a new and half-formed community, where every- 



CHAP. XXIV.] STATE DEBTS. 57 

thing is fluctuating and on the move a state from which tire 
Indians are only just retreating, and where few whites ever con 
tinue to reside three years in one place where thousands are 
going with their negroes to Louisiana, Texas, or Arkansas 
where even the County Court Houses and State Capitol are on 
the move, the Court House of Clarke county, for example, just 
shifted from Clarkesville to Macon, and the seat of legislature 
about to be transferred from Tuscaloosa to Montgomery. In 
the midst of such instability, a feeling of nationality, or state 
pride, can not easily be fostered. Nevertheless, the resources, 
both mineral and agricultural, of so vast a territory as Alabama 
a fifth larger in area than the whole of England proper, may 
enable them, with moderate economy, to overcome all their diffi 
culties. 

Often was the question put to us, " Are you moving ?" But 
at the small tavern at Claiborne it was supposed that I might 
be the Methodist minister whom they were expecting to come 
from the north, to preach a trial sermon. Two Alabamans, 
who, as I afterward learnt, were under this persuasion, were 
talking beside me of the chances of a war with England, and 
praised the British ministers for their offer of mediation. They 
condemned the folly of the Government at Washington for not 
accepting it, and agreed that the trade of Mobile would suffer 
seriously, if they came to blows with the English. " Calhoun," 
said one of them, " has pronounced in favor of peace ; but they 
say that the Governor-general of Canada is spending a mint of 
money on fortifications." "It is satisfactory," replied his com 
panion, " to think that we have not yet spent a dollar on prepa 
rations ; yet I doubt not, if we had to fight, that the English 
would get the worst of it." " Yes," said his friend, " we have 
whipped them twice, and should whip them a third time." 

I am bound to state, that never once, where I was known to 
be an Englishman, were any similar speeches, uncourteous in 
their tone toward my country, uttered in my hearing. 

On the table of the inn at Claiborne, I found a book entitled 
" Walsh s Appeal from the Judgment of Great Britain," in 
which all the provocations given to the Americans by English 

c* 



58 INNS OF SOUTHERN STATES. [CHAP. XXIV. 

travelers, and the daily and periodical press of Great Britain, 
were brought together in one view. It is at least instructive, as 
showing that a disposition to run down our transatlantic breth 
ren was quite as marked, and perhaps even more conspicuous, 
before any of the states had repudiated, than after the financial 
crisis of 1841. So long as such an unfriendly and disparaging 
tone is encouraged, England does well to keep up a larger mili 
tary force in Canada, and a larger navy than would otherwise be 
called for. It is only to be regretted that the Chancellor of the 
Exchequer can not set down as a separate item, the charge for 
indulging in anti- American prejudices, for it is possible that John 
Bull, patient as he is of taxation, might doubt whether the lux 
ury was worth its cost. When the landlord saw me making an 
extract from Walsh, he begged me to accept the book ; the 
second occasion in this tour in which mine host had pressed me 
to take a volume out of his library, which he had seen me read 
ing with interest. 

There is a considerable uniformity in the scale of charges in 
the country inns in the southern states. Great hotels in large 
cities are more expensive, and small inns in out-of-the-way places, 
where there were few comforts, considerably cheaper. We never 
made any bargains, and observed that the bill was always equit 
ably adjusted according to the accommodation provided. 

From Claiborne we crossed the Alabama River, and were hos 
pitably received by Mr. Blount, to whom I had a letter of intro 
duction from Mr. Hamilton Couper. While my wife staid 
with Mrs. Blount at Woodlands, he took me in his carriage 
through the forest, to the county town of Macon, where he had 
business as a magistrate. Macon (Alabama) happened to lie 
. directly in my way to Clarkesville, where I wished to examine 
the geology of the region where the fossil skeletons of the gigantic 
zeuglodon had been procured. The district we passed through 
was situated in the fork of the Alabama and Tombeckbee rivers, 
where the aboriginal forest was only broken here and there by a 
few clearings. To travel with an accomplished and agreeable 
resident proprietor, who could entirely sympathize with my feel 
ings and opinions, in a district so recently deserted by the Indians, 



CHAP. XXIV.] SALE OF SLAVES. 5.9 

was no small advantage. When I got to Macon, my attention 
was forcibly called to the newness of things, by my friend s 
pointing out to me the ground where there had been a bloody 
fight with the Choctaws and Chickasaws, and I was told how 
many Indians had been slaughtered there, and how the present 
clerk of the Circuit Court was the last survivor of those who had 
won the battle. The memory of General Jackson is quite idol 
ized here. It was enough for him to give public notice in the 
papers that he should have great pleasure in meeting his friends 
at a given point on a given day, and there was sure to be a 
muster of several hundred settlers, armed with rifles, and pre 
pared for a desperate fight with 5000 or 7000 Indians. 

At Macon I was fortunate enough to meet with Mr. William 
Pickett, a friend of Mr. Blount s, who, after returning from the 
wars in Texas, had most actively aided Mr. Koch in digging up 
the skeleton of the fossil whale, or zeuglodon, near Clarkesville. 
As I was anxious to knoAv the true position of that remarkable 
fossil, and to ascertain how much of it had been obtained in a 
single locality, I gladly accepted Mr. Pickett s offer, to act as 
guide in this excursion. On repairing to the stable for the horse 
destined to draw our vehicle, we were met with a singular piece 
of intelligence. The stable-boy who had groomed it in the morn 
ing was " up for sale." Without his assistance we could not 
start, for this boy had the key of the harness-room. So I deter 
mined to go to the auction, where I found that a sale of land and 
negroes was going on, in consequence of the state having fore 
closed one of those mortgages, before alluded to, on which public 
money borrowed from European capitalists had been lent by the 
state, for agricultural improvements. I first saw an old man 
sold for 150 dollars ; then a boy, seventeen years old, knocked 
down for 535 dollars, on which a bystander remarked to me, 
" They are selling well to-day." Next came on the young mar 
in whose immediate release I was more especially interested. 
He stepped forward, hat in hand, with an easy, natural air 
seeming to be very indifferent to the scene around him, whilt 
the auctioneer began to describe him as a fine griff (which mean& 
three parts black), twenty-four years old, and having many su- 



60 DRUNKENNESS IN ALABAMA. [CHAP. XX IV. 



perior qualities, on which he enlarged in detail. There was a 
sharp bidding, which lasted only a few minutes, when he was 
sold for 675 dollars. Mr. Pickett immediately asked him to get 
ready our horse, and, as he came away with us, began to joke 
with him, and told him " they have bid a hundred dollars more 
for you than I would have given ;" to which he replied, very 
complacently, " My master, who has had the hire of me for three 
years, knew better than to let any one outbid him." I discovered, 
in short, that he had gone to the sale with the full conviction 
that the person whom he had been serving was determined to 
buy him in, so that his mind was quite at ease, and the price 
offered for him had made him feel well satisfied with himself. 

I witnessed no mal-treatment of slaves in this state, but drunk 
enness prevails to such a degree among their owners, that I can 
not doubt that the power they exercise must often be fearfully 
abused. In the morning the proprietor of the house where I 
lodged was intoxicated, yet taking fresh drams when T left him, 
and evidently thinking me somewhat unpolite when I declined 
to join him. In the afternoon, when I inquired at the house of 
a German settler, whether I could see some fossil bones discover 
ed on his plantation, I was told that he was not at home ; in 
fact, that he had not returned the night before, and was supposed 
to be lying somewhere drunk in the woods, his wife having set 
out in search of him in one direction, and his sister in another. 
In the Congress at Washington I had seen one of the represent 
atives of this state, the worse for liquor, on his legs in the 
House, and I afterward heard of his being killed in a brawl in 
Alabama ; yet every one here speaks of the great reform which 
the temperance movement has made, it being no longer an 
offense to decline taking a dram with your host. 

When the conversation at Macon turned on dueling, I re 
marked to one of the lawyers, that a new bill had just been 
passed by the State of Mississippi, inflicting political disfran- 
chisement as a penalty on every one concerned, whether, as first 
or second, in a duel. He laughed, and said, " We have a simi 
lar statute here, but it is nugatory, for the forfeited rights are 
always restored by the Legislature, as a matter of course, if the 



CHAP. XXIV.] JEALOUSY OF WEALTH. 61 

offenders can prove that there was no unfair play in the fight." 
Notwithstanding this assertion, such enactments are not without 
their significance, and I believe that the example of New En 
gland and the progress of civilization is rapidly changing the 
tone of public opinion in regard to this barbarous practice. 
Soon after I left Macon, the news reached us of a fatal duel at 
Richmond, in Virginia, between two newspaper editors, one of 
whom, in the prime of life, and leaving a family dependent on 
him, was killed ; and where the coroner s jury had given a ver 
dict of murder, although the survivor was afterward acquitted. 
The newspaper comments on this tragedy, even in some of the 
southern states, were admirable. The following extract may 

be taken as an example : " Mr. P , a man of fifty years 

experience, had been called a coward by a young man, Mr. 
Thomas R . This touched his honor, which must be vin 
dicated by putting his duty as a son, a father, a citizen, a Chris 
tian, and a man at stake. The point to be proved by being mur 
dered, was that Tom R s opinion was incorrect, and that 

Mr. P was a man of honor and of courage. Mr. P 

is dead. Did his conduct prove that he was a brave or wise 
man ? Is his reputation better, or is it worse for all this ? If 
he could rise from the dead, and appear again in the streets of 
Richmond, would he be counted more a man of courage or honor, 

than if he had never taken the least notice of T. R or his 

opinion ? Mr. R lives and has his opinion still, and other 

people have also their opinion of him," &c. 

I heard many anecdotes, when associating with small proprie 
tors in Alabama, which convinced me that envy has a much 
ranker growth among the aristocratic democracy of a newly set 
tled slave state than in any part of New England which I visit 
ed. I can scarcely conceive the ostracism of wealth or superior 
attainments being carried farther. Let a gentleman who has 
made a fortune at the bar, in Mobile or elsewhere, settle in some 
retired part of the newly cleared country, his fences are pulled 
down, and his cattle left to stray in the woods, and various 
depredations committed, not by thieves, for none of his property 
is carried away, but by neighbors who, knowing nothing of 



62 JEALOUSY OF WEALTH. [CHAP. XXIV. 

him personally, have a vulgar jealousy of his riches, and take for 
granted that his pride must be great in proportion. In a recent 
election for Clarke county, the popular candidate admitted the up 
right character and high qualifications of his opponent, an old friend 
of his own, and simply dwelt on his riches as a sufficient ground 
for distrust. "A rich man," he said, " can not sympathize with 
the poor." Even the anecdotes I heard, which may have been 
mere inventions, convinced me how intense was this feeling. One, 
who had for some time held a seat in the Legislature finding him 
self in a new canvass deserted by many of his former supporters, 
observed that he had always voted strictly according to his instruc 
tions. " Do you think," answered a former partisan, "that they 
would vote for you, after your daughter came to the ball in them 
fixings ?" His daughter, in fact, having been at Mobile, had had 
a dress made there with flounces, according to the newest Parisian 
fashion, and she had thus sided, as it were, with the aristocracy 
of the city, setting itself up above the democracy of the pine woods. 
In the new settlements there the small proprietors, or farmers, are 
keenly jealous of thriving lawyers, merchants, and capitalists. One 
of the candidates for a county in Alabama confessed to me that he 
had thought it good policy to go every where on foot when soli 
citing votes, though he could have commanded a horse, and the 
distances were great. That the young lady, whose "fixings" I 
have alluded to, had been ambitiously in the fashion, I make no 
doubt ; for my wife found that the cost of making up a dress at 
Mobile was twenty dollars, or four times the ordinary London 
price ! The material costs about the same as in London or Paris, 
At New Orleans the charge for making a gown is equally high. 
I often rejoiced, in this excursion, that we had brought no 
servants with us from England, so strong is the prejudice here 
against what they term a white body-servant. Besides, it would 
be unreasonable to expect any one, who is not riding his own 
hobby, to rough it in the backwoods. In many houses I hesi 
tated to ask for water or towels, for fear of giving offense, 
although the yeoman with whom I lodged for the night allowed 
me to pay a moderate charge for my accommodation. Nor 
could I venture to beg any one to rub a thick coat of mud off 



CHAP. XXIV.] EMIGRANTS TO THE WEST. G1 

my boots or trowsers, lest I should be thought to reflect on the 
members of the family, who had no idea of indulging in such 
refinements themselves. I could have dispensed cheerfully with 
milk, butter, and other such luxuries ; but I felt much the want 
of a private bed-room. Very soon, however, I came to regard it 
as no small privilege to be allowed to have even a bed to myself. 
On one occasion, when my host had humored my whims so far 
in regard to privacy, I felt almost ashamed to see, in consequence, 
a similar sized bed in the same room, occupied by my companion 
and two others. When I related these inconveniences afterward 
to an Episcopal clergyman, he told me that the bishop and some 
of his clergy, when they travel through these woods in summer, 
and the lawyers, when on the circuit, or canvassing for votes at 
elections, have, in addition to these privations, to endure the 
bites of countless musquitos, fleas, and bugs, so that I had great 
reason to congratulate myself that it was now so cold. More 
over, there are parties of emigrants in some of these woods, 
where women delicately brought up, accustomed to be waited 
on, and with infants at the breast, may now be seen on their 
way to Texas, camping out, although the ground within their 
tent is often soaked with heavy rain. " If you were here in the 
hot season," said another, " the exuberant growth of the creepers 
and briars would render many paths in the woods, through which 
you now pass freely, impracticable, and venomous snakes would 
make the forest dangerous." 

Calling on a proprietor to beg him to show me some fossil 
bones, he finished by offering me his estate for sale at 3500 dol 
lars. He said he had been settled there for twenty years with 
his wife, longer than any one else in the whole country. He 
had no children ; and when I expressed wonder that he could 
leave, at his advanced age, a farm which he had reclaimed from 
the wilderness, and improved so much, he answered, " I hope to 
feel more at home in Texas, for all my old neighbors have gone 
there, and new people have taken their place here." 

The uncertainty of the cotton crops, and the sudden fluctua 
tions in the value of cotton from year to year, have been the ruin 
of many, and have turned almost every landowner into a mer 



64 DEMOCRATIC EQUALITY. [CHAP. XXIV 

chant and speculator. The maize, or Indian corn, appears to be 
almost as precarious a crop, for this year it has entirely failed in 
many places, owing to the intense summer heat. I passed some 
mills in which the grain, cob, arid husk were all ground up to 
gether for the cattle and hogs, and they are said to thrive more 
on this mixture than on the grain alone. 

The different stages of civilization to which families have 
attained, who live here on terms of the strictest equality, is often 
amusing to a stranger, but must be intolerable to some of those 
settlers who have been driven by their losses from the more ad 
vanced districts of Virginia and South Carolina, having to begin 
the world again. Sometimes, in the morning, my host would be 
of the humblest class of " crackers," or some low, illiterate Ger 
man or Irish emigrants, the wife sitting with a pipe in her mouth, 
doing no work and reading no books. In the evening, I came to 
a neighbor, whose library was well stored with works of French and 
English authors, and whose first question to me was, " Pray tell 
me, who do you really think is the author of the Vestiges of 
Creation?" If it is difficult in Europe, in the country far from 
towns, to select society on a principle of congeniality of taste and 
feeling, the reader may conceive what must be the control of 
geographical circumstances here, exaggerated by ultra-democratic 
notions of equality and the pride of race. Nevertheless, these 
regions will probably bear no unfavorable comparison with such 
parts of our colonies, in Canada, the Cape, or Australia, as have 
been settled for an equally short term of years, and I am bound 
to say, that I passed my time agreeably and profitably in Ala 
bama, for every one, as I have usually found in newly peopled 
districts, was hospitable and obliging to a stranger. Instead of 
the ignorant wonder, very commonly expressed in out-of-the-way 
districts of England, France, or Italy, at travelers who devote 
money and time to a search for fossil bones and shells, each 
planter seemed to vie with another in his anxiety to give me in 
formation in regard to the precise spots where organic remains 
had been discovered. Many were curious to learn my opinion 
as to the kind of animal to which the huge vertebrae, against 
which their plows sometimes strike, may have belonged. The 



CHAP. XXIV.] FOSSIL WHALE, OR ZEUGLODON. C5 

magnitude, indeed, and solidity of these relics of the colossal zeug- 
lodon, are such as might well excite the astonishment of the 
most indifferent. Dr. Buckley informed me that on the estate 
of Judge Creagh, which I visited, he had assisted in digging out 
one skeleton, where the vertebral column, almost unbroken, ex 
tended to the length of seventy feet, and Dr. Emmons afterward 
showed me the greater part of this skeleton in the Museum of 
Albany, New York. On the same plantation, part of another 
backbone, fifty feet long, was dug up, and a third was met with 
at no great distance. Before I left Alabama, I had obtained 
evidence of so many localities of similar fossils, chiefly between 
Macon and Clarkesville, a distance of ten miles, that I concluded 
they must have belonged to at least forty distinct individuals. 

I visited, with Mr. Pickett, the exact spot where he and Mr. 
Koch disinterred a portion of the skeleton afterward exhibited in 
New York under the name of Hydrarchos, or " the Water-king." 
The bones were imbedded in a calcareous marly stratum of the 
Eocene formation, and I observed in it many casts of the cham 
bers of a large nautilus, which were at first mistaken by Koch 
for the paddles of the huge animal. Portions of the vertebral 
column, exhibited by him, in 1845, at New York and Boston, 
were procured in Washington County, fifteen miles distant in a 
direct line from this place, where the head was discovered.* 
Some single vertebra, which I found here, were so huge and so 
impregnated with carbonate of lime, that I could not lift them 
from the ground without an effort. Professor Jeffries Wyman 
was the first who clearly pointed out that the bones, of which 
the factitious skeleton called Hydrarchos was made up, must 
have belonged to different individuals. They were in different 
stages of ossification, he said, some adult, others immature, a 
state of things never combined in one and the same individ 
ual. Mr. Owen had previously maintained, that the animal was 
not reptilian, but cetacean, because each tooth was furnished 
with double roots, implanted in corresponding double sockets. 
After my return from America, a nearly entire skull of the zeug- 
lodon was found by Mr. S. F. Holmes and Professor L. ft, 
* See "American Jour, of Science," New Series, vol. i. p. 312. 



68 VOYAGE TO MOBILE. [CHAP. XXIV. 

Gibbes, of Charleston, S. C., and it was found to have the 
double occipital condyles, only met with in mammals, and the 
convoluted tympanic bones which are characteristic of cetaceans, 
so that the real nature of this remarkable extinct species of the 
whale tribe has now been placed beyond all doubt. 

Feb. 5. On my return from this excursion, I rejoined my 
wife at Mr. Blount s, and we then went back to the inn at Clai- 
borne to wait for a steamer bound for Mobile. The first large 
vessel which touched for a moment at the landing, came up the 
river from that city, and stopped to know if there were any pas- 
seno-ers. The answer was, "No, what news ?" To which they 
replied, " Cotton up one eighth no war." They were off in an 
instant, and, a few hours later, when it was dark, another large 
vessel was hailed coming down stream. We were glad to find 
that it was the Amaranth, commanded by our old friend Captain 
Bragdon, who had sailed up and down more than 800 miles, in 
the interval since we saw him. Once more we descended the 
steep cliff, on the slope of which we had spent many pleasant 
hours, gathering hundreds of beautifully preserved shells, and 
saw it illuminated by a blaze of torch-light. 

Between Claiborne and Mobile, there are about 100 miles of 
river navigation, our course being nearly due south. About half 
way, -we passed, in the night, the junction of the Tombeckbee 
and Alabama rivers, and, in the morning, saw in all directions a 
low flat country, which continued till we reached the metropolis 
of Alabama. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

Voyage from Mobile to Tuscaloosa. Visit to the Coal-Field of Alabama. 
Its Agreement in Age with the ancient Coal of Europe. Absenteeism 
in Southern States. Progress of Negroes. Unthriftiness of Slave-Labor. 
University of Tuscaloosa. Churches. Bankruptcies. Judges and 
Law Courts. Geology on the Tombeckbee River. Artesian Wells. 
Limestone Bluff of St. Stephen s. Negro shot by Overseer. Involuntary 
Efforts of the Whites to civilize the Negroes. New Statute in Georgia 
against Black Mechanics. The Effects of speedy Emancipation and the 
free Competition of White and Black Laborers considered. 

Feb. 8, 1846. THE Tuscaloosa steamer was just ready to 
sail the next morning for Mobile, up the great western tributary 
of the Alabama, called the Tombeckbee (or more familiarly "the 
Bigby") ; I determined, therefore, to embark in her for the capi 
tal of the state, about 400 miles distant by water to the north, 
where I wished to explore the coal-field in which the coal used 
for gas and fuel at Mobile is procured, and to ascertain its geo 
logical age. Our steamer was 170 feet long, and made about 
ten miles an hour against the stream. She carried stores of all 
kinds to the upper country, but was not heavily laden ; and, on 
her return, is to bring down a large freight of cotton. By means 
of the high-pressure principle and the horizontal movement of the 
piston, she draws only a few feet of water, notwithstanding her 
great length. These steamers never appear to such advantage 
as when stemming an adverse current, for the boat can then be 
steered with more precision, and less time is lost at the landings ; 
at each of these they can go up direct to the bank, whereas, in 
descending, they have to turn round and re-ascend the stream 
before they can stop. There were also rafts laden with hugo 
piles of wood ready to be taken in tow at different points, the 
logs being thrown on board by our negroes, while the steamer 
was going on at full speed. The empty raft is then turned 
adrift, and is easily piloted down the stream by two men, a ma- 



68 THE TOMBECKBEE RIVER. [CHAP. XXV. 

noeuvre which could not be practiced when vessels are going 
in the opposite direction. Al| the chairs in the cabin of the 
Tuscaloosa were so constructed as to be capable of floating, and 
acting as life-preservers a useful precaution on a river, whatever 
may be thought of such safeguards in an ocean steamer. 

The river Tombeckbee was so high that the trees of both 
banks seemed to be growing in a lake. Before dark, we came 
to the limestone bluff at St. Stephen s, more than sixty miles due 
north of Mobile, and nearly 150 miles by the windings of the 
river. The tide is still slightly perceptible, even at this distance 
from the sea, and the water never rises during a flood more than 
five or six feet above its ordinary level ; whereas, higher up, at 
Demopolis, the extreme rise is not less than fifty feet, and at 
Tuscaloosa, sixty-nine feet. At the latter place, indeed, we 
found the waters so high, that the falls were converted into 
mere rapids. The magnificent scale of the navigation on these 
southern rivers in the rainy season, contrasts remarkably with 
the want of similar facilities of water communication in Texas 
and the more western countries bordering the gulf of Mexico. 
We admired the canes on the borders of the river between Tus 
caloosa and Dernopolis, some of which I found to be thirty feet 
high. Whether this magnificent reed, which is said sometimes 
to grow forty feet high, is a distinct species, or merely a variety 
of Miegia macrosperma, which I had seen from six to ten feet 
high, as far north as Kentucky and North Carolina, botanists 
are not yet agreed. 

Tuscaloosa is situated, like Augusta, Milledgeville, and Co 
lumbus, at the falls of a river, though, in this instance, the falls 
do not occur, as usual, at the junction of the granitic rocks, with 
the tertiary or cretaceous strata, but at the point where the latter 
first meet the carboniferous formation. The lower beds of the 
horizontal cretaceous series in contact with the inclined coal-mea 
sures, consist of gravel, some of the quartzose pebbles being as 
large as hens eggs, and they look like an ancient beach, as if the 
cretaceous sea had terminated here, or shingle had been accumu 
lated near a shore. 

There is a flourishing college at Tuscaloosa, standing upon a 



CHAP. XXV.] COAL-FIELD OF ALABAMA. 6D 



hill 450 feet above the level of the sea. Here I was welcomed 
by the professor of chemistry, Mr. Brumby, who had the kindness 
to set out immediately with me (Feb. 10) to examine the coal 
fields lying immediately north of this place. Starting in a north 
easterly direction, we first entered a hilly country formed of sand 
stone, grit, and shale of the coal formation, precisely like the strata 
in Avhich coal occurs in England. These hills were covered 
with long-leaved pines, and the large proportion they bear to the 
hard wood is said to have been increased by the Indian practice 
of burning the grass ; the bark of the oak and other kinds of hard 
wood being more combustible, and more easily injured by fire, 
than that of the fir tribe. Every where the young seedlings of 
the long-leaved pine were coming up in such numbers that one 
might have supposed the ground to have been sown with them ; 
and I was reminded how rarely we see similar self-sown firs in 
English plantations. When we had gone about twenty miles 
northeast of Tuscaloosa, we came to a higher country, where 
nearly all the pines disappeared, and were replaced by oak, hick 
ory, sumach, gum-trees, sassafras, and many others. In some 
clearings here, as in Georgia and the Carolinas, the quantity or 
cordage of wood fit for charcoal produced in thirty years by the 
new growth, is said, from its greater density, to have equaled the 
wood contained in the aboriginal forest. 

Near the banks of the Black Warrior River, we examined sev 
eral open quarries of coal, where the edges of the beds had been 
dug into by different proprietors, no regular mining operations 
having as yet been attempted. Even at the outcrop the coal is 
of excellent quality, and highly bituminous, and I soon satisfied 
myself that the strata were not of the age of the Richmond coal 
before described,^ but were as ancient as that of the Alleghany 
Hills, or of Western Virginia. In the beds of black shale cover 
ing each coal-seam, were impressions of fossil plants, precisely sim 
ilar to those occurring in the ancient coal-measures of Europe 
and America. Among these we found more than one species of 
Catamite, several ferns of the genera Sphenopteris and JVeurop- 
teris, the trunks of Lepidodendron and Sigilaria, the stems and 
* Ante, vol. i. p. 214. 



70 ABSENTEEISM IN SOUTHERN STATES. [CHAP. XXV. 



leaves of Aster ophyllite, and in other beds the characteristic root 
called Stigmaria, not uncommon.^ 

According to Professor Brumby, this coal-field of the Warrior 
River is ninety miles long from north to south, and from ten to 
thirty miles in breadth, and includes in it some coal-seams not 
less than ten feet thick. It forms a southern prolongation of the 
great Appalachian coal-field, with which I was unacquainted when 
I compiled my map, published in 1845, of the geology of North 
America.! Its geographical situation is peculiarly interesting ; 
for, being situated in lat. 33 10 north, it constitutes at present 
the extreme southern limit to which the ancient carboniferous 
vegetation has been traced in the northern hemisphere, whether 
on the east or west side of the Atlantic. 

Continuing our route into the upland country, we entered about 
thirty-three miles N.E. of Tuscaloosa, a region called Rooke s 
Valley, where rich beds of ironstone and limestone bid fair, from 
their proximity to the coal, to become one day a source of great 
mineral wealth. At present the country has been suffered to re 
trograde, and the population to grow less numerous than it was 
twenty years ago, owing to migrations to Louisiana and Texas, 
and partly to the unthriftiness of slave labor. 

We traveled in a carriage with two horses, and could advance 
but a few miles a day, so execrable and often dangerous was the 
state of the roads. Occasionally we had to get out and call at a 
farm-house to ask the proprietor s leave to take down his snake 
fence, to avoid a deep mud-hole in the road. Our vehicle was 
then driven over a stubble field of Indian corn, at the end of 
which we made our exit, some fifty yards on, by pulling down 
another part of the fence. In both places the labor of rebuilding 
the fence, which consists simply of poles loosely placed together 
and not nailed, was entailed upon us, and caused no small delay. 

One of the evils, tending greatly to retard the progress of the 
southern states, is absenteeism, which is scarcely known in the 
North. The cheapness of land, caused by such rapid emigration 

* See " Quart. Journ. of Geol. Soc.," vol. ii. p. 278, and for a list of 
the plants, by Mr. C. J. F. Bunbury, p. 282. ibid, 
t See "Travels," &c. vol. ii. 



CHAP. XXV.] PROGRESS OF NEGROES, 71 

to the South and West, and the frequent sales of the estates of 
insolvents, tempts planters to buy more land than they can man 
age themselves, which they must therefore give in charge to over 
seers. Accordingly, much of the property in Alabama belongs to 
rich Carolinians, and some wealthy slave-owners of Alabama have 
estates in Mississippi. With a view of checking the increase of 
these "pluralities," a tax has recently been imposed on absentees. 
In Alabama, as in Georgia, I found that the colored people were 
more intelligent in the upper country, and I listened with satis 
faction to complaints of their setting themselves up, and being- 
less content than formerly with their lot. That men of color can 
sometimes make large fortunes in trade, was proved to me by a 
fact which came accidentally to my knowledge. One of them, 
by standing security for a white man, had lately lost no less than 
17,000 dollars, or 3400 guineas; yet he was still prospering, 
and kept a store, and, being a free man would willingly have 
sent his son to the college of Tuscaloosa, had he not been prevent 
ed by the prejudices of a white aristocracy, ostentatiously boast 
ful of its love of equality. In consequence of similar impediments, 
many thriving artisans of the colored race remain uneducated, 
and are obliged to have white men to write for them and collect 
their debts ; and I found that many cabinet-makers, carpenters, 
builders, and other mechanics, earning high wages, who, in New 
England, would send their sons to college, do not contribute here 
even to the maintenance of common schools, their children riot 
being permitted by law to learn to read and write. I can not 
believe, however, that this state of things can endure many years, 
for I found that an excellent Sabbath school had been established 
by the Presbyterians in Tuscaloosa, for the children of negroes. 
There are two colored men in this town, who, having a dash of 
Indian as well as negro blood in their veins, have become the 
owners of slaves. 

Frequent mention was made during our stay in Alabama, of a 
negro named Ellis, a blacksmith, who had taught himself Greek 
and Latin. He is now acquiring Hebrew, and I was sorry to 
hear that the Presbyterians contemplate sending him as a mis 
sionary to Liberia. If it were an object in the south to elevate 



72 FREE AND SLAVE LABOR. [CHAP. XXV. 

the blacks, he might be far more instrumental in forwarding the 
cause of civilization and Christianity by remaining at home, for 
the negroes like a preacher of their own race. 

The colored domestic servants are treated with great indul 
gence at Tuscaloosa. One day some of them gave a supper to a 
large party of their friends in the house of a family which we 
visited, and they feasted their guests on roast turkeys, ice-creams, 
jellies, and cakes. Turkeys here cost only seventy-five cents, or 
about three shillings the couple, prepared for the table ; the price 
of a wild turkey, an excellent bird, is twenty-five cents, or one 
shilling. After calculating the interest of the money laid out in 
the purchase of the slaves, and the price of their food, a lawyer 
undertook to show me that a negro cost less than an English 
servant ; " but, as two blacks do the work of only one white, it 
is a mere delusion," he said, to imagine that their labor is not 
dearer." It is usual, moreover, not to exact the whole of their 
time for domestic duties. I found a footman, for example, work 
ing on his own account as a bootmaker at spare hours, and another 
getting perquisites by blacking the students shoes. 

That slave labor is more expensive than free, is an opinion 
which is certainly gaining ground in the higher parts of Alabama, 
and is now professed openly by some northerners who have settled 
there. One of them said to me, " Half the population of the 
south is employed in seeing that the other half do their work, arid 
they who do work, accomplish half what they might do under a 
better system." " We can not," said another, " raise capital 
enough for new cotton factories, because all our savings go to buy 
negroes, or, as has lately happened, to feed them, when the crop 
is deficient." A white bricklayer had lately gone from Tusca 
loosa to serve an apprenticeship in his trade at Boston. He had 
been earning there 2 dollars a day, by laying 3000 bricks daily. 
A southern planter, who had previously been exceedingly boastful 
and proud of the strength of one of his negroes (who could, in 
fact, carry a much greater weight than this same white brick 
layer), was at first incredulous when he heard of this feat, for his 
pattern slave could not lay more than 1000 bricks a day. 

During my absence on the geological excursion above mention- 



CHAP. XXV.] CHURCHES. 73 

ed, through forests recently abandoned by the Indians, and where 
their paths may still be traced, I found that my wife had made 
many agreeable acquaintances at Tuscaloosa. Two of the ladies 
she had seen (New Englanders, who had married southerners) 
were reading the works of Schiller and Goethe in the original for 
their amusement. My companion, the Professor of Chemistry, 
was not the only one from whom I obtained much scientific in 
formation, and we enjoyed the pleasure, one clear night, of look 
ing through a telescope recently sent from London, and were 
shown by Mr. Barnard, the teacher of astronomy, some double 
stars and southern constellations not visible in England. 

The annual expense of a student in the University is 3 dol 
lars, or sixty guineas a year, including board. A gentleman, 
whose family consisted of eight individuals, with eight negro serv 
ants, told me that he could, not live respectably for less than 1700 
dollars a year (340 guineas.) Yet he paid no less than 40 dol 
lars, or eight guineas, a year, for a pew in the Presbyterian 
church, holding six persons, which will give some idea of the lib 
eral support afforded, under the- voluntary system, to the minis 
ters of religion. Among the professors here, there are Baptists, 
Presbyterians, Episcopalians, and I was told of one that he was 
not a member of any church, but a regular attendant at the Bap 
tist or Presbyterian meeting. On Sunday, we heard the Bishop 
of Alabama preach, the congregation here being reckoned the 
second in the state. The first is at Mobile, and there are about 
ten in all. The service was read by another clergymen, and as, 
according to the usual custom in America, there was no clerk, 
the Bishop read the responses and gave out the psalms, seeming 
to us, at first, to be performing the office of clerk. It often struck 
me as an advantage in the United States, that the responses are 
never read by an illiterate man, as happens not uncommonly in 
our country parishes, and the congregation joins in the service 
more earnestly when the part which properly belongs to them 
does not devolve on a regular functionary. A few days later, 
when I was on my way, in a steamer, to Mobile, I conversed 
with an Episcopal clergyman, a high churchman, whose profes 
sion I had recognized by the strictness of his costume. He told 

VOL. II. D 



74 JUDGES AND LAW COURTS. [CHAP. XXV. 

me he meant to visit England, and, with that view, had for some 
months abstained entirely from the chewing of tobacco, having 
been told it would be considered a breach of good manners there. 
His physician, also, had assured him that this habit, which he 
had taken pains to acquire when a boy, because he thought it 
manly, though much against his natural taste, was injuring his 
health. He seemed to know the names of almost every bishop 
and dignitary of the English Church, their incomes and shades 
of opinion, and regretted that Archbishop Whately had taken 
such low ground in regard to the apostolic succession. " The 
bishop of this diocese," he said, "receives about 800/. a year, 
and has to pay his own traveling expenses, but in the older states 
the bishops have higher salaries." Episcopal clergymen usually 
receive about 500 dollars (or 100 guineas) in country parishes, 
and four times that sum in large towns, or even more. Upon 
the whole, he thought them well paid, in proportion to the aver 
age scale of fortunes in the United States, and he was convinced, 
that as the wealthiest class are so often Episcopalians, his church 
is a gainer in worldly advantages as well as spiritual influence-, 
by being wholly unconnected with the state. 

In the afternoon, the Presbyterian minister of Tuscaloosa de 
livered a good discourse on the necessity of a higher standard of 
honor in commercial affairs. Channing had said, that they who 
become insolvent by over-trading, often inflict more misery than 
highwaymen and thieves ; and this preacher affirmed that for 
each hundred persons engaged in trade in Alabama, there had 
been ninety-seven bankruptcies. One of the citizens, who was 
scandalized at this assertion, afterward raised the question, whether 
it was true, arid I asked if any one of the party could name a 
tradesman in their town who had not failed once in the last 
twenty years. They were only able to mention two. 

I was surprised at the number of lawyers at Tuscaloosa who 
enjoy the title of Judge, and equally amused when the cause was 
explained to me. False notions of economy have from time to 
time induced the democracy to lower the salaries of the judges ; 
especially in the inferior courts. The consequence has been, that 
as the state can no longer command the services of the best law- 



CHAP. XXV. J GEOLOGY. 73 

yers, the bench has grown weaker than the bar, and the author 
ity of judicial decisions has been impaired. Hence the increased 
number of appeals to the Supreme Court of the state now sitting 
at Tuscaloosa. Yet, in spite of this augmentation of business, 
the income of the judges in this court also has been lowered from 
3000 to 2500 dollars ; although lawyers in good practice in Mo 
bile have been known to make 10,000 or 14,000 dollars a year. 
It is by no means uncommon, therefore, for one who has a large 
family, to give up the bench and return to the bar ; but, in that 
case, the title of Judge is still given to him by courtesy, and is 
much prized, especially by northern men, who are willing to 
make a sacrifice for this honor, by serving a few years on the 
bench and then retiring from it. 

I have before alluded to the deep ravines recently cut through 
incoherent strata in Georgia, after the natural wood has been 
felled.* One of these modern gulleys may now be seen intersect 
ing most inconveniently the main street of Tuscaloosa, and sev 
eral torrents are cutting their way backward through the " cre 
taceous" clay, sand, and gravel of the hill on which the Capitol 
stands. They even threaten in a few years to undermine that 
edifice. I had observed other recent ravines, from seventy to 
eighty feet deep, in the Eocene strata between Macon and Clarkes- 
ville (Alabama), where the forest had been felled a few years 
before. 

On my way back from Tuscaloosa to Mobile, I had a good 
opportunity of examining the geological structure of the country, 
seeing various sections, first of the cretaceous, and then lower 
down of the tertiary strata. The great beds of gravel and sand 
above alluded to, forming the inferior part of the cretaceous series, 
might from their want of consolidation, be mistaken for much 
newer deposits, if their position on the Tombeckbee, as well as 
on the Alabama River at Montgomery, were not perfectly clear. 
They pass beneath the great marlite formation, full of cretaceous 
shells, which gives rise to the prairie soils before described,! as 
nearly destitute of natural wood, and crossing Alabama in an 
east and west direction. These I examined at Erie, at Demo- 
* Ante, p. 28. * Ante, p. 41. 



76 ARTESIAN WELLS. [CHAP. XXV. 

polls, and at Arcola, where they contain hippurites and other char 
acteristic fossils. The depth to which they have sunk Artesian 
wells through them in many places (between 500 and 1000 
feet), is astonishing. One boring through blue marl and lime 
stone at Erie, in Greene County, was 469 feet deep, and the well 
yielded 350 gallons of water per minute at the surface. The 
water rises forty feet above the surface, and can be made to reach 
fifty feet, though in diminished quantity. Here, as in Europe, 
the temperature of the earth s crust is found to increase as we 
descend, the water being sensibly warmer than that of the air, so 
much so that in cold weather it sends forth steam. Each new 
excavation at Erie robs the wells previously bored of part of 
their supply. The auger with which they perforate the soil is 
four inches in diameter, and the average cost of excavation sixty- 
two cents, or about 2s. 6d. per foot, for the whole depth of 469 
feet. No solid rock has been pierced here, the strata consisting 
throughout of soft, horizontally stratified blue limestone. They 
have also pierced these same rocks, at a distance of three miles 
from. Demopolis (a town situated at the junction of the Tom- 
beckbee and Black Warrior rivers), to the depth of 930 feet 
without gaining the water, yet they do not despair of success, as 
sand has just been reached. 

At Arcola, the proprietor presented me with several creta 
ceous fossils, and some irregular tubular bodies, the origin of 
which he wished to have explained. I immediately recognized 
them as identical with the vitreous tubes found at Drigg, in Cum 
berland, in hills of shifting sand, which have been described and 
figured in the Transactions of the Geological Society of London.* 
They have a glazed and vitrified interior, and bodies of similar 
form and structure were first supposed by Saussure to have been 
due to the passage of lightning through sand, a theory now gen 
erally adopted. 

If any geologist retains to this day the doctrine once so popu 
lar, that at remote periods marine deposits of contemporaneous 
origin were formed every where throughout the globe with the 
same mineral characters, he would do well to compare the suc- 
# Vol. ii. p. 528, and vol. v. p. 617, 1st series. 



CHAP. XXV.] BLUFF OF ST. STEPHEN S. 77 

cession of rocks on the Alabama River with those of the same 
date in England. If there were no fossils, he might suppose the 
lower cretaceous beds of loose gravel to be the newest tertiary, 
the main body of the chalk to be lias, and the soft limestone of 
St. Stephen s, which is tertiary, to be the representative of chalk. 
When I arrived at the last-mentioned rock, or the white calca 
reous bluff of St. Stephen s, it was quite dark, but Captain 
Lavargy, who commanded the vessel, was determined I should 
not be disappointed. He therefore said he would stop and take 
in a supply of wood at the place, and gave me a boat, with two 
negroes amply provided with torches of pine wood, which gave so 
much light that I was able to explore the cliff from one end to 
the other, and to collect many fossils. The bluff was more than 
100 feet high, and in parts formed of an aggregate of corals 
resembling nummulites, but called, by A. D Orbigny. orbitoides. 

I had seen the same " orbitoidal" limestone in the interior of 
Clarke County, forming knolls, on which many cedars or junipers 
were growing, reminding me greatly of parts of the English South 
Downs, covered with yew trees or juniper, where the pure cal 
careous soil of the chalk reaches the surface. 

When I looked down from the top of the precipice at St. Ste 
phen s, the scene which presented itself was most picturesque. 
Near us was the great steamboat, throwing off a dense column 
of white vapor, and an active body of negroes throwing logs on 
board by torch-light. One of my companions had clambered 
with me, torch in hand, to the top of the bluff; the other was 
amusing himself in the boat below by holding another blazing 
torch under large festoons of Spanish moss, which hung from the 
boughs of a huge plane tree. These mossy streamers had at 
length been so dried up by the heat, that they took fire, and add 
ed to the brilliant illumination. My fellow passengers were asleep 
during this transaction, but congratulated me the next morning 
on having had the command of the vessel during the night. 

On board the steamer were three gentlemen of respectable 
families and good standing in society, who had been ruined by 
their drunken habits. They had all been brought up to the bar, 
and two of them were married. One had become quite imbe- 



73 NEGRO SHOT BY OVERSEER. [CHAP. XXV. 

cile ; and I saw the captain and clerk interfere to prevent him 
from taking more spirits. We heard many lamentations at the 
prevalence of this vice in Alabama, and were told of a skillful 
physician who had lost all his practice by giving way to intem 
perance. While one of the passengers was conversing with me 
on this subject, he called my attention to an overseer just coming 
on board, who, not long ago, had shot a negro, a ringleader in a 
conspiracy. The affair, he said, had not reached a desperate 
point, and might have been better managed, had he not been a 
passionate man. I was going to express my indignation at the 
idea of such an agent continuing to be intrusted with power, 
when I saw him approaching us. His countenance was by no 
means prepossessing, arid I involuntarily withdrew. To my sur 
prise, my companion, whose general opinions had pleased me 
much, greeted and shook hands with his acquaintance with appa 
rent cordiality. 

This adventure, and my meeting with the slave-stealer on 
board the " General Clinch," before related,* were the two cases 
which most shocked my feelings in the course of my present, tour 
in Georgia and Alabama. To inquire into the condition of the 
negroes, and the evils arising out of the relation of master and 
slave, was not the object of my visit ; but when I afterward 
related to an abolitionist in Massachusetts, how little actual suf 
fering had obtruded itself on my notice, he told me that great 
pains must have been taken by the planters to conceal from me 
the true state of things, while they had taken care to propitiate 
me by hospitable attentions. I was glad, however, to find my 
experience borne out by that of a Scotch weaver, William Thom 
son, of Stonehaven, who traveled in the years 1841 2 for his 
health in the southern states. He supported himself as he went 
along by manual labor, and lived on intimate terms with persons 
of a different class of society from those with whom I had most 
intercourse. On his return home he published a small book, in 
which he says, " It will appear, to those who knew my opinions 
on slavery before I visited America, that, like most others who 
can judge dispassionately, I have changed my opinion consider- 
* Ante, vol. i. p. 232. 



CHAP. XXV.] SLAVERY IN SOUTHERN STATES. 79 



ably." He gives a detailed account of his adventures in the re 
gions which I traversed in Alabama, Georgia, and many other 
states, and concludes by observing, " After witnessing negro 
slavery in mostly all the slaveholding states, having lived for 
weeks in cotton plantations, observing closely the actual condition 
of the negroes, I can assert, without fear of contradiction from 
any man who has any knowledge of the subject, that I have 
never witnessed one-fifth of the real suffering that I have seen in 
manufacturing establishments in Great Britain." In reference to 
another topic, he affirms " that the members of the same family 
of negroes are not so much scattered as are those of working men 
in Scotland, whose necessities compel them to separate at an age 
when the American slave is running about gathering health and 
strength."-* 

I am aware that there is some danger, when one hears the 
philanthropist declaiming in terms of gross exaggeration on the 
horrors of slavery and the crimes of the planters, of being tempted 
by a spirit of contradiction, or rather by a love of justice, to coun 
teract misrepresentation, by taking too favorable a view of the 
condition and prospects of the negroes. But there is another 
reason, also, which causes the traveler in the south to moderate 
his enthusiasm for emancipation. He is forced continually to 
think of the responsibility which would be incurred, if several 
millions of human beings were hastily set aside, like so many ma 
chines, by withdrawing from them suddenly the protection afford 
ed by their present monopoly of labor. In the opening of the 
market freely to white competitors, before the race is more im 
proved, consists their danger. 

Yet, on taking a near view of the slave question, we are often 
thrown into opposite states of mind and feeling, according as the 
interests of the white or negro race happen, for the moment, to 
claim our sympathy. It is useless now to look back and wish, 
for the sake of civilization, that no Africans had ever crossed the 
Atlantic. Their number in the Union now exceeds three mill 
ions, and, as they have doubled in the last twenty-five years, we 

* Tradesman s Travels in the United States, &c., in the years 1840-42, 
p. 182. 



80 CIVILIZATION OF NEGROES. [CHAP. XXV. 

must expect, unless some plan can be devised to check their in 
crease, that they will amount, before the close of this century, to 
twelve millions, by which time the white population will have 
augmented to eighty millions. Notwithstanding this increase of 
negroes, were it not for disturbing causes, to which I shall pres 
ently advert, I should cherish the most sanguine hopes of their 
future improvement and emancipation, and even their ultimate 
amalgamation and fusion with the whites, so highly has my esti 
mate of their moral and intellectual capabilities been raised by 
what I have lately seen in Georgia and Alabama. Were it not 
for impediments which white competition and political ascenden 
cy threaten to throw in the way of negro progress, the grand ex 
periment might be fairly tried, of civilizing several millions of 
blacks, not by philanthropists, but by a steadier and surer agen 
cy the involuntary efforts of several millions of whites. In spite 
of prejudice and fear, and in defiance of stringent laws enacted 
against education, three millions of a more enlightened and pro 
gressive race are brought into contact with an equal number of 
laborers lately in a savage state, and taken from a continent 
where the natives have proved themselves, for many thousand 
years, to be singularly unprogressive. Already their task-mas 
ters have taught them to speak, with more or less accuracy, one 
of the noblest of languages, to shake off many old superstitions, to 
acquire higher ideas of morality, and habits of neatness and clean 
liness, and have converted thousands of them to Christianity. 
Many they have emancipated, and the rest are gradually ap 
proaching to the condition of the ancient serfs of Europe half a 
century or more before their bondage died out. 

All this has been done at an enormous sacrifice of time and 
money ; an expense, indeed, which all the governments of Eu 
rope and all the Christian missionaries, whether Romanist or 
Protestant, could never have effected in five centuries. Even in 
the few states which I have already visited since I crossed the 
Potomac, several hundred thousand whites of all ages, among 
whom the children are playing by no means the least effective 
part, are devoting themselves with greater or lesd activity to these 
involuntary educational exertions. 



CHAP. XXV.] LAW AGAINST BLACK MECHANICS. 81 

It had previously been imagined that an impassable gulf 
separated the two races ; but now it is proved that more than 
half that space can, in a few generations, be successfully passed 
over, and the humble negro of the coast of Guinea has shown 
himself to be one of the most imitative and improvable of human 
beings. Yet the experiment may still be defeated, not so much 
by the fanaticism of abolitionists, or the prejudices of those slave^ 
owners who are called perpetualists, who maintain that slavery 
should be permanent, and that it is a blessing in itself to the negro, 
but by the jealousy of an unscrupulous democracy invested with 
political power. Of the imminent nature of this peril, I was never 
fully aware, until I was startled by the publication of an act 
passed by the Legislature of Georgia during my visit to that 
state, December 27th, 1845. The following is the preamble 
and one of the clauses : 

" An act to prohibit colored mechanics and masons, being 
slaves, or free persons of color, being mechanics or masons, from 
making contracts for the erection of buildings, or for the repair 
of buildings, and declaring the white person or persons directly 
or indirectly contracting with or employing them, as well as the 
master, employer, manager, or agent for said slave, or guardian 
for said free person of color, authorizing or permitting the same, 
guilty of a misdemeanor," and prescribing punishment for the 
violation of this act. 

"Section 1. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of 
Representatives of the State of Georgia in General Assembly 
met, and it is hereby enacted by the authority of the same, That 
from and after the 1st day of February next, each and every 
white person who shall hereafter contract or bargain with any 
slave, mechanic, or mason, or free person of color, being a 
mechanic or mason, shall be liable to be indicted for a mis 
demeanor ; and, on conviction, to be fined, at the discretion of the 
Court, not exceeding two hundred dollars." 

Then follows another clause imposing the like penalties on the 
owners of slaves, or guardians of free persons of color, who au 
thorize the contracts prohibited by this statute. 

I may first observe, in regard to this disgraceful law, which 

D* 



82 DEGRADED POSITION OF NEGROES. [CHAP. XXV, 

was only carried by a small majority in the Georgian Legislature, 
that it proves that not a few of the negro race have got on so 
well in the world in reputation and fortune, and in skill in certain 
arts, that it was worth while to legislate against them in order 
to keep them down, and prevent them from entering into success 
ful rivalry with the whites. It confirms, therefore, most fully the 
impression which all I saw in Georgia had left on my mind, that 
the blacks are steadily rising in social importance in spite of slavery ; 
or, to speak more correctly, by aid of that institution, assuming, 
as it does, in proportion as the whites become civilized, a more 
and more mitigated form. In the next place I shall endeavor to 
explain to the English reader the real meaning of so extraordinary 
a decree. Mr. R. H. Wilde, formerly senator for Georgia, told me 
that he once knew a colored freeman who had been brought up as a 
saddler, and was a good workman. To his surprise he found him 
one day at Saratoga, in the State of New York, acting as servant at 
an hotel. " Could you not get higher wages," he inquired, " as a 
saddler ?" " Yes," answered he ; " but no sooner was I engaged by 
a < boss, than all the other workmen quitted." They did so, not be 
cause he was a slave, for he had long been emancipated, but because 
he was a negro. It is evident, therefore, that it requires in Georgia 
the force of a positive statute to deprive the negro, whether he be a 
freeman or slave, of those advantages from which, in a free state like 
New York, he is excluded, without any legislative interference. 

I have heard apologists in the north endeavoring to account for 
the degraded position which the negroes hold, socially and polit 
ically, in the free states, by saying they belong to a race which is 
kept in a state of slavery in the south. But, if they really desired 
to accelerate emancipation, they would begin by setting an example 
to the southern states, and treating the black race with more 
respect and more on a footing of equality. I once heard some 
Irish workmen complain in New York, " that the ni ggers shut 
them out from all the easiest ways of getting a livelihood ;" arid 
many white mechanics, who had emigrated from the north to the 
slave states, declared to me that every opening in their trades was 
closed to them, because black artisans were employed by their 
owners in preference. Hence, they are now using in Georgia the 



CHAP. XXV.] EFFECTS OF IMMEDIATE EMANCIPATION. 83 

power given to them by an exclusive franchise, to pass disabling 1 
statutes against the blacks, to prevent them from engaging in 
certain kinds of work. In several states, Virginia among others, 
I heard of strikes, where the white workmen bound themselves 
not to return to their employment until the master had discharged 
all his colored people. Such combinations will, no doubt, forward 
the substitution of white for negro labor, and may hasten the era 
of general emancipation. But if this measure be prematurely 
adopted, the negroes are a doomed race, and already their situa 
tion is most critical. I found a deep conviction prevailing in the 
minds of experienced slave-owners, of the injury which threatened 
them ; and, more than once, in Kentucky and elsewhere, in an 
swer to my suggestions, that the time for introducing free labor 
had come, they said, " I think so ; we must get rid of the negroes." 
"Do you not think," said I, "if you could send them all away, 
that some parts of the country would be depopulated, seeing how 
unhealthy the low grounds are for the whites ?" " Perhaps so," 
replied one planter, " but other regions would become more pro 
ductive by way of compensation ; the insalubrity of the Pontine 
marshes would be no excuse for negro slavery in Italy. All might 
end well," he added, "were it not that so many anti-slavery men 
in the north are as precipitate and impatient as if they believed, 
like the Milleritcs, that the world was coming to an end." 

One of the most reasonable advocates of immediate emancipa 
tion whom I met with in the north, said to rne, " You are like 
many of our politicians, who can look on one side only of a great 
question. Grant the possibility of these three millions of colored 
people, or even twelve millions of them fifty years hence, being 
capable of amalgamating with the whites, such a result might be 
to you perhaps, as a philanthropist or physiologist, a very inter 
esting experiment ; but would not the progress of the whites be 
retarded, and our race deteriorated, nearly in the same proportion 
as the negroes would gain ? Why not consider the interests of the 
white race by hastening the abolition of slavery. The whites con 
stitute nearly six-sevenths of our whole population. As a philan 
thropist, you arc bound to look to the greatest good of the two races 
collectively, or the advantage of the whole population of the Union." 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

"Return to Mobile. Excursion to the Shores of the Gulf of Mexico. View 
from Lighthouse. Mouth of Alabama River. Gnathodon inhabiting 
Brackish Water. Banks of these Fossil Shells far Inland. Miring of 
Cattle. Yellow Fever at Mobile in 1839. Fire in same Year. Voyage 
from Mobile to New Orleans. Movers to Texas. Lake Pontchartrain. 
Arrival at New Orleans. St. Louis Hotel. French Aspect of City. 
Carnival. Procession of Masks. 

Feb. 21, 1846. THERE had been some very cold weather in 
the beginning of the month in the upper country, the thermometer 
at Tuscaloosa having been down as low as 17 Fahr. ; yet, on 
our return to Mobile, we saw the signs of approaching spring, for 
on the banks of the Alabama river the deciduous cypress and 
cotton trees were putting out their leaves, and the beautiful 
scarlet seed-vessels of the red maple (Acer Drummondii) enliv 
ened the woods. 

Once more at Mobile, I was impatient to see, for the first 
time, the shores of the Gulf of Mexico, and therefore lost no time 
in making an excursion to the mouth of the Alabama River. I 
was fortunate in having as my companion the Rev. Dr. Hamilton, 
minister of the principal Presbyterian congregation, who was well 
acquainted with the natural history of this region. He drove me 
first to the lighthouse, where, from the top of the tower, we had 
a splendid view of the city to the north, and to the south the 
noble bay of Mobile, fourteen miles across. The keeper of the 
lighthouse looked sickly, which is not surprising, as he is living 
in a swamp in this region of malaria. It was his first year of 
residence, and the second year is said to be most trying to the 
constitution. The women, however, of his family, seemed healthy 
We then went to the sea-side, two miles to the eastward, and 
found the waters of the bay smooth and unrippled, like an ex 
tensive lake, the woods coming down every where to its edge, and 
the live oaks and long-leaved pines, with the buck-eye and several 



CHAP. XXVI.] VIEW FROM LIGHTHOUSE. 85 

other trees just beginning to put forth their young leaves. As the 
most northern countries I had visited in Europe Norway and 
Sweden were characterized by fir trees mingled with birch, I 
was surprised to find the most southern spot I had yet seen, a 
plain only a few feet above the level of the sea, almost equally 
characterized by a predominance of pines. On the ground I ob 
served a species of cactus, about one foot high, and the marshy 
spots were covered with the candleberry (My-rica carolinensis), 
resembling the species so common in the north, in the scent of 
its aromatic leaves, but thrice as high as I had seen it before. 
The most common plant in flower was the English chickweed 
(Cerastium vulgare), a truly cosmopolite species. 

A prodigious quantity of drift timber, of all sizes, and in every 
stage of decomposition, lay stranded far and wide along the shore. 
Many of the trunks of the trees had been floated a thousand miles 
and more down the Mississippi and its tributaries, and, after escaping 
by one of the many mouths of the great river, had drifted one hun 
dred and fifty miles eastward to this spot. The fact of their long 
immersion in salt water was sometimes proved by a dense coat of 
encrusting barnacles, the only marine shells we could find here, 
for the mollusks proper to this part of the bay are such as belong 
to fresh or brackish water, of the genera Cyrena, Gnathodon, and 
Neritina. Just before our visit, a north wind had been blowing 
and driving back the sea water for some days, and the bay was 
so freshened by the Alabama River pouring in at this season a full 
stream, that I could detect no brackish taste in the water. It 
is, in fact, so sweet here, that ships often resort to the spot to 
take in water. Yet there is a regular tide rising three feet every 
six hours, and, when the wind blows from the south, the waters 
are raised six or seven feet. 

After walking over a large expanse of ripple-marked sands, we 
came to banks of mud, inhabited by the bivalve shell called 
Gnathodon, some of which we dug up alive from a depth of 
about two inches from the surface. This part of the bay of Mobile 
is now the most northern locality of this remarkable brackish-water 
genus, but dead shells of the same species are traced many miles 
inland, forming banks three or four feet thick. They are called 



86 BANKS OF FOSSIL SHELLS. [CHAP. XXVI. 

clams hero in popular language, and, being thick and strong, 
afford a good material for road-making. From the same mud- 
bank we dug out a species of Cyrena, the only accompanying shell. 
In some places riot far off, a Neritina is also met with. As a 
geologist, I was much interested by observing the manner in 
which these shells were living in the mud of the delta of the 
Alabama River. The deposits formed by the advance of this arid 
other deltas along the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico, will 
be hereafter characterized by such shells in a fossil state, just as, 
in the Pampas, Mr. Darwin and M. A. D Orbigny found the 
brackish-water shell, called Azara labiat.a, marking far inland 
the position of ancient estuaries. Arid as, in South America, 
" the Pampean mud," described by Mr. Darwin,* is filled with 
the skeletons of the extinct Megatherium, Toxodon, arid other 
strange mammalia, so in the modern delta of the Alabama, the 
quadrupeds now inhabiting the southern shores of the United 
States will hereafter be met with buried in the same assemblage 
of deposits of rnud and sand as the Gn&thodon. I was told that 
in a great morass which we saw near the lighthouse some cattle 
had lately perished, arid for many days the turkey buzzards have 
been snatching parts of the dead carcasses out of the mud, watch 
ing their opportunity the moment the dogs, which are also preying 
on them, retire. Formerly the wolves used to prowl about these 
swamps in search of similar booty, tearing up portions of the 
mired cattle, arid in this manner we may expect that, while 
sonic skeletons, which have sunk deep into the softer mud, may 
be preserved entire, the bones of others will be scattered about 
where the wolves have gnawed thorn, or birds of prey have picked 
oil the flesh. 

On our way back to the town, at places a mile and a half 
from the sea, I examined some large banks of fossil shells of the 
G- tuitkodon, lying as if they had been washed up by the waves 
at a time when the coast-line extended only thus far south. I 
also found that the city of Mobile itself was built upon a similar 
bed of shells, in which no specimens of the Neritina occurred ; 
but I was told by Mr. Hale, that he has met with them in banks 
* Geolog. Ohs. on S. America (1846), p. 99. 



CHAP. XXVI.] YELLOW FEVER. 87 

much farther in the interior, and, as he truly remarked, they 
refute the theory which would refer such accumulations to the 
Indians, who, it is well known, were accustomed to feed on the 
Gnatkodon. The distinct stratification seen in some of the 
heaps of shells and sand at Mobile, also satisfied me that they 
were thrown up by the action of water. Mr. Hale gave me a 
map, in which he had laid down the localities of these beds of 
fossil Gnatliodon, some of which he has traced as far as twenty 
miles into the interior, the accumulations increasing 1 in thickness 
in the most elevated and inland situations, and containing 1 there 
an intermixture of the Neritince with the Cyrena, which last 
seems only to occur in the recent banks of mud and sand. Mr. 
Hale observes, " that the inland heaps of shells often rise so far 
above the level of the highest tides, that it seems difficult to ac 
count for their position simply by the advance of the delta, and 
without supposing that there has been a slight upheaval of the 
land." 

In the gardens at Mobile there were jonquils arid snowdrops 
in flower, and, for the first time, we saw that beautiful evergreen, 
the yellow jessamine (Gehcmium sempervirens), in full bloom, 
trailed along the wall of Dr. Hamilton s house. Its fragrance 
is delicious, more like that of our bind- weed than any other scent 
I could remember. It had not been injured by the late frost, 
although the thermometer at Mobile had been eight degrees below 
the freezing point. 

The citizens are beginning to flatter themselves that the yel 
low fever has worn itself out at Mobile, because the hot season 
of 1845 was so healthy both here and at New Orleans. Some 
medical men, indeed, confessed to me, that as the wind blew ibr 
many weeks from the north, passing over the marshes north of 
the city during the summer, without giving rise to the usual epi 
demic, all their former theories as to the origin of the pestilence 
have been refuted. It may still hold true, that to induce the 
disease, three causes must concur, namely, heat, a moist ground, 
and a decaying vegetation ; but it seems clear that all these may 
be present in their fullest intensity, and yet prove quite innocuous. 
The dangerous months are July, August, and September, and 



88 FIRE AT MOBILE. [CHAP. XXVI. 

great is the anxiety of those who then remain in the city. It is 
fearful to witness the struggle between the love of gain, tempting 
the merchant to continue at his post, and the terror of the plague, 
which causes him to stand always prepared for sudden flight. 
In 1839, such was the dismay, that only 3000 out of a popula 
tion of 16,000 tarried behind in the city. Dr. Hamilton, one 
of those who staid, told me that he knew not a single family, a 
member of which was not attacked by the disease. Out of the 
3000, 800 died. All the clergy remained faithful to their duties, 
and many of them perished. 

The yellow fever is not the only scourge which has frequently 
devastated Mobile. I found it slowly recovering, like so many 
other American cities, from the ravages of a great fire, which, in 
1839, laid the greater part of it in ashes. The fire broke out 
in so many places at once, as to give too much reason to suspect 
that it was the work of incendiaries seeking plunder. 

Feb. 23. The distance from Mobile to New Orleans is 175 
miles by what is called the inland passage, or the channel be 
tween the islands and the main land. We paid five dollars, or 
one guinea each, for berths in the " James L. Day" steamer, 
which made about nine miles an hour. Being on the low pres 
sure principle, she was so free from noise and vibration, that we 
could scarcely believe we were not in a sailing vessel. The 
stunning sounds and tremulous motions of the boats on the south 
ern rivers are at first so distracting, that I often wondered we 
could sleep soundly in them. The " James L. Day" is 185 feet 
long, drawing now five and a half feet water, and only seven feet 
when fully freighted. We sailed out of the beautiful bay of 
Mobile in the evening, in the coldest month of the year, yet the 
air was warm, and there was a haze like that of a summer s 
evening in England. Many gulls followed our ship, enticed by 
pieces of bread thrown out to them by the passengers, some of 
whom were displaying their skill in shooting the birds in mere 
wantonness. The stars were brilliant as the night came on, and 
we passed between the islands and main land, where the sea was 
as smooth as a lake. 

On board were many " movers," going to Texas with their 



CHAP. XXVI.] MOVERS TO TEXAS. 



slaves. One of them confessed to me, that he had been eaten 
out of Alabama by his negroes. He had no idea where he was 
going, but after settling his family at Houston, he said he should 
look out for a square league of good land to be had cheap. 
Another passenger had, a few weeks before, returned from Texas, 
much disappointed, and was holding forth in disparagement of 
the country for its want of wood and water, declaring that none 
could thrive there, unless they carne from the prairies of Illinois, 
and were inured to such privations. " Cotton," he said, " could 
only be raised on a few narrow strips of alluvial land near the 
rivers, and as these were not navigable by steamers, the crop, 
when raised, could not be carried to a market." He also com 
forted the mover with the assurance, " that there were swarms 
of buffalo flies to torment his horses, and sand flies to sting him 
and his family." To this the undismayed emigrant replied, 
" that when he first settled in Alabama, before the long grass 
and canes had been eaten down by his cattle, the insect pests 
were as great as they could be in Texas." He was, I found, 
one of those resolute pioneers of the wilderness, who, after build 
ing a log-house, clearing the forest, and improving some hundred 
acres of wild ground by years of labor, sells the farm, and mi 
grates again to another part of the uncleared forest, repeating 
this operation three or four times in the course of his life, and, 
though constantly growing richer, never disposed to take his ease. 
In pursuing this singular vocation, they who go southward from 
Virginia to North and South Carolina, and thence to Georgia 
and Alabama, follow, as if by instinct, the corresponding zones 
of country. The inhabitants of the red soil of the granitic region 
keep to their oak and hickory, the "crackers" of the tertiary pine- 
barrens to their light-wood, and they of the newest geological 
formations in the sea-islands to their fish and oysters. On reaching 
Texas, they are all of them at fault, which will surprise no geologist 
who has read Ferdinand R,oemer s account of the form which the 
cretaceous strata assume in that country, consisting of a hard, 
compact, siliceous limestone, which defies the decomposing action 
of the atmosphere, and forms table-lands of bare rock, so entirely 
unlike the marls, clay, and sands of the same age in Alabama. 



90 LAKE PONTCHARTRAIN. [CHAP. XXVI. 

On going down from the cabin to the lower deck, I found 
a slave-dealer with sixteen negroes to sell, most of them Vir 
ginians. I heard him decline an offer of 500 dollars for one of 
them, a price which he said he could have got for the man be 
fore he left his own state. 

Next morning at daylight we found ourselves in Louisiana. 
We had already entered the large lagoon, called Lake Pontchar- 
train, by a narrow passage, and, having skirted its southern 
shore, had reached a point six miles north of New Orleans. 
Here we disembarked, and entered the cars of a railway built on 
piles, which conveyed us in less than an hour to the great city, 
passing over swamps in which the tall cypress, hung with Span 
ish moss, was flourishing, and below it numerous shrubs just 
bursting into leaf. In many gardens of the suburbs, the almond 
and peach trees were in full blossom. In some places the blue- 
leaved palmetto, and the leaves of a species of iris (Iris cuprea), 
were very abundant. We saw a tavern called the " Elysian 
Fields Coffee House," and some others with French inscriptions. 
There were also many houses with porte-cocheres, high roofs, 
and volets, and many lamps suspended from ropes attached to 
tall posts on each side of the road, as in the French capital. 
We might indeed have fancied that we were approaching Paris, 
but for the negroes and mulattoes. and the large verandahs remind 
ing us that the windows required protection from the sun s heat. 

It was a pleasure to hear the French language spoken, and to 
have our thoughts recalled to the most civilized parts of Europe 
by the aspect of a city, forming so great a contrast to the innu 
merable new towns we had lately beheld. The foreign appear 
ance, moreover, of the inhabitants, made me feel thankful that 
it was possible to roam freely and without hindrance over so 
large a continent, no bureaus for examining and signing of 
passports, no fortifications, no drawbridges, no closing of gates at 
a fixed hour in the evening, no waiting till they are opened in 
the morning, no custom-houses separating one state from another, 
no overhauling of baggage by gens d armes for the octroi ; and yet 
as perfect a feeling of personal security as I ever felt in Germany 
or France. 



CHAP. XXVI. J NEW ORLEANS. 91 

The largest of the hotels, the St. Charles, being fuL, we ob 
tained agreeable apartments at the St. Louis, in a part of the 
town where we heard French constantly spoken. Our rooms 
were fitted up in the French style, with muslin curtains and 
scarlet draperies. There was a finely-proportioned drawing- 
room, furnished a la Louis Quatorze, opening into a large dining- 
room with sliding doors, where the boarders and the " transient 
visitors," as they are called in the United States, met at meals. 
The mistress of the hotel, a widow, presided at dinner, and we 
talked French with her and some of the attendants ; but most 
of the servants of the house were Trish or German. There was 
a beautiful ball-room, in which preparations were making for a 
grand masked ball, to be given the night after our arrival. 

It was the last day of the Carnival. From the time we 
landed in New England to this hour, we seemed to have been 
in a country where all, whether rich or poor, were laboring from 
morning till night, without ever indulging in a holiday. I had 
sometimes thought that the national motto should be, " All work 
and no play." It was quite a novelty and a refreshing sight to 
see a whole population giving up their minds for a short season 
to amusement. There was a grand procession parading the 
streets, almost every one dressed in the most grotesque attire, 
troops of them on horseback, some in open carriages, with bands 
of music, and in a variety of costumes, some as Indians, with 
feathers in their heads, and one, a jolly fat man, as Mardi Gras 
himself. All wore masks, and here and there in the crowd, or 
stationed in a balcony above, we saw persons armed with bags 
of flour, which they showered down copiously on any one who 
seemed particularly proud of his attire. The strangeness of the 
scene was not a little heightened by the blending of negroes, 
quadroons, and mulattoes in the crowd ; and we were amused 
by observing the ludicrous surprise, mixed with contempt, of 
several unmasked, stiff, grave Anglo-Americans from the north, 
who were witnessing for the first time what seemed to them so 
much mummery and torn-foolery. One wagoner, coming out of 
a cross street, in his working-dress, drove his team of horses and 
vehicle heavily laden with cotton bales right through the proces- 



92 THE CARNIVAL. [CHAP. XXVI. 

sion, causing a long interruption. The crowd seemed determined 
to allow nothing to disturb their good humor ; but although 
many of the wealthy Protestant citizens take part in the cere 
mony, this rude intrusion struck me as a kind of foreshadowing 
of coming events, emblematic of the violent shock which the in 
vasion of the Anglo-Americans is about to give to the old regime 
of Louisiana. A gentleman told me that, being last year in 
Rome, he had not seen so many masks at the Carnival there ; 
and, in spite of the increase of Protestants, he thought there had 
been quite as much " flour and fun" this year as usual. The 
proportion, however, of strict Romanists is not so great as for 
merly, and to-morrow, they say, when Lent begins, there will be 
an end of the trade in masks ; yet the butchers will sell nearly 
as much meat as ever. During the Carnival, the greater part 
of the French population keep open house, especially in the 
country. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

Catholic Cathedral, New Orleans. French Opera. Creole Ladies. 
Quadroons. Marriage of Whites with Quadroons. St. Charles Theater. 
English Pronunciation. Duelist s Grave. Ladies Ordinary. Pro 
cession of Fire Companies. Boasted Salubrity of New Orleans. Goods 
selling at Northern Prices. Mr. Wilde. Roman Law. Shifting of 
Capital to Baton Rouge. Debates in Houses of Legislature. Conven 
tion and Revision of the Laws. Policy of Periodical State Conventions. 
Judges cashiered. Limitation of their Term of Office. 

New Orleans, February, 1846. WALKING first over the 
most ancient part of the city, called the First Municipality, we 
entered the Place d Armes, and saw on one side of the square the 
old Spanish Government House, and opposite to it the Cathedral, 
or principal Catholic church, both in an antique style of archi 
tecture, and therefore strikingly unlike any thing we had seen for 
many months. Entering the church, which is always open, we 
found persons on their knees, as in Catholic countries, although it 
was not Sunday, and an extremely handsome quadroon woman 
coming out. 

In the evening we went to the French Opera, and were much 
pleased with the performance, the orchestra being the best in 
America. The audience were very quiet and orderly, which is 
said not to be always the case in some theaters here. The 
French creole ladies, many of them descended from Norman an 
cestors, and of pure unmixed blood, are very handsome. They 
were attired in Parisian fashion, not over dressed, usually not so 
thin as the generality of American women ; their luxuriant hair 
tastefully arranged, fastened with ornamental pins, and adorned 
simply with a colored ribbon or a single flower. My wife learnt 
from one of them afterward, that they usually pay, by the month, 
a quadroon female hairdresser, a refinement in which the richest 
ladies in Boston would not think of indulging. The word creole 
is used in Louisiana to express a native-born American, whether 



94 QUADROONS. [CHAP. XXVlt. 

black or white, descended from old-world parents, for they would 
not call the aboriginal Indians Creoles. It never means persons 
of mixed breed ; and the French or Spanish Creoles here would 
shrink as much as a New Englander from intermarriage with 
one tainted, in the slightest degree, with African blood. The 
frequent alliances of the Creoles, or Louisianians, of French ex 
traction, with lawyers and merchants from the northern states, 
help to cement the ties which are every day binding more firmly 
together the distant parts of the Union. Both races may be im 
proved by such connection, for the manners of the Creole ladies 
are, for the most part, more refined ; and many a Louisianian 
might justly have felt indignant if he could have overheard a 
conceited young bachelor from the north telling me "how much 
they were preferred by the fair sex to the hard-drinking, gambling, 
horse-racing, cock-fighting, and tobacco-chewing southerners." If 
the Creoles have less depth of character, and are less striving and 
ambitious than the New Englanders, it must be no slight source 
of happiness to the former to be so content with present advant 
ages. They seem to feel, far more than the Anglo-Saxons, that 
if riches be worth the winning, they are also worth enjoying. 

The quadroons, or the offspring of the whites and mulattoes, 
sat in an upper tier of boxes appropriated to them, When they 
are rich, they hold a peculiar and very equivocal position in so 
ciety. As children, they have often been sent to Paris for their 
education, and, being as capable of improvement as any whites, 
return with refined manners, and not unfrequently with more 
cultivated minds than the majority of those from whose society 
they are shut out. By the tyranny of caste they are driven, 
therefore, to form among themselves a select and exclusive set. 
Among other stories illustrating their social relation to the 
whites, we were told that a young man of the dominant race 
fell in love with a beautiful quadroon girl, who was so light- 
colored as to be scarcely distinguishable from one of pure breed. 
He found that, in order to render the marriage legal, he was re 
quired to swear that he himself had negro blood in his veins, 
and, that he might conscientiously take the oath, he let some of 
the blood of his betrothed into his veins with a lancet. The 



CHAP. XXVII.] ST. CHARLES THEATER. 95 

romance of this tale was, however, greatly diminished, although 
I fear that my inclination to believe in its truth was equally 
enhanced, when the additional circumstance was related, that 
the young lady was rich. 

Some part of the feeling prevailing in New England, in regard 
to the immorality of New Orleans, may be set down to the fact 
of their theaters being open every Sunday evening, which is no 
indication whatever of a disregard of religion on the part of the 
Catholics. The latter might, with as much reason, reflect on 
the Protestants for not keeping the doors of their churches open 
on week-days. But as a great number of the young mercantile 
men who sojourn here are from the north, and separated from 
their families, they are naturally tempted to frequent the theaters 
on Sundays ; and if they do so with a sense that they are violat 
ing propriety, or acting against what in their consciences they 
think right, the effect must be unfavorable to their moral char 
acter. 

During our stay here we passed a delightful evening in the 
St. Charles theater, seeing Mr. and Mrs. Kean in the " Game 
ster" and in " The Follies of a Night." Her acting of Mrs. 
Beverley was perfection ; every tone and gesture full of feeling, 
and always lady-like, never overwrought, in the most passionate 
parts. Charles Kean s acting, especially in Richard, has been 
eminently successful during his present tour in the United States. 

While at New Orleans, Mrs. Kean told my wife she had 
been complimented on speaking English so well ; and some won 
der had been expressed that she never omitted or misplaced her 
h s. In like manner, during our tour in New England, some of 
the natives, on learning that we habitually resided in London, 
exclaimed that they had never heard us confound our v s and w s. 
" The Pickwick Papers" have been so universally read in this 
country, that it is natural the Americans should imagine Sam 
Weller s pronunciation to be a type of that usually spoken in the 
old country, at least in and about the metropolis. In their turn, 
the English retaliate amply on American travelers in the British 
Isles : " You don t mean to say you are an American ? Is it 
possible ? I should never have discovered it, you speak English 



LADIES ORDINARY. [CHAP. XXVII. 



so well !" " Did you suppose that we had adopted some one of 
the Indian languages ?" " I really never thought about it; but 
it is wonderful to hear you talk like us !" 

Looking into the shop-windows in New Orleans, we see much 
which reminds us of Paris, and abundance of articles manufac 
tured in the northern states, but very few things characteristic 
of Louisiana. Among the latter I remarked, at a jeweler s, 
many alligators teeth polished and as white as ivory, and set in 
silver for infants to wear round their necks to rub against their 
gums when cutting their teeth, in the same way as they use a 
coral in England. 

The tombs in the cemeteries on the outskirts of the town are 
raised from the ground, in order that they may be above the 
swamps, and the coffins are placed in bins like those of a cellar. 
The water is seen standing on the soil at a lower level in many 
places ; there are often flowers and shrubs round the tombs, by 
the side of walks made of shells of the Gnathodon. Over the 
grave of one recently killed in a duel was a tablet, with the 
inscription " Mort, victime de 1 honneur !" Should any one 
propose to set up a similar tribute to the memory of a duelist at 
Mount Auburn, near Boston, a sensation would be created which 
would manifest how v/idely different is the state of public opinion 
in New England from that in the " First Municipality." 

Among the signs of the tacit recognition of an aristocracy in 
the large cities, is the manner in which persons of the richer and 
more refined classes associate together in the large hotels. There 
is one public table frequented by bachelors, commercial travelers, 
and gentlemen not accompanied by their wives and families, and 
a more expensive one, called the Ladies Ordinary, at which la 
dies, their husbands, and gentlemen whom they invite, have their 
meals. Some persons who occupy a marked position in society, 
such as our friend the ex-senator, Mr. Wilde, often obtain leave 
by favor to frequent this ordinary ; but the keepers of the hotels 
grant or decline the privilege, as they may think proper. 

A few days after the Carnival we had another opportunity of 
peeing a grand procession of the natives, without masks. The 
corps of all the different companies of firemen turned out in their 



CHAP. XXVII.] SALUBRITY OF NEW ORLEANS. 97 

uniform, drawing their engines dressed up with flowers, ribbons, 
and flags, and I never saw a finer set of young men. We could 
not help contrasting their healthy looks with the pale, sickly 
countenances of " the crackers," in the pine-woods of Georgia 
and Alabama, where we had been spending so many weeks. These 
men were almost all of them Creoles, and thoroughly acclima 
tized ; and I soon found that if I wished to ingratiate myself 
with natives or permanent settlers in this city, the less surprise 
I expressed at the robust aspect of these young Creoles the better. 
The late Mr. Sydney Smith advised an English friend who was 
going to reside some years in Edinburgh to praise the climate : 
" When you arrive there it may rain, snow, or blow for many 
days, and they will assure you they never knew such a season 
before. If you would be popular, declare you think it the most 
delightful climate in the world." When I first heard New Or 
leans commended for its salubrity, I could scarcely believe that 
my companions were in earnest, till a physician put into my 
hands a statistical table, recently published in a medical maga 
zine, proving that in the year 1845 the mortality in the metrop 
olis of Louisiana was 1-850, whereas that of Boston was 2-250, 
or, in other words, while the capital of Massachusetts lost 1 out 
of 44 inhabitants, New Orleans lost only 1 in 54 ; "yet the 
year 1845," said he, " was one of great heat, and when a wider 
area than usual was flooded by the river, and exposed to evapor 
ation under a hot sun." 

It appears that when New Orleans is empty in the summer 
in other words, when all the strangers, about 40,000 in number, 
go into the country, and many of them to the north, fearing the 
yellow fever, the city still contains between 80,000 and 100,000 
inhabitants, who never suffer from the dreaded disease, whether 
they be of European or African origin. If, therefore, it be fair 
to measure the salubrity of a district by its adaptation to the 
constitutions of natives rather than foreigners, the claim set up 
for superior healthiness may be less preposterous than at first it 
sounded to my ears. I asked an Irishman if the summer heat 
was intolerable. You would have something else to think of in 
the hot months," said he, " for there is one set of musquitoes who 
VOL. n. E 



98 GOODS AT NORTHERN PRICES. [CHAP. XXVII. 

sting you all day, and when they go in toward dusk, another 
kind comes out and bites you all night." 

The desertion of the city for five months by so many of the 
richer residents, causes the hotels, and the prices of almost every 
article in shops, to be very dear during the remainder of the year. 
" Goods selling at northern prices" is a common form of adver 
tisement, showing how high is the usual cost of all things in this 
city. The Irish servants in the hotel assure us that they can 
not save, in spite of their high wages, for, whatever money they 
put by soon goes to pay the doctor s bill, during attacks of chill 
and fever. 

Hearing that a Guide-book of New Orleans had been publish 
ed, we wished to purchase a copy, although it was of somewhat 
ancient date for a city of rapid growth. The bookseller said that 
we must wait till he received some more copies from New York, 
for it appears that the printing even of books of local interest is 
done by presses 2000 miles distant. Their law reports are not 
printed here, and there is only one newspaper in the First Mu 
nicipality, which I was told as very characteristic of the French 
race ; for, in the Second Municipality, although so much newer, 
the Anglo-Americans have, during the last ten years, started ten 
newspapers. 

We were very fortunate in finding our old friend, Mr. Richard 
Henry Wilde, residing in the same hotel, for he had lately estab 
lished himself iri New Orleans, and was practicing in the courts 
of civil law with success. The Roman law, originally introduced 
into the courts here by the first settlers, was afterward modified 
by the French, and assimilated to the Code Napoleon, and finally, 
by modern innovations, brought more and more into accordance 
with the common law of England. Texas, in her new constitu 
tion, and even some of the older states, those of New England 
not excepted, have borrowed several improvements from the Ro 
man law. Among these is the securing to married women rights 
in property, real and personal, so as to protect them from the 
debts of their husbands, and enable them to dispose of their own 
property. 

Mr. Wilde took me to the Houses of the Legislature, where a 



CHAP. XXV1I.J HOUSES OF LEGISLATURE. 99 

discussion was going on as to the propriety of changing the seat 
of government from New Orleans to some other place in Louisi 
ana, for it had been determined, though by a majority of one 
only, in a convention appointed for that purpose, that they should 
go somewhere else, to a place at least sixty miles distant from 
the metropolis. I remarked, that the accessibility of New Or 
leans was so great, and so many must be drawn to it by business, 
that the determination to seek out a new site for a capital, seemed 
to me incomprehensible. " You will wonder still more," he re 
plied, " when I tell you, that when the convention had been some 
time at Baton Rouge to frame the new constitution, they thought 
it advisable to adjourn to New Orleans, where they could consult 
with lawyers who were attending the courts, and with the prin 
cipal merchants, and where they might have access to good libra 
ries, and be in daily communication by steam with all parts of 
the state. In short, they found that for the faithful discharge of 
their task, they stood in need of a great variety of information 
which they could obtain nowhere so readily as in the metropolis. 
Yet it seems never to have struck them that our future law 
makers might, with equal profit to the state, derive knowledge 
from the same sources." 

In the House of Representatives, English is spoken exclusively, 
but in the Senate many were addressing the House in French, 
and when they sat down an interpreter rose and repeated the 
whole speech over again in English. An orator was on his legs, 
maintaining that Baton Rouge had the best claims to become the 
future capital, a proposition soon afterward adopted by the major 
ity. Another contended that Donaldson ville ought to be the 
place, as it would suit the convenience of 26,000 white male 
citizens, while Baton Rouge would only favor the interest of 
12,000. This line of argument seemed to me to contain in it 
an implied censure on the abandonment of New Orleans, but 
that was no longer an open question. When I afterward saw 
the insignificant village of Donaldsonville, I could not help being 
diverted at the recollection of the inflated terms in which its 
future prospects had been dwelt upon. The speaker said, "He 
liked to lift the vail off the face of futurity and contemplate the 



100 CHANGING SITE OF CAPITAL. [CHAP. XXVII. 

gigantic strides to wealth, population and power, which that city 
was destined to make ; he liked to behold it in imagination, as it 
will be in reality, built up from the bank of the river to the mar 
gin of the lake, sustaining and supporting a happy, industrious, 
and enterprising population of millions, and being at the same 
time the great emporium of the trade and commerce of the world." 

Although I talked much with Louisianiaris of different classes 
in society, as to their reasons for changing the site of the capital, 
I never could satisfy myself that I had fathomed the truth, and 
suspect that a spirit of envy and antagonism of country against 
town lies more at the bottom of the measure than they were 
willing to confess, aggravated, perhaps, in this case, by the rivalry 
of two races. No one pretended that they wished to retreat to 
a village, from fear that the populace, or mob, of New Orleans 
might control the free action of the representative body. Some 
told me, that as their members received pay, they were desirous 
of taking away from them all temptations to protract the session, 
which the charms of a luxurious metropolis afforded. They also 
affirmed that, by living in so dear a place, their representatives 
acquired extravagant notions in regard to the expenditure of pub 
lic money, and that they were exposed to the influence of rich 
merchants and capitalists, who gave them good dinners, and 
brought them round to their opinions. 

I asked if a convention for remodeling the constitution had 
been called for. My informants were generally disposed to think 
that the time had arrived when such a re-cast of the old system 
had become unavoidable. The recurrence, they said, of such 
conventions every twenty-five or thirty years, might seem to 
European politicians to imply a wish to perpetuate an experi 
mental state of things ; but where the population had quadrupled 
since the last convention where thousands of emigrants had 
poured in from various states, the majority of them speaking a 
new language, and introducing a new code of laws, into the Sec 
ond Municipality where circumstances connected with their 
social, religious, political, and financial affairs had so altered in 
a word, where they were unavoidably in a transition state, the 
best way of guarding against revolutionary movements was to 



CHAP. XXVII.] JUDGES CASHIERED. 101 

settle on some fixed periods for revising the constitution, and in 
quiring whether any organic changes were indispensable. 

Among other violent proceedings, I found that the late conven 
tion had cashiered all the judges of the Supreme Court, although 
they had been appointed for life, or " quamdiu se bene gesserint," 
and with very high salaries. They were to have no retiring 
pensions, and this I remarked was an iniquity, as some of them 
had doubtless given up a lucrative practice on the faith of enjoy 
ing a seat on the bench for life. Some lawyers agreed that the 
measure was indefensible, and said they presumed that, in the 
end, the democratic party would elect all the judges annually, by 
universal suffrage. I met, however, with optimists who were 
ready to defend every act of the convention. Several of the 
judges, they said, were superannuated, and it would have been 
invidious to single them out, and force them to resign. It was 
better to dismiss the whole. " As for retiring pensions, we hold, 
with your Jeremy Bentham, that no man can acquire a vested 
right in a public injury. Men are apt, when they have retained 
possession of an office for a great part of their lives, to think they 
own it." " But what is to become of the judges," said I, " who 

are thus cast off without pensions ?" " Old Judge A ," he 

replied, " owns a plantation, and will go and farm it. Judge 

B will probably get a professor s chair in the new Law 

University ;" and so he went on, providing for all of them. " In 
future," he continued, " our judges are to be appointed by the 
Governor and Senate, with good salaries, for eight years ; those 
first named being for two, four, six, and eight years, so that they 
may go out in rotation ; but members of the Legislature can not 
be raised to the bench, as in Great Britain." I objected, that 
such a system might render a judge who desired to be re-elected 
subservient to the party in power, or at least open to such an im 
putation. " No doubt," he rejoined ; " as in the case of your 
judges, who may be promoted to higher posts on the bench. As 
to the corrupting influence of their dependence on a legislature 
chosen by a widely-extended suffrage, many of your mayors and 
aldermen are elected for short terms, and exercise judicial func 
tions in England." 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

Negroes not Attacked by Yellow Fever. History of Mr. Wilde s Poem. 
The Market, New Orleans. Motley Character of Population. Levee 
and Steamers. First Sight of Mississippi River. View from the Cupola 
of the St. Charles. Site of New Orleans. Excursion to Lake Pontchar- 
train. Shell Road. Heaps of Gnathodon. Excavation for Gas- Works. 
Buried Upright Trees. Pere Antoine s Date-palm. 

BEFORE we left New Orleans Mr. Wilde received a message 
from his negroes, whom he had left behind at Augusta, in Georgia, 
entreating him to send for them. They had felt, it seems, some 
what hurt and slighted at not having been sooner permitted to 
join him. He told us that he was only waiting for a favorable 
season to transplant them, for he feared that men of color, when 
they had been acclimatized for several generations in so cool a 
country as the upper parts of Alabama and Georgia, might run 
great risk of the yellow fever, although the medical men here as 
sured him that a slight admixture of negro blood sufficed to make 
them proof against this scourge. 

" No one," he said, " feels safe here, who has not survived an 
attack of the fever, or escaped unharmed while it has been rag 
ing." He mentioned the belief of some theorists, that the com 
plaint was caused by invisible animalcules, a notion agreeing sin 
gularly with that of many Romans in regard to the malaria of 
Italy. 

The year following this conversation, our excellent friend was 
himself carried off by this fatal disease. He is well known to 
the literary world as the author of a work on the " Love and 
Madness of Tasso," published in 1842, and perhaps still more 
generally by some beautiful lines, beginning " My life is like the 
summer rose," which are usually supposed to have derived their 
tone of touching melancholy, from his grief at the sudden death 
of a brother, and soon after of a mother, who never recovered the 
shock of her son s death. As there had been so much contro- 



CHAP. XXVIII.] MR. WILDE S POEM. 103 

versy about this short poem, we asked Mr. Wilde to relate to us 
its true history, which is curious. He had been one of a party 
at Savannah, when the question was raised whether a certain 
professor of the University of Georgia understood Greek ; on 
which one of his companions undertook to translate Mr. Wilde s 
verses, called " The Complaint of the Captive," into Greek prose, 
so arranged as to appear like verse, and then see if he could pass 
it off upon the Professor as a fragment of AlcaBus. The trick 
succeeded, although the Professor said that not having the works 
of Alcseus at hand, he could not feel sure that the poem was 
really his. It was then sent, without the knowledge of Mr. 
Wilde and his friends, to a periodical at New York, and pub 
lished as a fragment from Alcseus, and the Senator for Georgia 
was vehemently attacked by his political opponents, for having 
passed off a translation from the Greek as an original composi 
tion of his own. 

Soon after this affair, Captain Basil Hall mentioned in his 
" Schloss Hainfeld" (chap, x.), that the Countess Purgstall had 
read the lines to him, and would not tell him who was the au 
thor, but he had little doubt that she had written them herself. 
The verses had become so popular that they were set to music, 
and the name of Tampa, a desolate sea-beach on the coast of 
Florida, was changed into Tempe, the loveliest of the wooded 
valleys of Greece, in the concluding stanza : 

" My life is like the prints which feet 

Have left on Tampa s desert strand ; 
Soon as the rising tide shall beat, 

All trace will vanish from the sand. 
Yet, as if grieving to efface 
All vestige of the human race, 
On that lone shore loud moans the sea, 
But none, alas ! shall mourn for me !" 

In the countess s version Zara had been substituted for Tampa. 

During our stay in New Orleans, Mr. Wilde introduced us to 
his friend Mr. Clay, the Whig candidate in the late presidential 
election, and I was glad of the opportunity of conversing with 
this distinguished statesman. In the principal Episcopal church 
we were very fortunate in hearing Dr. Hawkes preach, and 



104 THE MARKET, NEW ORLEANS. [CHAP. XXVIII. 

thought the matter and manner of his discourse deserving of his 
high reputation for pulpit eloquence. 

One morning we rose early to visit the market of the First 
Municipality, and found the air on the bank of the Mississippi 
filled with mist as dense as a London fog, hut of a pure white 
instead of yellow color. Through this atmosphere the innumera 
ble masts of the ships alongside the wharf, were dimly seen. 
Among other fruits in the market we observed abundance of ba 
nanas, and good pine-apples, for 25 cents (or a shilling) each, 
from the West Indies. There were stalls where hot coffee was 
selling in white china cups, reminding us of Paris. Among 
other articles exposed for sale, were brooms made of palmetto 
leaves, and wagon-loads of the dried Spanish moss, or Tillandma. 
The quantity of this plant hanging from the trees in the swamps 
surrounding New Orleans, and every where in the delta of the 
Mississippi, might suffice to stuff all the mattresses in the world. 
The Indians formerly used it for another purpose to give poros 
ity or lightness to their building materials. When at Natchez, 
Dr. Dickeson showed me some bricks dug out of an old Indian 
mound, in which the tough woody fiber of the Tillandsia was 
still preserved. When passing through the stalls, we were sur 
rounded by a population of negroes, mulattoes, and quadroons, some 
talking French, others a patois of Spanish and French, others a 
mixture of French and English, or English translated from French, 
and with the French accent. They seemed very merry, espe 
cially those who were jet black. Some of the Creoles also, both 
of French and Spanish extraction, like many natives of the south 
of Europe, were very dark. 

Amid this motley group, sprung from so many races, we en 
countered a young man and woman, arm-in-arm, of fair complex 
ion, evidently Anglo-Saxon, and who looked as if they had recently 
come from the north. The Indians, Spaniards, and French stand 
ing round them, seemed as if placed there to remind us of the suc 
cessive races whose power in Louisiana had passed away, while 
this fair couple were the representatives of a people whose domin 
ion carries the imagination far into the future. However much 
the moralist may satirize the spirit of conquest, or the foreigner 



CHAP. XXVIII.] VIEW OF CITY. 105 

laugh at some vain-glorious boasting about " our destiny," none 
can doubt that from this stock is to spring the people who will 
supersede every other in the northern, if not also in the southern 
continent of America : 

" Immota manebunt 

Fata tibi .... 

Romanes rerum dominos." 

Soon after our arrival we walked to the levee, or raised bank 
of the Mississippi, and, ascending to the top of the high roof of a 
large steamer, looked down upon the yellow muddy stream., not 
much broader than the Thames at London. At first I was dis 
appointed that the " Father of Waters" did not present a more 
imposing aspect ; but when I had studied and contemplated the 
Mississippi for many weeks, it left on my mind an impression of 
grandeur and vastness far greater than I had conceived before 
seeing it. We counted thirty-four large steam-ships lying at the 
wharf, each with their double chimneys, and some of truly mag 
nificent dimensions. The vessel we had chanced to enter, had 
her steam up and was bound for St. Louis, and we were informed 
that she would convey us to that city, a distance of 1100 miles, 
in five days, against the current, for eighteen dollars, or 4/., board 
included. 

We next went, for the sake of obtaining a genera] view of the 
city and its environs, to the top of the cupola of the St. Charles 
Hotel, the most conspicuous building in New Orleans, finished in 
183G, the lofty dome of which is of a beautiful form. Within 
the memory of persons now living, there were to be seen on the 
site of this massive edifice, ducks and other water birds, swim 
ming about in pools of water, in a morass. The architect began 
the foundation by placing horizontally on the mud a layer of 
broad planks two and a half inches thick ; in spite of which, the- 
heavy building has sunk slightly in some places, but apparently 
without sustaining material injury. 

If a traveler has expected, on first obtaining an extensive view 
of the environs of this city, to see an unsightly swamp, with 
scarcely any objects to relieve the monotony of the flat plain save 
the winding river and a few lakes, he will fee agreeably disap- 

E* 



106 SITE OF NEW ORLEANS. [CHAP. XXVIII. 

pointed. He will admire many a villa and garden in the sub 
urbs, and in the uncultivated space beyond, the effect of uneven 
and undulating ground is produced by the magnificent growth of 
cypress and other swamp timber, which have converted what 
would otherwise have formed the lowest points in the landscape 
into the appearance of wooded eminences. From the gallery of 
the cupola we saw the well-proportioned, massive square tower 
of St. Patrick s Church, recently built for the Irish Catholics, the 
dome of the St. Louis Hotel, and immediately below us that fine 
bend of the Mississippi, where we had just counted the steamers 
at the wharf. Here, in a convex curve of the bank, there has 
been a constant gain of land, so that in the last twenty-five years 
no less than three streets have been erected, one beyond the oth 
er, and all within the line of several large posts of cedar, to which 
boats were formerly attached. New Orleans was called the 
Crescent City, because the First Municipality was built along 
this concave bend of the Mississippi. The river in this part of 
its course varies in breadth from a mile to three-quarters of a mile, 
and below the city sweeps round a curve for eighteen miles, and 
then returns again to a point within five or six miles of that from 
which it had set out. Some engineers are of opinion that as the 
isthmus thus formed is only occupied by a low marsh, the cur 
rent will in time cut through it, in which case the First Munic 
ipality will be deserted by the main channel. Even should this 
happen, the prosperity of a city which extends continuously for 
more than six miles along the river would not be materially af 
fected, for its site has been admirably chosen, although originally 
determined in some degree by chance. The French began their 
settlements on Lake Pontchartrain because they found there an 
easy communication with the Gulf of Mexico. But they fixed 
the site of their town on that part of the great river which was 
nearest to the lagoon, so as to command, by this means, the nav 
igation of the interior country. 

March 5, 1846. From New Orleans I made a short excur 
sion with Dr. Carpenter and Dr. M Cormac to Lake Pontchar 
train, six miles to the northward. We went first along the 
shell road" by the Bayou St, John s, and then returned by the 



CHAP. XXVIII.] HEAPS OF GNATHODON. 107 



canal. The shell road, so called from the materials used in. its 
construction, namely, the valves of the Gnathodon cuneatus, 
before mentioned, is of a dazzling white color, and in the bright 
sunshine formed a strong contrast with the vegetation of the ad 
joining swamps. Yet the verdure of the tail cypresses is some 
what dimmed by the somber color of the gray Spanish moss hang 
ing every where from its boughs like drapery. The rich clusters 
of scarlet and purplish fruit of the red maple (Acer Drummondii) 
were very conspicuous, and the willows have just unfolded their 
apple-green leaves. The swamp palmetto ( Chamcerops adanso- 
nia) raises its fan-shaped leaves ten feet high, although without 
any main trunk, like the sea-island palmetto before described. 
Several of them are surmounted by spikes bearing seeds. Among 
the spring flowers we gathered violets ( Viola cuculata), the ele 
gant Housto?iia serpyllifolia, which we had first seen at Clai- 
borne, and a white bramble (Rubus, trivialis), the odor of which 
resembles that of our primrose. The common white clover, also, 
is most abundant here, as on the banks of the Mississippi, below 
New Orleans ; yet it is not a native of Louisiana, and some bot 
anists doubt whether any of the European species now growing 
wild in this state are indigenous. 

Lake Pontchartrain is about fifteen feet below high water, and 
two feet below the lowest water of the Mississippi. It is said to 
have become sensibly shallower in the last forty years, its depth 
being now fourteen or fifteen feet only, for it receives annual sup 
plies of mud from the Mississippi, poured into it by one of its 
mouths, called the Iberville River. 

The southeast wind sometimes drives the salt water into the 
great lagoon, and raises its level from five to ten feet. On a mud 
bank near the shore I observed the living Gnathodon, accom 
panied by a modiola (JDreissena ?), and there was a small bank 
of dead shells on the southern borders of the lake, which may 
have been thrown up by the waves in a storm, the valves of most 
of them being separate. I learned that the road materials before 
spoken of were procured from the east end, where there is an 
enormous mound of dead shells, a mile long, fifteen feet high, and 
from twenty to sixty yards broad. Dr. Riddell, Director of the 



108 EXCAVATION FOR GAS-WORKS. [CHAP. XXVIH 

Mint at New Orleans, estimates the height of some of these shell 
banks north of the lake, at twenty feet above its level ; yet h$ 
thinks they may have been washed up by the waves during 
storms. I suspect, however, that some change in the relative 
level of land and sea has taken place since their accumulation. 
Dr. M Cormac informed jne that he had observed heaps of these 
same shells recently cast up along the margin of the bay called 
the Sabine Lake, where the waters of the delta are brackish. 

Returning to the bayou, we passed a splendid grove of live 
oaks on the Mctairie ridge, supposed by some to be an old bank 
of the Mississippi. These bayous, which traverse the delta and 
alluvial plain of the Mississippi in every direction, are some of 
them ancient arms of the great river, and others parts of its main 
channel which have been deserted. They are at a lower level 
than the present bed of the river, and convey the surface-waters 
to the sea from that part of the land which the Mississippi is 
incapable of draining. The bayous are sometimes stagnant, and 
sometimes they flow in one direction when they convey the sur 
plus waters of the Mississippi to the swamps, and in an opposite 
direction at seasons when they drain the swarnps. 

When we reached the canal which connects Lake Pontchar- 
train with New Orleans, we found its surface enlivened with the 
sails of vessels laden with merchandize. On the stern of one of 
these I read, in large letters, a favorite name here " The Dem 
ocrat." Many features of the country reminded me of Holland. 
About a mile from the city we passed a building where there is 
steam machinery for pumping up water and draining the low 
lands. 

It is not easy for a geologist who wishes to study the modern 
deposits in the delta, to find any natural sections. I was there 
fore glad to learn that, in digging the foundations of the gas-works, 
an excavation had been made more than fifteen feet deep, and 
therefore considerably below the level of the Gulf, for the land at 
New Orleans is elevated only nine feet above the sea. The con 
tractors had first hired Irishmen, with spades, to dig this pit ; 
but finding that they had to cut through buried timber, instead 
of soil, they were compelled to engage, instead, 150 well-prac- 



CHAP. XXVIII.] BURIED UPRIGHT TREES. 109 

ticed ax-men from Kentucky. I am informed that the superin 
tendent of the gas-works, Dr. Rogers, who is now absent in Cuba, 
endeavored to estimate the minimum of time required for the 
growth of the cypress and other trees, superimposed one upon 
the other, in an upright position, with their roots as they grew, 
and had come to the opinion, that eighteen centuries must hava 
been required for the accumulation. At the time of my visit the 
section was too obscure to enable me to verify or criticise these 
conclusions ; but Mr. Bringier, the state surveyor, told me that 
when the great canal, before alluded to, was dug to the depth of 
nine feet from Lake Pontchartrain, they had cut through a cy 
press swamp which had evidently filled up gradually, for there 
were three tiers of the stumps of trees, some of them very old, 
ranged one above the other ; and some of the trunks must have 
rotted away to the level of the ground in the swamp before the 
tipper ones grew over them. If it be true, as I suspect from 
these statements, that the stools of trees which grew in fresh 
water can be traced down to a level below the Gulf of Mexico, 
we must conclude that the land has sunk down vertically. Per 
haps some part of this subsidence might arise from the gradual 
decay or compression of large masses of wood slowly changing 
into lignite, for carbonated hydrogen is said to be constantly given 
out from the soil here wherever such masses of vegetable matter 
are decomposing ; and during the excavation of these works much 
inflammable gas was observed to escape. That such upright 
buried trees are not every where to be met with in this part of 
the delta, I ascertained from Mr. Bringier. At his house, in the 
suburbs of New Orleans, a well has been sunk to the depth of 
twenty-seven feet, and the strata passed through consisted of sandy 
clay, with only here and there some buried timber and roots. 

Walking through one of the streets of New Orleans, near the 
river, immediately north of the Catholic cathedral, I was surprised 
to see a fine date-palm, thirty feet high, growing in the open air. 
(See fig. 8.) 

Mr. Wilde told me, that in 1829, in the island of Anastatio, 
opposite St. Augustine, in Florida, he saw one still taller, proba 
bly brought there by the Spaniards, who have introduced them 



110 



DATE-PALM. 



[CHAP. XXVIII. 



into the south of Spain from Africa. The tree is seventy or 
eighty years old, for Pere Antoine, a Roman Catholic priest, 
who died about twenty years ago, at the age of eighty, told Mr. 
Bringier that he planted it himself, when he was young. In his 
will he provided, that they who succeeded to this lot of ground 
should forfeit it if they cut down the palm. Wishing to know 
something of Pere Antoine s history, I asked a Catholic Creole, 
who had a great veneration for him, when he died. He said it 
could never be ascertained, because, after he became very emaci 
ated, he walked the streets like a mummy, and gradually dried 
up, ceasing at last to move ; but his flesh never decayed, or em 
itted any disagreeable odour. 

Fig. 8. 




Pere Antoine s Date-palm (Phoenix dactylifera). 

If the people here wish to adorn their metropolis with a striking 
ornament, such as the northern cities can never emulate, let them 
plant in one of their public squares an avenue of these date-palms. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

Excursion from New Orleans to the Mouths of the River. Steam-Boat 
Accidents. River Fogs. Successive Growths of Willow on River Bank. 
Pilot-Station of the Balize. Lighthouse destroyed by Hurricane. 
Reeds, Shells, and Birds on Mud-Banks. Drift- Wood. Difficulty of 
estimating the annual Increase of Delta. Action of Tides and Currents. 
Tendency in the old Soundings to be restored. Changes of Mouths in 
a Century inconsiderable. Return to New Orleans. Battle-Ground. 
Sugar-Mill. Contrast of French and Anglo-American Races. Causes 
of Difference. State and Progress of Negroes in Louisiana. 

Feb. 28, 1846. BEFORE my arrival at New Orleans, I had 
resolved to visit the mouths of the Mississippi, and see the banks 
of sand, mud, and drift timber, recently formed there during the 
annual inundations. Dr. William Carpenter, although iri full 
practice as a physician, kindly offered to accompany me, and his 
knowledge of botany and geology, as well as his amiable manners, 
made him a most useful and agreeable companion.* 

I had heard much of the dangers of the Mississippi, and even 
before I left New England, some of my friends, partly in jest, 
and partly for the sake of inspiring me with due caution, in the 
choice of vessels and captains, had told me endless stories of the 
risks we should run. One of them presented to me a newspaper, 
containing a formidable array of last year s casualties. Fifty 
vessels had been snagged, twenty-seven sunk, sixteen had burst 
their boilers, fifteen had been run into by other vessels, thirteen 
destroyed by fire, ten wrecked, and seven cut through by ice. 
This enumeration was followed by an account of the number of 
persons drowned or injured. Another friend called my attention 
to a form of advertisement, not uncommon in the St. Louis papers, 
headed thus, " A fine opportunity of going below." This, he 
explained, " does not mean going to the bottom, as you might 

* This excellent naturalist, I regret to say, died soon afterward, in the 
prime of life, at New Orleans, in 1848. 



112 STEAM-BOAT ACCIDENTS. [CHAP. XXIX. 

naturally conclude (although this is by no means an improbable 
result of your voyage), but it merely signifies going down the 
river. " Another offered this piece of advice, " When you are 
racing with an opposition steam-boat, or chasing her, and the 
other passengers are cheering the captain, who is sitting on the 
safety valve to keep it down with his weight, go as far as you 
can from the engine, and lose no time, especially if you hear the 
captain exclaim, Fire up boys, put on the resin ! Should a 
servant call out, Those gentlemen who have not paid their 
passage will please to go to the ladies cabin, obey the summons 
without a moment s delay, for then an explosion may be appre 
hended." " Why to the ladies s cabin ?" said I. " Because it 
is the safe end of the boat, and they are getting anxious for the 
personal security of those who have not yet paid their dollars, 
being, of course, indifferent about the rest. Therefore never pay 
in advance, for should you fall overboard during a race, and the 
watch cries out to the captain, A passenger overboard, he will 
ask, Has he paid his passage ? and if he receives an answer in 
the affirmative, he will call out, Go ahead ! " 

I shall explain in the sequel why the danger of accidents, in 
the present state of the navigation, is by no means so great as 
statistical tables make it appear at a distance ; but certainly my 
first day s experience was not of a character to dispose me to 
regard the warnings I had received as idle or uncalled for. 
After we had been seated for half an hour on the deck of the 
" Wave" steamer, Dr. Carpenter was recommended by a friend 
to go by preference in a rival boat, just ready to start for the 
Balize, which he said was safer. We accordingly went into 
her, and she sailed first. Eight hours afterward, while we were 
waiting, as I thought, an unconscionable time, at a landing, while 
a Creole proprietor, who was by no means inclined to be in a 
hurry, was embarking himself and some black servants, we saw 
the rival steamer come up very slowly. No sooner had she 
joined us, than all her passengers poured into our steamer, and 
told us they had been in the greatest alarm, their steam-pipe 
having burst ; but, most providentially, they had all escaped 
without serious injury. If I had not already sailed about 1500 



CHAP. XXIX.] RTVER FOGS. 113 

miles in southern steamboats, since leaving South Carolina, with 
out a mischance, I might have looked on this adventure as very 
ominous. 

The greater part of New Orleans would be annually over- 
flowed by the river, but for the " levee," an artificial embank 
ment, eight or nine feet high, which protects the city. This 
levee became less and less elevated as we descended the stream. 
We saw the buildings of several sugar plantations just behind it, at 
a short distance from the edge of the bank. When we had gone 
about twenty miles, below the bend called the English turn, I 
was struck with the resemblance of the Mississippi to the Savan 
nah, Alabama, and Altamaha rivers, where they flow through 
a broad alluvial plain, with no bluffs in sight. The swamps on 
both sides, although several feet lower than the river banks, have 
the aspect, as before stated, of wooded eminences. 

The distance from New Orleans to the great pilot-station at 
the mouth of the river, called the Balize, is about 80 miles by 
land, and 1 1 by water. We had been told we should reach 
our destination before night ; but we were scarcely half way, 
when we cast anchor in a dense fog, followed in the course of 
the night, by much lightning and rain. We found the tempera 
ture of the water to be 46 Fahrenheit, while that of the air had 
varied, in the course of twenty-four hours, from 50 to 75. This 
difference between the temperature of the water and air, often 
amounting to 3 Fahrenheit, gives rise to the fogs which prevail 
at this season. The river flowing from the north, where there is 
now much ice and snow, is always much colder, and I am in 
formed by pilots, that as far as the Mississippi water can be 
traced, by its color, into the gulf, it is commonly covered, in the 
spring, with dense fog, while the atmosphere is clear on each 
side. These fogs are generated in the same manner as ordinary 
clouds, by the mixture of two currents of air of different degrees 
of temperature. The river cools the air in contact with its sur 
face, and this colder layer of air mingling with the warmer layer 
immediately over it, causes the fog to begin to form close to the 
water. Hence it is frequently confined to the bed of the river, 
not spreading at all over the banks. The upper surface is often 



114 PUMICE ON THE MISSISSIPPI. [CHAP. XXIX. 

as well defined as if it were a bed of liquid, instead of vapor, and 
the cabin, roof, and funnels of a steamer may be seen moving 
along perfectly imobscured, while the hull and lower parts are 
as completely hidden as if buried beneath the turbid water on 
which it floats. The pilot, too, from the upper deck, can often 
see the shore and landmarks with perfect clearness, and steer his 
vessel with safety, while the passengers on the cabin deck can see 
nothing beyond the sides of the boat. The fogs form sometimes 
whatever be the quarter from which the wind blows, but are 
more frequent when it is from the south, as the air is then the 
warmest. Pieces of ice rarely floated down below Natchez, 
350 miles above the Balize ; but, in some seasons, they have 
been known to reach the gulf itself. 

Next morning we weighed anchor, and passed Fort Jackson, 
formerly Fort St. Philip, thirty-three miles above the Balize. 
At several points, where we stopped for passengers, Dr. Carpenter 
and I landed. The wood consisted of live oaks bearing bunches 
of misletoe, cypress hung with Spanish moss, elms, alders, and the 
red maple ; also a species of myrica, twenty feet high, and nu 
merous wild vines, and other climbers, on the trees. At Bayou 
Liere, there was a dense growth of a fan-palrn (Cliatn&rops 
adansonia), from eight to thirteen feet high, and a log-cabin 
thatched with its leaves, affording good shelter from the heaviest 
rain. On the ground were numerous land-crabs ( Gclasimus), 
called here fiddlers, which ran into their holes as we approached, 
and a few small lizards, and a frog (liana pipicus), which, in 
the night, had so shrill and clear a note, that we heard it two 
miles off. The spring is so backward that few flowers are in 
bloom, and we congratulated ourselves on escaping all annoyance 
from musquitoes. At the water s edge I picked up several nuts 
of the Carya aquatica, and many pieces of pumice as large as 
apples, which must have come from the Rocky Mountains, and 
are interesting, as reminding one of the fact, that volcanic regions 
are drained by the western tributaries of the Mississippi. But I 
could riot find a single empty land-shell, or helix, such as the 
Rhine arid many other rivers bring down, and am told that none 
are met with buried in the recent deposits of the delta. 



CHAP. XXIX.] WILLOWS ON RIVER BANK. 115 

The storm of the preceding night had driven many sea-gulls 
up the river, which now followed our steamer, darting down to 
the water to snatch up pieces of apple or meat, or whatever we 
threw to them. After passing Fort Jackson, all trees disap 
peared, except a few low willows. We then entered that long 
promontory, or tongue of land, if such it can be called, which 
consists simply of the broad river, flowing between narrow banks, 
protruded for so many miles into the Gulf of Mexico. Each 
bank, including the swamps behind it, is about 200 or 300 
yards wide, covered with dead reeds, among which we saw many 
tall, white cranes feeding, as in a flooded meadow, and as con 
spicuous as sheep. The landscape on either side was precisely 
similar, and most singular, consisting of blue sky, below which 
were the dark-green waters of the Gulf, lighted up by a brilliant 
sun ; then the narrow band of swamp, covered with dead reeds, 
and, in the foreground, a row of pale-green willows, scarcely re 
flected in the yellow, turbid water of the river. Occasionally 
large merchant-vessels, some three-masted, were towed up by 
steam-tugs, through the slack water, near the bank. How the 
river can thus go to sea as it were, and yet continue for centuries 
to preserve the same channel, in spite of storms and hurricanes, 
which have more than once in the last hundred years caused the 
waters of the Gulf to break over its banks, seems, at first, incom 
prehensible, till we remember that we have here a powerful body 
of fresh water flowing in a valley more than a hundred feet deep, 
with vasts mounds of mud and sand on each side, and that the 
sea immediately adjoining is comparatively shallow. 

The growth of willows on that side of the stream where the 
land is gaining on the water, is often so formal and regular, that 
they look like an artificial plantation. In the front row are 
young saplings just rising out of the ground, which is formed of 
silt, thrown down within the last two or three years. Behind 
them is an older growth from four to eight feet high. Still far 
ther back is seen a third row twenty-five feet high, and some 
times in this manner five tiers, each overtopping the other, show 
ing the gradual formation of the bank, which inclines upward, 
because the soil first deposited has been continually raised during 



116 THE BALIZE. [CHAP. XXTX. 

annual floods. While a gain of land is thus taking place on one 
side, the river is cutting into and undermining the opposite bank, 
often at the rate of ten feet or more in a year. The most com 
mon willow is Salix nigra, but Dr. Carpenter tells me there is 
a rarer species (Salix longifolia) intermixed. I inquired how it 
happened that none of these trees were old, although some part 
of the banks on which they grew are known to be of considerable 
antiquity. My companion said, " that in marshy places the 
Salix nigra is not a long-lived tree, rarely lasting more than 
twenty-five or thirty years." 

At length, as we approached the Balize, even these willows 
ceased to adorn the margin of the river, which was then simply 
bounded by mounds of bare sand. Balize means beacon in 
Spanish. It appears that, in 1744, the main passage or en 
trance of the river was at three small islands, which then existed 
where this pilot station now stands. It continued to be the 
principal mouth of the Mississippi for about a quarter of a cen 
tury later. The present village, called the Balize, has a popu 
lation of more than 450 souls, among whom there are fifty reg 
ularly appointed pilots, and many more who are aspirants to that 
office. The houses are built on piles driven into the mud-banks, 
and the greater part of them moored, like ships, to strong anchors, 
whenever a hurricane is apprehended. They have no fear of the 
river, which scarcely rises six inches during its greatest floods ; 
but some winds make the Gulf rise six feet, as in the year 1812, 
and so fast has been the increase of the population of late, that 
there are scarcely boats enough, as one of the pilots confessed to 
me, to save the people, should the waters rise again to that ele 
vation. They might, however, escape on drift timber, which 
abounds here, provided they had time to choose the more buoy 
ant trees ; for we observed many large rafts of wood so water 
logged that it could scarcely swim, and the slightest weight 
would sink it. 

Although the chimney of our steamer was not lofty, it stood 
higher than the houses ; but in order to obtain a wider prospect, 
I went up into the look-out, a wooden frame-work with a plat 
form, where the pilots were watching for vessels, with their 



CHAP. XXIX.] LIGHTHOUSE HOUSES ON PILES. 117 

telescopes. From this elevation we saw, far to the south, the 
lighthouse, situated at what is now the principal entrance of the 
river. The pilots told us, that the old lighthouse, of solid brick 
work, eighty-seven feet high, erected on "the south point," was 
destroyed by a hurricane in the winter of 1839. The keeper 
was saved, although he was in the building for forty-eight hours 
before it fell, and, during the whole time, it vibrated frightfully 
to and fro. Much of the low banks, then bounding the river, 
were swept away, but have since been restored. 

To the eastward all was sea ; turning to the north, or toward 
New Orleans and the delta, I could discover no more signs of 
the existence of a continent than when looking southward or 
toward the lighthouse. In the west, Bird Island, covered with 
trees, was more conspicuous. An old pilot told us it was inhab 
ited by large deer, and was "very high land." "How high 
above the sea?" said I. "Three or four feet," he replied ; and 
as if so startling an assertion required the confirmation of several 
witnesses, he appealed to the bystanders, who assented, saying, 
"It is all that, for it was only just covered during the great hur 
ricane." And well may such an elevation command respect in 
a town where all the foundations of the houses are under water, 
and where the value of each site is measured by the number of 
inches or feet within which a shoal rises to the surface of the sea. 

It was a curious sight to behold seventy or more dwellings, 
erected on piles, among reeds half as high as the houses, and 
which often grew close to them, most of the buildings communi 
cating with an outhouse by a wooden bridge thrown over a 
swarnp or pool of water, sometimes fresh and sometimes brackish. 
On one side of the main channel, which our steamer had entered, 
was built a long wooden platform, made of planks, resting on 
piles, which served for a promenade. There we saw the pilots 
wives and daughters, and among them the belles of the place, 
well dressed, and accompanied by their pet dogs, taking their 
evening walk. 

March 1 . Having engaged a boat, Dr. Carpenter and I set 
out on an excursion to examine the bayous or channels between 
the mud banks. The first stroke of the oars carried us into the 



118 REEDS, SHELLS, AND BIRDS. [CHAP. XXIX. 

midst of a dense crop of tall reeds. This plant (Arundo phrag- 
mitis) is an annual, and inhabits fresh-water swamps, yet we 
found many dead barnacles attached to them, showing that, in 
the course of the year, when the river is low, the salt water pre 
vails here, so that these marine cirripeda have time to be devel 
oped from the embryo state, and to flourish for some months, till 
they are killed by the returning fresh water. We could only 
detect one shell inhabiting these mud banks, a species of Neritina. 
But I am told that the Gnathodon is found in the brackish 
water, a short distance beyond. It was also stated, that about 
eighteen miles beyond the southwest and northwest passes, or 
extreme mouths of the river, there are banks of sea-shells of 
various species. With the arundo was intermixed a tall rush or 
reed-mace ( Typha), somewhat resembling the bulrush. We got 
out and walked on these banks, on which fresh water was stand 
ing, so cold and benumbing to the hands, that we had no fear of 
musquitoes. At almost any other season these insects would have 
swarmed here, and tormented us greatly. Even the alligators 
were invisible, though some of them had been out a few days 
before. Many paths, recently trodden by racoons, were seen to 
traverse the reeds, and there were foot-prints of the civet or 
mink, and of wild cats and water-rats in abundance. We put 
up several white herons, and many snipes and curlews, and the 
boat-tailed grackle (Quisqualus). 

At length returning to the boat, we soon reached a channel 
blocked up with drift wood in every stage of decay, some fresh 
and sound, but most of it rotten and water-logged. We walked 
for hundreds of yards over natural rafts of this timber, the quan 
tity of which, they say, has sensibly diminished since the steamers 
began to consume so much fuel, for it is now intercepted in large 
quantities before it gets to New Orleans, and cut into logs for the 
steamers. 

We were desirous of obtaining accurate information from the 
pilots respecting the recent advance of land on the Gulf, hoping 
from such data to calculate the time when the mouths of the 
river were at New Orleans. But I soon found that materials 
for such a calculation are not to be procured. 



CHAP. XXIX.] CHARLEVOIX S MAPS. U9 

Dr. Carpenter had brought with him Chaiievoix s maps of the 
river mouths or "passes," published 112 years ago, and referring 
to the state of things about 130 years ago. We were surprised 
to find how accurately this survey represents, for the most part, 
the number, shape, and form of the mud-banks and bayous, or 
channels, as they now exist around the Balize. The pilots, to 
whom we showed the charts, admitted that one might imagine 
them to have been constructed last year, were it not that bars 
had been thrown across the mouths of every bayou, because they 
are no longer scoured out as they used to be when the principal 
discharge of the Mississippi was at this point. We then went 
within a mile of the old Spanish building, called the Magazine, 
correctly laid down in Charlevoix s map, and now 600 yards 
nearer the sea than formerly, showing that the mud-banks have 
given way, or that the salt water has encroached in times when 
a smaller body of fresh water has been bringing down its sedi 
ment to this point. 

The southwest pass is now the principal entrance of the 
Mississippi, and till lately there was eighteen feet water in it, 
but the channel has grown shallower by two feet. When it is 
considered that a fleet of the largest men-of-war could sail for a 
thousand rniles into the interior, were it not for the bars thrown 
across the entrance of each of the mouths or passes, one can not 
wonder that efforts should have been made to deepen the main 
channel artificially. But no human undertaking seems more 
hopeless; for, after a great expenditure of money in 1838 and 
1839, and the excavation, by means of powerful steam dredges, 
of a deep passage, the river filled up the entire cavity with mud 
during a single flood. 

One of the chief pilots told us, that since 1839, or in six years, 
he had seen an advance of the prominent mouths of the river of 
more than a mile. But Linton, the oldest and most experienced 
of them, admitted that the three passes called the northeast, 
southeast, and southwest, had in the last twenty-four years only 
advanced one mile each. Even this fact would furnish no ground 
for estimating the general rate at which the delta advances, for 
on each of these narrow strips of land, or river-banks, the sea 



120 ANNUAL INCREASE! OF DELTA. [CHAP. XXIX. 

would make extensive inroads whenever the main channel of 
discharge is altered and there is a local relaxation of the river s 
power. Every year, as soon as the flood season is over, the tide 
enters far up each channel, scouring out mud and sand, and 
sweeping away many a bar, formed during the period of inunda 
tion. Bringier, an experienced surveyor of New Orleans, told 
me, that on revisiting the mouths of the Mississippi after an 
interval of forty years, he was surprised to observe how station 
ary their leading features had remained. Mr. Dunbar, also an 
engineer in great practice in Louisiana, assured me that on com 
paring the soundings lately made by him with those laid down 
in the French maps of Sieur Diron, published in 1740, he found 
the changes to be quite inconsiderable. On questioning the 
pilots on the subject, they stated that the changes from year to 
year are great, but are no measure whatever of those worked out 
in a long period, for there seems to be a tendency in the action 
of the tides and river to restore the old soundings. 

Captain Grahame, also a government surveyor, on comparing 
the northeast pass with the charts made a century before, found 
it had not advanced more than a quarter of a mile, and that in 
the same interval the principal variations at the pass a Loutre 
had consisted in the filling up of some bayous. Even if we could 
assume that the progress of the whole delta in twenty-five years 
was as great as that assigned by Linton to one or two narrow 
channels and banks, it would have taken several thousand years 
for the river to advance from New Orleans to the Balize ; but 
when we take into our account the whole breadth of the delta, or 
that part of it which has advanced beyond the general coast-line 
above 100 miles across, we must allow an enormous period of 
time for its accumulation. 

The popular belief in New Orleans, that the progress of the 
banks near the mouths of the river has been very rapid, arises 
partly from the nature of the evidence given by witnesses in the 
law courts, in cases of insurance. When a ship is lost, the usual 
line of defense on the part of the pilots, whether for themselves 
or their friends, is to show that new sand-bars are forming, and 
shoals shifting their places so fast, that no blame attaches to any 



CHAP. XXIX.] TIDES AND CURRENTS. 121 

one for running a vessel aground. To exaggerate rather than 
underrate, the quantity of sediment newly deposited by the river, 
is the bias of each witness, although their statements may in the 
main be correct ; for in the contest annually carried on between 
the river and the sea, there is unquestionably a vast amount of 
destruction and renovation of mud-banks and sand bars. In 
these changes the action of the tide, and the power of the break 
ers during storms, and a strong marine current, all play their part. 
There seem to be well-authenticated accounts of anchors cast 
up from a depth of several fathoms near the mouths of the river, 
and heavy stones sunk sixteen feet deep, and found afterward high 
and dry on shoals. The ballast also of several wrecked vessels, 
the submergence of which, in two or three fathoms water, had 
been ascertained, have in like manner been thrown up, above 
high water mark, on newly formed islands. 

All the pilots agree, that when the Mississippi is at its height, 
it pours several streams of fresh water, tinged with yellow sedi 
ment, twelve or more miles into the gulf, beyond its mouths. 
These streams floating over the heavier salt water, spread out 
into broad superficial sheets or layers, which the keels of vessels 
plough through, turning up a furrow of clear blue water, form 
ing a dark streak in the middle of the ship s wake. I infer, 
therefore, that both in the summer, when the swollen river is 
turbid and depositing mud, and in the winter, when the sea is 
making reprisals on the delta, there is a large amount of fine sed 
iment dispersed far and wide, and carried by currents to the deeper 
and more distant parts of the Gulf. To this dispersing power I 
shall recall the reader s attention in a future chapter, when dis 
cussing the probable antiquity of the delta. 

March 2. We returned to New Orleans in the same steamer. 
It is remarkable that for more than 150 miles above the Balize, 
there is only one of those great bends in the course of the Missis 
sippi, which are so general a character of its channel north of 
New Orleans. The exception is the great sweep called the English 
Turn. Mr. Forshey imputes this difference in the shape of the 
bed of the river to the distinct circumstances under which a 
stream is placed when it shapes out its course through a deposit 
VOL. TI. F 



122 SUGAR-MILL. [CHAP. XXIX, 

raised above the level of the sea, or when it is forming its bed, 
as to the south of New Orleans, below the sea-level. 

Above the English Turn, and within a few miles of the me 
tropolis, I landed on the famous battle-ground, where the English, 
in 1815, were defeated, and saw the swamp through which the 
weary soldiers were required to drag their boats, on emerging from 
which, they were fired upon by the enemy, advantageously 
placed on the higher ground, or river-bank. The blunder of the 
British commander is sufficiently obvious even to one unskilled in 
military affairs. They are now strengthening the levee at this 
point, for the Mississippi is threatening to pour its resistless cur 
rent through this battle-ground, as, in the delta of the Ganges, 
the Hoogly is fast sweeping away the celebrated field of Plassy. 

At one of the landings on the left bank of the river, Dr. Car 
penter went with me to see a large sugar-mill, in the management 
of which an Anglo-American proprietor had introduced all the 
latest improvements. There was machinery, worked by steam, 
for pressing the j uice out of the sugar-canes, and large boilers and 
coolers, with ducts for the juice to flow down into enormous vats. 

We heard much of the injury done to the sugar plantations 
and gardens by the cocoa, or nut grass (Cyperus hydra), which 
I had seen springing up even in the streets of New Orleans be 
tween the pavement stones. It increases by suckers as well as 
by seed ; but it is only of late years that it has ravaged Louisi 
ana. If horses be brought from an estate where- this plant is 
known to exist, their hoofs are carefully cleaned, lest the soil, ad 
hering to them should introduce some fibers or tubers of this 
scourge. 

Although impatient to return to the city, we could riot help 
being amused when we learnt that our boat and all its passengers 
were to be detained till some hogsheads of sugar were put on 
board, some of the hoops of which had got loose. A cooper had 
been sent for, who was to hammer them on. " You may there 
fore go over the sugar-mill at your leisure." I observed that all 
whose native tongue was English, were indignant at the small 
value which the captain seemed to set on their time ; but the 
Creole majority, who spoke French, were in excellent humor. A 



CHAP. XXIX. ] FRENCH AND ANGLO AMERICANS. 123 

party of them was always playing whist in the cabin, and the rest 
looking 1 on. When summoned to disembark at their respective 
landings, they were in no haste to leave us, wishing rather to 
finish the rubber. The contrast of the two races was truly di 
verting, just what I had seen in Canada. Whenever we were 
signaled by a negro, and told to halt "till Master was ready," 
I was sure to hear some anecdote from an Anglo-Saxon passen 
ger in disparagement of the Creoles. "North of New Orleans," 
said one of my companions, " the American captains are begin 
ning to discipline the French proprietors into more punctual 
habits. Last summer, a senator of Louisiana having forgotten 
his great-coat, sent back his black servant to bring it from his 
villa, expecting a first-rate steamer, with several hundred people 
on board, to wait ten or fifteen minutes for him. When, to his 
surprise, the boat started, he took the captain to task in great 
wrath, threatening never to enter his vessel again." 

My attention was next called to the old-fashioned make of the 
French ploughs. " On this river, as on the St. Lawrence," said 
an American, "the French had a fair start of us by more than a 
century. They obtained possession of all the richest lands, yet 
are now fairly distanced in the race. When they get into debt, 
and sell a farm on the highest land next the levee, they do not 
migrate to a new region farther west, but fall back somewhere 
into the low grounds near the swamp. There they retain all 
their antiquated usages, seeming to hate innovation. To this day 
they remain rooted in those parts of Louisiana where the mother 
country first planted her two colonies two centuries ago, and they 
have never swarmed off, or founded a single new settlement. 
They never set up a steam-engine for their sugar-mills, have tak 
en no part in the improvement of steam navigation, and when a 
railway was proposed in Opelousas, they opposed it, because they 
feared it would let the Yankees in upon them. When a rich 
proprietor was asked why he did not send his boy to college, he 
replied, < Because it would cost me 450 dollars a year, and I shall 
be able to leave my son three more negroes when I die, by not 
incurring that expense. Dr. Carpenter informed me, that the 
Legislature of Louisiana granted in 1834, a charter for a medi- 



121 FRENCH AND ANGLO-AMERICANS. [CHAP. XXIX. 

cal college in the Second Municipality, which now, in the year 
1846, numbers one hundred students, and is about to become the 
medical department of a new university. The Creoles were so 
far stimulated by this example, as to apply also for a charter for a 
French College in the First Municipality. It was granted in the 
same year, but has remained a dead letter to this day. 

One of the passengers had been complaining to me, that a cre- 
ole always voted for a Creole candidate at an election, however 
much he differed from him in political opinions, rather than sup 
port an Anglo-Saxon of his own party. I could not help saying 
that I should be tempted to do the same, if I were of French ori 
gin, and heard my race as much run down as I had done since 
I left the Balize. 

A large portion of the first French settlers in Louisiana came 
from Canada, and I have no doubt Gayarre is right in affirming 
that they have remained comparatively stationary, because they 
carried out with them, from the mother country, despotic maxims 
of government, coupled with extreme intolerance in their religious 
opinions. The bigotry which checked the growth of the infant 
colony was signally displayed, when Louis XIV. refused to per 
mit 400 Huguenot families, who had fled to South Carolina, 
after the revocation of the edict of Nantes, to be incorporated 
among the new settlers on the Mississippi.^ 

Notwithstanding the marked inclination of the Anglo-Saxons 
to seek no other cause than that of race to account for the alleged 
stationary condition of the Creoles, I was glad to find that one of 
the most intelligent citizens of New Orleans took a more hopeful 
and less fatalist view of the matter. I observe," he said, " that 
those French emigrants who have come out to us lately, espe 
cially the Parisians, are pushing their way in the world with as 
much energy as any of our race ; so I conclude that the first 
settlers in Canada and Louisiana quitted Europe too soon, before 
the great Revolution of 1792 had turned the Frenchman into a 
progressive being." 

Among the Creoles with whom I came in contact, I saw many 
whose manners were most polite and agreeable, and I felt as I 
* Gayarre, Hisloire de la Louisiane, torn. i. p. 69. 



CHAP. XXIX.] NEGROES IN LOUISIANA. 125 

had done toward the Canadian " habitants," that I should have 
had more pleasure in associating with them than with a large 
portion of their Anglo-American rivals, who, from a greater read 
iness to welcome new ideas, are more likely to improve, and will 
probably outstrip them in knowledge and power. 

When we sat down to dinner in the cabin, one of the Creoles, 
of very genteel appearance, was so dark that I afterward asked 
an American, out of curiosity, whether he thought my neighbor 
at table had a dash of negro blood in his veins. He said he had 
been thinking so, and it had made him feel very uncomfortable 
during dinner. I was so unprepared for this manifestation of 
anti-negro feeling, that I had difficulty in keeping my counte 
nance. The same messmate then told me that the slaves had 
lately risen on an estate we were just passing, on the right bank 
of the river, below New Orleans, but had been quickly put down. 
He said that the treatment of them had greatly improved within 
the last eight years, keeping pace steadily with the improved civ 
ilization of the whites. The Creoles, he said, fed their negroes 
well, but usually gave them no beds, but blankets only to lie 
down upon. They were kind in their feelings toward them ; but, 
owing to their improvident habits, they secured no regular med 
ical attendance, and lost more black children than the American 
planters. 

I afterward remarked that the growth of New Orleans seemed 
to show that a large city may increase and flourish in a slave 
state ; but Dr. Carpenter arid Mr. Wilde both observed, that the 
white race has been superseding the negroes. Ten years ago, 
say they, all the draymen of New Orleans, a numerous class, and 
the cabmen, were colored. Now, they are nearly all white. 
The servants at the great hotels were formerly of the African, 
now they are of the European race. Nowhere is the jealousy 
felt by the Irish toward the negroes more apparent. According 
to some estimates, in a permanently resident population not much 
exceeding 80,000, there are only 22,000 colored persons, and a 
large proportion of these are free. 

Over a door in the principal street of New Orleans we read 
the inscription, "Negroes on sale here." It is natural that 



126 NEGROES IN LOUISIANA. [CHAP. XXIX. 

southerners should not be aware how much a foreigner is shocked 
at this public mode of treating a large part of the population as 
mere chattels. 

The following is an advertisement copied verbatim from a 
Natchez paper : 

"NINETY NEGROES FOR SALE. 

"I have about ninety negroes, just arrived from Richmond, 
Virginia, consisting of field hands, house servants, carriage drivers, 
two seamstresses, several very fine cooks (females), and one very 
fine neat cook (male), one blacksmith, one carpenter, and some 
excellent mules and excellent wagons arid harness, and one very 
fine riding horse all of which I will sell at the most reasonable 
prices. I have made arrangements in Richmond, Va., to have 
regular shipments every month, and intend to keep a good stock 
on hand of every description of servants during the season. 

" JOHN D. JAMES. 

"Natchez, October 16-tf." 

In a St. Louis paper, I read, in the narrative of a steamboat 
collision, the following passage : " We learn that the passengers, 
with few exceptions, lost all their effects ; one gentleman in 
particular lost nine negroes (who were on deck) arid fourteen 
horses." 

Among the laws recently enacted in Louisiana, I was glad to 
see one to prevent persons of color exiled from other states, or 
transported for some offense, from becoming citizens. In spite of 
such statutes, the negro-exporting portions of the Union will al 
ways make the newer states play in some degree the part of penal 
settlements. 

Free blacks are allowed to be witnesses in the courts here, in 
cases where white men are concerned, a privilege they do not en 
joy in some free states, as in Indiana ; but they do not allow 
free blacks to come and settle here, and say they have been com 
pelled to adopt this precaution by the abolitionists. 

An intelligent Louisianian said to me, Were we to emanci 
pate our negroes as suddenly as your government did the West 



CHAP. XXIX. ] NEGROES IN LOUISIANA. 



Indians, they would be a doomed race ; but there can be no doubt 
that white labor is more profitable even in this climate." " Then, 
why do you not encourage it ?" I asked. " It must be the work 
of time," he replied ; " the prejudices of owners have to be over 
come, and the sugar and cotton crop is easily lost, if not taken in 
at once when ripe ; the canes being damaged by a slight frost, 
and the cotton requiring to be picked dry as soon as mature, and 
being ruined by rain. Very lately a planter, five miles below 
New Orleans, having resolved to dispense with slave labor, hired 
one hundred Irish arid German emigrants at very high wages. 
In the middle of the harvest they all struck for double pay. No 
others were to be had, and it was impossible to purchase slaves 
in a few days. In that short time he lost produce to the value 
of ten thousand dollars." 

A rich merchant of Pennsylvania, who was boarding at the 
St. Louis Hotel, showed me a letter he had just received from 
Philadelphia, in which his correspondent expressed a hope that 
his feelings had not often been shocked by the sufferings of the 
slaves. " Doubtless," said the writer, " you must have often 
witnessed great horrors." The Philadelphian then told me, that 
after residing here several years, and having a strong feeling of 
the evils as well as. impolicy of slavery, he had never been forced 
to see nor hear of any castigatiori of a slave in any establishment 
with which he had intercourse. " Once," he added, " in New 
Jersey (a free state) he remembered having seen a free negro child 
whipped by its master." The tale of suffering to which his 
Pennsylvanian correspondent particularly alluded, was not authen 
tic, or, at least, grossly exaggerated. It had been copied from 
the abolitionist papers of the north into the southern papers, 
sometimes with and sometimes without comment ; for such libels 
are hailed with pleasure by the Perpetualists as irritating the feel- 
ino- of that class of slave-owners who are most anxious to advance 

C5 

the welfare arid education of the negroes. 

We ascertained that Miss Martirieau s story of Madame Lalau- 
rie s cruelty to her slaves was perfectly correct. Instances of such 
savage conduct are rare, as was indeed sufficiently proved by the 
indignation which it excited in the whole city. A New England 



123 NEGROES IN LOUISIANA. [CHAP. XXIX, 

lady settled here told me, she had promised to set free her two 
female colored servants at her death. I asked if she had no fear 
of their poisoning her. " On the contrary," she replied, " they 
would be in despair were I to die." 

One of the families which we visited at New Orleans was 
plunged in grief by the death of a little negro girl, suddenly car 
ried off by a brain fever, in the house. She was the daughter of 
a domestic servant, and the sorrow for her loss was such as might 
have been felt for a relation. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

Voyage from New Orleans to Port Hudson. The Coast. Villas, and Gar 
dens. Cotton Steamers. Flat Boats. Crevasses and Inundations. 
Decrease of Steamboat Accidents. Snag-Boat. Musquitoes. Natural 
Rafts. Bartram on buried Trees at Port Hudson. Dr. Carpenter s Ob 
servations. Landslip described. Ancient Subsidence in the Delta fol 
lowed bv an upward Movement, deducible from the buried Forest at 
Port Hudson. 

March 10, 1846. ON leaving New Orleans, I made ar 
rangements for stopping to examine the bluff at Port Hudson, 
160 miles up the river, where I was to land in the night, from 
the Rainbow steamer, while my wife started in another boat, 
the Magnolia, to go direct to the more distant port of Nat 
chez. If a lady is recommended to the captain of one of these 
vessels she feels herself under good protection, and needs no other 

escort ; but Mr. Wilde introduced my wife to Judge , who 

kindly undertook to take charge of her, and see her to the hotel 
at Natchez. The Rainbow ascended the river at the rate of 
eleven miles an hour, keeping near the bank, where the force of 
the current was broken by eddies, or where the backwater was 
sometimes running in our favor. Occasionally her speed waa 
suddenly checked, when it became necessary to cross the stream 
on reaching a point where the current was setting with its full 
force against the bank along which we had been sailing. In 
spite of such delays, the rate of going up is only one-third less 
than going down the stream. The recent introduction of sep 
arate engines to work each of the wheels greatly economizes 
the time spent in the landing of passengers. The boat may be 
turned round or kept stationary with more facility, when each 
wheel can be moved in an opposite direction. In this part of 
the Mississippi, and at this season, the points where passengers 
can be set ashore are very numerous, the water being often forty 
feet deep close to the banks But there are certain regular places 



130 THE COAST FLAT BOATS. [CHAP. XXX. 

of disembarkation, the approach to which is announced by ringing 
a large bell. 

A great proportion of the trees are still leafless, the willows, 
cypresses, and red maples being no more advanced than I had 
seen them at Mobile in the third week of February. The gar 
dens continue to be gay with the blossoms of the peach and plum- 
trees. As our vessel wound its way round one great bend after 
another, we often saw directly before us the dome of the St. Charles 
and the tower of St. Patrick s, and were sailing toward them after 
I thought we had already taken a last look at them far astern. 
In the first seven hours we made sixty miles, including stoppages. 
We were passing along what is called " the coast," or that part 
of the Mississippi which is protected by a levee above the metrop 
olis. A great many handsome country houses, belonging to the 
proprietors of sugar plantations, give a cultivated aspect to this 
region, and the scenery is enlivened by a prodigious number of 
schooners and large steamers sailing down from the Ohio arid Red 
rivers, heavily laden with cotton. This cotton has already been 
much compressed when made up into bales ; but it undergoes, at 
New Orleans, still greater pressure, by steam power, to diminish 
its bulk before embarkation for Liverpool. 

The captain calculated that within the first seven hours after 
we left the wharf, in the Second Municipality, we had passed no 
less than ten thousand bales going down the river, each bale 
worth thirty-five dollars at present prices, and the value of the 
whole, therefore, amounting to 350.000 dollars, or 73,500/. 
sterling. All this merchandize would reach the great emporium 
within twenty hours of the time of our passing it. Before we 
lost sight of the city, we saw a large flat boat drifting down in 
the middle of the current, steered by means of a large oar at the 
stern. It was laden with farm produce, and had come about 
two thousand miles, from near Pittsburg, on the Ohio. I had 
first observed this kind of craft on my way to the Balize, meet 
ing near Fort Jackson a boat without a single inmate, thirty-five 
feet long, and built of stout planks, with a good roof. It was 
drifting along on its way to the Gulf of Mexico, the owner hav 
ing abandoned it after selling his corn and other stores at the 



CHAP. XXX.] FLAT BOATS. 131 

great city. He himself had probably returned to the north in a 
steamer ; having found the substantial floating mansion, in which 
he had lived for several weeks or months, quite unsaleable, al 
though containing so much good timber shaped into planks. It 
is the duty of the wharfinger at New Orleans to see that the 
river is not blocked up with such incumbrances, and to set them 
adrift. After wandering for several hundred miles in the Gulf, 
they are sometimes cast ashore at Pensacola. 

Soon afterward, when we were taking in wood at a landing, 
I entered another of these flat boats, just arrived there, and dis 
covered that it was a shop, containing all kinds of grocery and 
other provisions, tea, sugar, lard, cheese, flour, beef, and whiskey. 
It was furnished with a chimney, and I was surprised to see a 
large family of inmates in two spacious cabins, for no one would 
suspect these boats to be so roomy below water, as they are 
usually sunk deep in the river by a heavy freight. They had a 
fiddle on board, and were preparing to get up a dance for the 
negroes. A fellow-traveler told me that these peddlers are com 
monly called chicken-thieves, and, the day after they move off", 
the planters not unfrequently miss many of their fowls. 

Pointing to an old levee with a higher embankment newly 
made behind it, the captain told me, that a breach had been 
made there in 1844, through which the Mississippi burst, inun 
dating the low cultivated lands between the highest part of the 
bank and the swamp. In this manner, thousands of valuable 
acres were injured. He had seen the water rush through the 
opening at the rate of ten miles an hour, sucking in several flat 
boats, and carrying them over a watery waste into a dense swamp 
forest. Here the voyagers might remain entangled among the 
trees unheard of and unheeded till they were starved, if canoes 
were not sent to traverse the swamps in every direction, in the 
hope of rescuing such wanderers from destruction. When we 
consider how many hair- breadth escapes these flat boats have 
experienced, how often they have been nearly run down in the 
night, or even in the day, during dense fogs, and sent to the bot 
tom by collision with a huge steamer, it is strange to reflect, 
that at length, when their owners have caught sight of the 



132 CREVASSES AND INUNDATIONS. [CHAP. XXX. 

towers of New Orleans in the distance, they should be hurried 
into a wilderness, and perish there. 

I was shown the entrance of what is called the Carthage 
crevasse, formed in May, 1840, and open for eight weeks, during 
which time it attained a breadth of eighty feet. Its waters 
were discharged into Lake Pontchartrain, when nothing was 
visible between that great lagoon and the Mississippi but the 
tops of tall cypress trees growing in the morass, and a long, nar- 
narrow, black stripe of earth, being the top of the levee, which 
marked the course of the river. 

The reader may naturally ask why the Mississippi, when it 
has once burst through its bank, and taken this shorter cut to the 
sea, does not continue in the same course, reaching the salt water 
in a few miles instead of flowing two hundred miles before it 
empties itself into the Gulf. I may remark in reply, that the great 
river does not run, as might be inferred from the description of 
some of the old geographers, on the top of a ridge in a level plain, 
but in a valley from one hundred to two hundred and fifty feet 
deep. 

Fig. 9- 



^J?^_jg>jjj._ 



c 
Section of Channel, Bank, Levees (a and b), and Swamps of Mississippi River. 

Thus a b c may represent the cavity in which the river flows, 
the artificial levees at the top of the banks being seen at a and b. 
The banks are higher than the bottom of the swamps, f g and 
d e ; because, when the river overflows, the coarser part of the 
sediment is deposited at a and b, where the speed of the current 
is first checked. It usually runs there with a gentle current 
among herbage, reeds, and shrubs ; and is nearly filtered of its 
earthy ingredients before it arrives at the swamps. It is probable 
that the Mississippi flows to the nearest point of the Gulf, where 
there is a sufficient depth or capacity in the bed of the sea to 




CHAP. XXX.] SNAG-BOATS. 133 

receive its vast burden of water and mud ; and if it went to Lake 
Pontchartrain, it would have to excavate a new valley like a b c, 
many times deeper than the bottom of that lagoon. 

The levee raised to protect the low grounds from inundation, 
was at first, when we left New Orleans, only four feet high, so 
as not to impede our view of the country from the deck ; but as 
we ascended, both the natural bank and the levee became higher 
and higher, and by the time we had sailed up sixty-five miles, I 
could only just see the tops of tall trees in the swamps. Even 
these were only discernible from the roof of the cabin, or what is 
called the hurricane deck, when we had gone 100 miles from New 
Orleans. 

The large waves raised by the rapid movement of several hun 
dred steamers, causes the undermining and waste of the banks 
to proceed at a more rapid rate than formerly. The roots also 
of trees growing at the edge of the stream, were very effective 
formerly in holding the soil together, before so much timber had 
been cleared away. Now the banks offer less resistance to the 
wasting action of the stream. 

The quantity of drift wood floated down the current has not 
diminished sensibly within the last twenty years, but nearly all 
of it is now intercepted in the last forty miles above New Orleans, 
and split up into logs by the proprietors to supply the furnaces of 
steamboats, which are thus freeing the river of the heavy masses 
against which they used formerly to bump in the night, or round 
which they were forced to steer in the day. There has also been 
a marked decrease, of late years, in the number of snags. The 
trunks of uprooted trees, so called, get fixed in the mud, having 
sunk with their heavier end to the bottom, and remain slanting 
down the stream, so as to pierce through the bows of vessels sail 
ing up. A government report just published, shows that two 
snag-boats, each having a crew of twenty men, one of them draw 
ing four feet, and the other two feet water, have, extracted 700 
snags in four weeks out of the Missouri, and others have been at 
work on the Mississippi. When it is remembered that some of 
the most dangerous of these snags have been known to continue 
planted for twenty years in the same spot (so slowly does wood 



134 STEAMBOAT ACCIDENTS. [CHAP. XXX. 

decay under water), it may readily be conceived how much this 
formidable source of danger has lessened in the last few years. 
At the season when the river is lowest, grappling irons are firm 
ly fixed to these snags, and the whole force of the engines in the 
snag-boat is exerted to draw them out of the mud ; they are then 
cut into several pieces, and left to float down the stream, but 
part of them being water-logged, sink at once to the bottom. 

Several travelers assure me, that serious accidents are not more 
common now on the Mississippi and its tributaries, when there are 
800 steamers afloat, than twenty years ago, when the number 
of steamers was less than fifty. The increased security arises, 
chiefly, from the greater skill and sobriety of the captains and 
engineers, who rarely run races as formerly, and who usually cast 
anchor during fogs and in dark nights. Such precautions have 
no doubt, become more and more imperative, in proportion as the 
steamers have multiplied. On the wide Atlantic, the chances of 
collision in a fog may be slight, but to sail in so narrow a channel 
as that of a river, at the rate of ten miles an hour, unable to see 
a ship s length ahead, with the risk of meeting, every moment, 
other steamers coming down at the rate of fifteen miles an hour, 
implies such recklessness, that one can not wonder that navigators 
on the western waters have earned the character of setting small 
value on their own and others lives. Formerly, the most fre 
quent cause of explosions was a deficiency of water in the boiler ; 
one of the great improvements adopted, within the last five years, 
for preventing this mischief, is the addition of a separate steam- 
apparatus for pumping up water, and securing a regular supply 
by machinery, instead of trusting to the constant watchfulness of 
the engineers. On the whole, it seems to be more dangerous to, 
travel by land, in a new country, than by river steamers, and 
some who have survived repeated journeyings in stage-coaches, 
show us many scars. The judge who escorted my wife to 
Natchez, informed her that he had been upset no less than thir 
teen times. 

On the left bank, about sixty miles above New Orleans, stands 
Jefferson College ; a schoolmaster from the north, speaking to me 
of its history, imputed its want of success to the insubordination 



CHAP. XXX.] THUNDER-SHOWER. 135 

of the youths, the inability of southern planters to govern their 
children themselves, and their unwillingness to delegate the 
necessary authority to the masters of universities or schools. 
" But they are growing wiser," he said, " and vigorous efforts 
are making to improve the discipline in the university of Char- 
lottesville, in Virginia, which has hitherto been too lax. 

We soon afterward passed a convent on the same bank, and I 
heard praise bestowed on the " Sisters of Charity," for their 
management of a hospital. 

At St. Thomas s Point, about twenty-five miles above New 
Orleans, we passed a fine plantation, which formerly belonged to 
Mr. Preston, of South Carolina, a distinguished member of Con 
gress, whose acquantaince I made in 1842. There are, I am 
told, nearly 1000 negroes here, and I am astonished at the large 
proportion of the colored race settled every where on the land 
bordering the river. The relative value of colored and white 
labor was here, as elsewhere, a favorite theme of conversation, 
when there happened to be passengers on board from the northern 
states. The task of three negroes, they say, in Louisiana, is to 
cut and bind up two cords of wood in a day, whereas, a single 
white man, in the State of New York, prepares three cords daily. 
In packing cotton, the negroes are expected to perform a third 
less work than a white laborer. 

In the afternoon we were overtaken by a heavy thunder-shower, 
the water pouring off the eaves of our cabin roof, in copious streams, 
into the river, through numerous spouts or tin pipes. When the 
rain abated, I saw a fog slowly stealing over parts of the stream, 
for the water was much colder than the air. For some hours we 
were unable to proceed, and the captain informed me, that w r e 
should remain prisoners until the temperature of the Mississippi 
and that of the atmosphere were more nearly equalized. This, 
he hoped, would happen in one of two ways, either by a renewal 
of rain, which would warm the river, or by the wind veering 
round from south to west, which w r ould cool the air. The latter 
change soon occurred, and we were instantly released. 

I was congratulated by some northerners at having escaped 
the musquitocs. The captain said, "that they who are acclirnat- 



136 MUSQUITOES. BAYOUS. [CHAP. XXX. 

ized, suffer no longer from the bites, or scarcely at all, and even 
the young children of Creoles are proof against them, although 
the face and neck of a new settler, whether young or old, swell 
up frightfully. Yet the wild cattle and deer have not acquired any 
hereditary immunity from this torment, and, to escape it, are seen 
standing in the lakes with their heads only above the water." 
Some passengers assured me, " that when people have recovered 
from the yellow fever, the skin, although in other respects as 
sensitive as ever, is no longer affected by a musquito bite, or, if 
at all, in a very slight degree;" and they added, "that last year, 
1845, both the yellow fever and the musquitoes were in abeyance, 
although the heat of the season was intense." 

After we had sailed up the river eighty miles, I was amused 
by the sight of the insignificant village of Donaldsonville, the 
future glories of which I had heard so eloquently depicted.^ Its 
position, however, is doubtless important ; for here the right bank 
is intersected by that arm of the Mississippi, called Bayou La 
Fourche. This arm has much the appearance of a canal, and 
by it, I am told, our steamer, although it draws no less than ten 
feet water, might sail into the Gulf of Mexico, or traverse a large 
part of that wonderful inland navigation in the delta which con 
tributes so largely to the wealth of Louisiana. A curious 
description was given me, by one of my fellow travelers, of that 
same low country, especially the region called Attakapas. It 
contains, he said, wide " quaking prairies," where cattle are 
pastured, and where you may fancy yourself far inland. Yet, 
if you pierce any where through the turf to the depth of two 
feet, you find sea-fish swimming about, which make their way in 
search of food under the superficial sward, from the Gulf of Mexico, 
through subterranean watery channels. 

Notwithstanding the quantity of sediment in the Mississippi, 
they tell me that its waters are inhabited by abundance of shad 
and herring, and in several places, when I asked the fishermen 
what they were catching, they answered, " Sardines." 

In the course of the first day we saw the Bayou Plaquemine 
on the right, and the Iberville River on the left bank of the Mis- 
* Ante, p. 99. 



CHAP. XXX.] BURIED TREES, PORT HUDSON. 137 

sissippi, the two arms next above that of La Fourche. One of 
those natural rafts of floating trees which occasionally bridge over 
the western rivers for many years in succession, becoming covered 
over with soil, shrubs, and trees, blocked up till lately the Bayou 
Plaquemine. The obstacle was at length removed at the expense 
of the state, and the rush of water through the newly cleared 
channel was so tremendous, that several engineers entertained 
apprehensions, lest the whole of the Mississippi should take its 
course by this channel to the sea, deserting New Orleans. Mr. 
Forshey assured me there was no real ground for such fears, 
because the Mississippi, as before hinted,^ takes at present the 
shortest cut to that part of the Gulf where it can find a basin 
deep and capacious enough to receive it. 

During the night we passed Baton Rouge, the first point above 
New Orleans where any land higher and older than the alluvial 
plain comes up to the bank to constitute what is termed a bluff. 
The cliff there is only a few feet high. The next bluff is at Port 
Hudson, 2 5 miles higher up the river, and 165 miles above New 
Orleans. I had been urged by Dr. Carpenter to examine the 
geology of this bluff, which I had also wished to do, because 
Bartram, in his travels, in 1777, discovered there the existence 
of a fossil forest at the base of the tall cliff, and had commented 
with his usual sagacity on the magnitude of the geographical 
changes implied by its structure. The following are his words, 
which deserve the more attention, because the particular portion 
of the cliff described by him, has long ago been undermined and 
swept away by the Mississippi. " Next morning," says Bartram, 
" we set off again on our return home, and called by the way at 
the cliffs, which is a perpendicular bank or bluff, rising up out 
of the river near one hundred feet above the present surface of the 
water, whose active current sweeps along by it. From eight or 
nine feet below the loamy vegetative mold at top, to within four 
or five feet of the water, these cliffs present to view strata of clay, 
marl, and chalk of all colors, as brown, red, yellow, white, blue, 
and purple ; there are separate strata of these various colors, as 
well as mixed or parti-colored : the lowest stratum next the water 
* Ante, p. 132. 



138 BURIED TREES. [CHAP. XXX. 

is exactly of the same black mud, or rich soil, as the adjacent 
low cypress swamps above and below the bluff; and here, in the 
cliffs, we see vast stumps of cypress and other trees which, at this 
day, grow in these low, wet swamps, and which range on a level 
with them. These stumps are sound, stand upright, and seem 
to be rotted off about two or three feet above the spread of their 
roots ; their trunks, limbs, &c., lie in all directions about them. 
But when these swampy forests were growing, and by what cause 
they were cut off and overwhelmed by the various strata of earth, 
which now rise near one hundred feet above, at the brink of the 
cliffs, and two or three times that height, but a few hundred yards 
back, are inquiries perhaps not easily answered. The swelling 
heights, rising gradually over and beyond this precipice, are now 
adorned with high forests of stately Magnolia, Liquidambar, 
Fagus, Quercus, Lauras, Morus, Juglans, Tilia, Halesia, 
JEsculus, Callicarpa, Liriodendron" fyc.* 

Dr. Carpenter, in 1838, or sixty-one years after Bartram, 
made a careful investigation of this same bluf having ascertained 
that in the interval the river had been continually w r earing it 
away at such a rate as to expose to view a section several hun 
dred feet to the eastward of that seen by his predecessor. I shall 
first give a brief abstract of Dr. Carpenter s observations, published 
in Sillirnan s Journal.! 

" About the level of low water, at the bottom of the bluff, a 
bed of vegetable matter is exposed, consisting of sticks, leaves, and 
fruits, arranged in thin horizontal laminae, with very thin layers 
of clay interposed. Among the fruits were observed the nuts of 
the swamp hickory (Juglam aquoMca) very abundant, the burr- 
like pericarp of the sweet gurn (Liquidambar styraciflua), and 
walnuts, the fruit of Juglans nigra. The logs lying horizontally 
are those of cypress (Cupressus thyoides), swamp hickory, a 
species of cotton wood (Populus), and other trees peculiar to the 
low swamps of Louisiana. Besides these there were a great 
number of erect stumps of the large deciduous cypress ( Taxodium 
disticlium} sending their roots deep into the clay beneath. This 

* Bartram, " Travels in North America," p. 433. 
t Vol. xxxvi. p. 118. 



CHAP. XXX.] BLUFFS OF PORT HUDSON. 139 



buried forest is covered by a bed of clay, twelve feet thick, and 
is followed by another superimposed bed of vegetable matter, four 
feet thick, containing logs arid branches, half turned into lignite, 
and erect stumps, among which there are none of the large cy 
presses, as in the lower bed. Among the logs, the water-oak 
(Quercus aquatica) was recognizable, and a pine with a great 
deal of bark, and the strobiles of the Pinus tceda. 

" This upper forest points to the former existence, on the spot, 
of one of those swamps, occurring at higher levels, in which the 
Ciqiressus disticha ( Taxodium) does not grow. Above the 
upper layer of erect stumps are various beds of clay, in all more 
than fifty feet thick, with two thin layers of vegetable matter 
intercalated ; and above the whole more than twenty feet of sand, 
the lower part of which included siliceous pebbles derived from 
some ancient rocks, and containing the marks of encrinites and 
corals (Favosites)," &c. 

Dr. Carpenter, when he published this account in 1838, 
thought he had detected the distinct marks of the ax* on some 
of the logs accompanying the buried stumps ; but he informed 
me, in 1846, that he was mistaken, and that the apparent 
notches were caused by the gaping open of the bituminized wood, 
probably after shrinking and drying, of the truth of which I was 
myself convinced, after seeing the specimens. That the lowest 
bed had originally been a real cypress swamp, was proved beyond 
all doubt by the stumps being surrounded by those peculiar knobs 
or excrescences called cypress knees, which this tree throws out 
from its base, when it grows in a submerged soil. These knees 
sometimes rise up through the water from a depth of six or eight 
feet, and are supposed to supply the roots with air, as they are 
never formed when the cypress grows on dry ground. 

At the time of my visit, the river was unfortunately too high 
to enable me to see the lowest deposit containing the memorials 
of this ancient forest, the geological interest of which is much 
enhanced by its having been seen by Bartram, and again by 
Carpenter, extending horizontally over a considerable area. I 
learnt from several residents at Port Hudson, and from Captain 
* Silliman. ibid. p. 119, 



140 BURIED TREES. [CHAP. XXX 



Sellick. who commanded the Rainbow, that, last season, when, 
the water was low, the stumps of the buried trees were as con 
spicuous as ever at the base of the cliff, which has been much 
undermined by the river since the year 1838, when Dr. Carpenter 
explored it. The fossil forest was 12 feet under water when I 
landed, but at higher levels I saw the trunks of two trees buried 
in a vertical position at different levels, each of them about 2 
feet high. I estimated the height of the entire cliff to be about 
75 feet, consisting in part of stiff unctuous clay, and partly of 
loam, but with no chalk, as stated by Bartram. A small 
streamlet, artificially led to the top of the bluff, had, within the 
last four years, cut out a ravine no less than sixty feet deep 
through the upper loamy beds. In the sections thus laid open, 
I saw precisely such deposits as a river would form in its bed, or 
in the swamps which it had occasionally flooded. Near the 
bottom was a layer of leaves, resembling those of the bay, with 
numerous roots of trees and wood in a fresher state than I ever 
saw them in any tertiary formation. Taking a canoe, I after 
ward proceeded to examine that part of the cliff which extends 
about a mile down the river s left bank, immediately below Port 
Hudson, where it is between seventy and eighty feet high. The 
deposits laid open to view were divisible into three groups, the 
topmost consisting of brown clay, the middle of whitish siliceous 
sand, and the lower of green clay. I found some men digging 
the middle or sandy stratum for making bricks, and they had just 
come upon a prostrate buried tree, black and carbonized, but not 
turned into lignite. I counted in it 220 rings of annual growth. 
Near it I found two other smaller fossil trunks, all lying as if 
they had been drift wood carried down by a river and buried in 
sand. One of the men pointed out to me that the structure of 
the wood showed distinctly that they belonged to three different 
species, one being oak, another hickory, and the third sassafras. 
Their texture seemed certainly that of distinct genera of trees, 
but for the accuracy of my informant s determination I can not 
vouch. At this point they told me the bluff has, in the course 
of the last eight years, lost ground no less than 200 feet by the 
encroachment of the river. 



CHAP. XXX.] LANDSLIP. 141 

To prove that the present site of the buried forest before 
alluded to, must be far from the point where Bartram or even 
Carpenter saw it, an account was given me by the residents here, 
of several recent landslips near Port Hudson ; one in particular, 
a few years ago, when by the caving in of the bank, three acres 
of ground, fifty or sixty feet high, composed of clay and sand, and 
covered by a forest, sank down bodily in the river, and were then 
gradually washed away. One of the eye-witnesses related to me 
that the trees were at first seen to tremble, then large rents began 
to open in the soil deeper and deeper, after which the movement 
was such that the boughs of the trees lashed each other, and acorns 
and beech nuts were showered down like hail. A herd of pigs 
was so intent in devouring these, that they allowed themselves 
to be carried down vertically fifty feet, the subsidence occupying 
about five minutes. The outer edge of the bluff, with some of 
the swine, fell into the river, but these swam to the sunk part 
of the bluff, and joined their companions. The owners watched 
them anxiously till dusk, unable to go to their rescue ; but at 
length, to their surprise, they saw a leader, followed by all the 
rest, wind his way along narrow ledges on the face of the precipice, 
from which the fallen mass had been detached, and climb up to 
the top. Next morning, to their no less astonishment, they found 
the herd feeding again on the same perilous ground, and saw them 
again return by the same path at night. 

I have dwelt at some length on the geological phenomena 
disclosed in the interesting sections of these bluffs, because I agree 
with Bartram and Carpenter, that they display a series of deposits 
similar to the modern formations of the alluvial plain and delta 
of the Mississippi. They lead us, therefore, to the important 
conclusion, that there have been changes in the relative level of 
land and sea since the establishment, in this part of the continent, 
of a geographical state of things approximating to that now pre 
vailing. Then, as now, there were swamps in which the decid 
uous cypress and other trees grew, and became buried in mud, 
without any intermixture of sand or pebbles. At that remote 
period, also, drift wood was brought down from the upper country, 
and inclosed in sandy strata. Although I could not ascertain 



142 ANCIENT SUBSIDENCE OF DELTA. [CHAP. XXX. 

the exact height above the level of the sea, of the fossil cypress 
swamp at Port Hudson, I presume it is less than thirty feet ; and 
in order to explain the superposition of 150 feet of fresh-water 
sediment, we must imagine the gradual subsidence of fluviatile 
strata to a depth far below the level of the sea, followed by an 
upward movement to as great an amount. The depression must 
have taken place so slowly as to allow the river to raise the 
surface by sedimentary deposition continually, and never permit 
the sea to encroach and cover the area. Jt is quite conceivable, 
for example, that the present delta and alluvial plain should sink 
150 feet without the salt water coming up even to New Orleans, 
provided the land went down only a few feet or inches in a cen 
tury, and provided the ground was raised vertically to the same 
amount by fluviatiie mud, sand, or vegetable matter. But if the 
land should go down even ten or twelve feet at once, the whole 
delta would be submerged beneath the sea. Were the downward 
movement here supposed to be followed by an upheaval to the 
extent of about 150 feet, and should the river then cut a channel 
through the upraised mass, we might expect to see the modern 
formation exhibit appearances similar to those of high antiquity 
above described at Port Hudson. 

I shall endeavor, in the sequel, to show that oscillations of 
level, like those here assumed to account for the phenomena at 
Port Hudson, will explain other appearances, observable, not 
only in cliffs bounding the valley of the Mississippi, but in ancient 
alluvial terraces bordering the Ohio, and other tributaries of the 
great river. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

Fontania near Port Hudson. Lake Solitude. Floating Island. Bony Pike, 
Story of the Devil s Swamp. Embarking by Night in Steamboat. 
Literary Clerk. Old Levees undermined. Succession of upright buried 
Trees in Bank. Raccourci Cut-off. Bar at Mouth of Red River. Shelly 
Fresh-water Loam of Natchez. Recent Ravines in Table-Land. Bones 
of extinct Quadrupeds. Human Fossil Bone. Question of supposed co 
existence of Man with extinct Mammalia discussed. Tornado at Natchez. 
Society, Country-Houses, and Gardens. Landslips. Indian Antiqui 
ties. 

AFTER I had examined the bluff below Port Hudson, I went 
down the river in my boat to Fontania, a few miles to the south, 
to pay a visit to Mr. Faulkner, a proprietor to whom Dr. Car 
penter had given me a letter of introduction. He received me 
with great politeness, and, at my request, accompanied me at 
once to see a crescent-shaped sheet of water on his estate, called 
Lake Solitude, evidently an ancient bed of the Mississippi, now 
deserted. It is one of the few examples of old channels which 
occur to the east of the great river, the general tendency of which 
is always to move from west to east. Of this eastward movement 
there is a striking monument on the other side of the Mississippi 
immediately opposite Port Hudson, called Fausse Riviere, a sheet 
of water of the usual horse-shoe form. One of my fellow pas 
sengers in the Rainbow had urged me to visit Lake Solitude, 
" because," said he, " there is a floating island in it, well wooded, 
on which a friend of mine once landed from a canoe, when, to his 
surprise, it began to sink with his weight. In great alarm he 
climbed a cypress tree, which also began immediately to go down 
with him as fast as he ascended. He mounted higher and higher 
into its boughs, until at length it ceased to subside, and, looking 
round, he saw in every direction, for a distance of fifty yards, the 
whole wood in motion." I wished much to know what founda 
tion there could be for so marvelous a tale. It appears that 



144 BONY PIKE. [CHAP. XXXI. 

there is always a bayou or channel, connecting, during floods, 
each deserted bend or lake with the main river, through which 
large floating logs may pass. These often form rafts, and become 
covered with soil supporting shrubs and trees. At first such 
green islands are blown from one part of the lake to another by 
the winds, but the deciduous cypress, if it springs up in such a 
soil, sends down strong roots, many feet or yards long, so as to 
cast anchor in the muddy bottom, rendering the island stationary. 
Lake Solitude, situated in lat. 31 N. is two miles and a half 
in circuit, and is most appropriately named, being a retired sheet 
of water, its borders overhung by the swamp willow, now just 
coming into leaf, and skirted by the tall cypress, from which long 
streamers of Spanish moss are hanging. On the east it is bounded 
by high ground, a prolongation of the bluff at Port Hudson, on 
which the hickory, the oak, and many splendid magnolias, with 
the beech, walnut, tulip tree, and holly, and a variety of beautiful 
shrubs are seen. The surface of the lake (except near the shore, 
where it is covered with the water lily) faithfully reflects the trees 
and sky, presenting, in this respect, a marked contrast to the 
yellow waters of the Mississippi. It is inhabited by hundreds 
of alligators and countless fish, and so many birds were swimming 
on it, or flying over it, that it seemed as if all the wild creatures 
which the steamers had scared away from the main river had 
taken refuge here. Several alligators were lying motionless, with 
their noses just above the surface of the water, resembling black 
logs. About fourteen years ago, some of them were not unfre- 
quently seen here measuring fifteen feet in length, but they now 
rarely exceed eight feet. I observed a large gar-fish, or bony 
pike, called the alligator gar (Lepidosteus), leap nearly out of the 
water in pursuit of its prey. Its hard shining scales are so strong 
and difficult to pierce, that it can scarcely be shot. It can live 
longer out of water than any other fish of this country, having a 
large cellular swimming bladder, which is said almost to serve 
the purpose of a real lung. One of them has been known to seize 
the nostrils of a mule who was drinking, and only to be shaken 
off on dry ground, when its whole body had been dragged into 
the air. 



CAP. XXXL] THE DEVIL S SWAMP. 145 

On the "boughs of the willows were perched several white 
cranes, while herons, cormorants, and water-rails were swimming 
on the lake, their various notes adding to the wildness of the scene. 
Shriller than all, as the evening came on, we heard the voice of 
the large bull-frog. 

As we went back to the house, over the high ground, we saw 
three kinds of squirrels and many birds. So skillful was my 
companion with his rifle, that he brought down every bird which 
came within shot owls, rice-birds, woodpeckers, and jays that 
I might examine their plumage. I admired a beautiful cluster 
of the flowers and fruit of the red maple, about twenty feet above 
our heads. He offered to pick them for me, and, without delay, 
took aim so dexterously, as to sever the stem from the bough just 
below the blossom, without seeming to have injured the flower by 
a single shot. In the course of our walk, I observed several 
shrubs, almost hidden by the luxuriant growth of that most ele 
gant of climbers, the yellow jessamine (Gelsemmm nitidum), 
with its fragrant blossoms. 

From these heights south of Port Hudson, we had a grand 
view of the great plain of the Mississippi, far to the south and 
west, an endless labyrinth of uninhabited swamps, covered with 
a variety of timber, and threaded with bayous, one resembling 
another so exactly, that many a stranger, who has entered them 
in a canoe, has wandered for days without being able to extricate 
himself from their woody mazes. Among these morasses, one 
called the Devil s Swamp was in sight, and I found a curious 
account of the origin of its name in a MS. dated 1776, of Caleb 
Carpenter, a relation of my New Orleans friend. 

A German emigrant having settled near the bank of the Mis 
sissippi, in 1776, felled, with great labor, some lofty cypresses; 
but, happening one day to make a false turn in his canoe, entered, 
by mistake, a neighboring bayou. Every feature was so exactly 
like the scene where he had been toiling- for weeks, that he could 
riot question the identity of the spot. He saw all the same bends, 
both in the larger and smaller channels. He made out distinctly 
the same trees, among others the very individual cypresses which 
he had cut down. There they stood, erect and entire, without 

VOL. II. G 



146 EMBARKATION BY NIGHT. [CHAP. XXXI. 

retaining one mark of his ax. He concluded that some evil spirit 
had, in a single night, undone all the labors of many weeks ; 
and, seized with superstitious terror, he fled from the enchanted 
wood, never to return. 

In order that I might not spend an indefinite time on the 
Mississippi, I determined to be prepared for a start in the first 
chance steamer which might be bound for Natchez, 140 miles 
distant, whenever an opportunity should offer, whether by day or 
night. I was told by my host that a trusty black servant had 
been already appointed to look out for a steamer, which was to 
convey some farm produce to a proprietor far off on the Pvecl 
River. He proposed, therefore, to give orders to this negro to 
wake me if any boat bound for Natchez should appear in sight 
before morning. Accordingly, about an hour after midnight, I 
was roused from rny slumbers, and went down over a sloping lawn 
to the steam-boat landing on the river s bank. The sky was clear, 
and it was bright moonlight, and the distant cries of the owls, and 
other night birds around Lake Solitude, \vere distinctly heard, 
mingled with the chirping of myriads of frogs. On the low bank 
my watchman had lighted a signal fire, and I heard the puffing 
of a steamer in the distance ascending the stream. She soon 
neared us, and, on being hailed, answered, " La Belle Creole, 
bound for Bayou Sara." This port was far short of my destina 
tion, and when we shouted " Natchez," the captain first asked 
if we had any wood to sell, and on learning there was none, 
sailed away. I returned to the house, and took another nap of 
several hours, when I received a second summons from my faith 
ful sentinel. The scene was entirely changed ; it was nearly 
day-break, and the fogs rising from the marshes had begun to 
cover the river. I was in despair, fearing that our signal fire 
would not be discerned through the mist. Soon, however, we 
heard the loud gasping of the two steam-pipes sounding nearer 
and nearer, and a large steamer coming suddenly close to the 
landing, was announced as " the Talma of Cincinnati." In a 
few minutes I was crossing the narrow plank which led from 
the steep bank to the vessel, which was actually in motion as I 
walked over it, so that I was glad to find myself safe on deck. 



CHAP. XXXI.] LITERARY CLERK. OLD LEVEES. 147 

They told me I must register my name at the office. The clerk 
asked me if I was the author of a work on geology, and being 
answered in the affirmative, wished to know if I was acquainted 
with Mr. Macaulay. On my saying yes, he took out a late 
number of the Edinburgh Review, and begged me to tell him 
whether the article on Addison was written by my friend, for 
he had been discussing this matter with a passenger that evening. 
When I had confirmed this opinion he thanked me, expressing much 
regret that he should not see me again, since I was to land next 
day at Natchez before he should be up. This conversation lasted 
but a few minutes, and in as many more I was in a good berth 
under a musquito net, listening to a huge bell tolling in the fog, 
to warn every flat-boat to get out of the way, on peril of being 
sent instantly to the bottom. In spite of this din, and that of 
the steam funnels arid machinery, I soon fell asleep for the third 
time. 

When I carne on deck next day, all hands were at work, taking 
in wood at a landing below Bayou Sara, where I saw on the top 
of the river bank, now sixteen feet high, several striking memorials 
of the ravages of former inundations. Besides the newest levee, 
there was one which had given way previously to the great flood 
of 1814, and a still older one, which, although once parallel, was 
now cut off abruptly, and at right angles to the present course of the 
river. They reminded me of the remnant of an oval intrench- 
ment at the edge of the cliff near New Haven in Sussex, and of 
those paths leading directly to the brink of precipices overhanging 
the sea in many maritime counties in England. Farther on, at 
another wooding station, in Adams County, Mississippi, I observed 
a bank eighteen feet in perpendicular height, and said to be forty- 
five feet high when the water is at its lowest. It was composed 
of sand, or sandy loam, indicating a comparatively rapid deposi 
tion. In such loam, no erect stumps and trunks of trees are met 
with, the sediment having accumulated on the margin of the 
river in a few years too fast to allow large trees to grow there. 
But in other places, where the bank consisted of fine, stiff clay, 
I saw here and there the buried stools of cypresses, and other 
trees, in an upright position, with their roots attached, sometimes 



148 UPRIGHT BURIED TREES. [CHAP. XXXI. 



repeated at several different levels iii the face of the same bank. 
I first remarked one of these at a point forty-five miles above New 
Orleans, and they increased in number as we ascended. When 
first told of this phenomenon, before visiting the Mississippi, it 
appeared to me very difficult of explanation. I soon, however, 
discovered that the great river, in its windings, often intersects 
the swamps or cypress basins which had been previously filled up 
with fine mud or vegetable matter, at various distances from the 
former river-channel. 

Suppose an ancient bed of the Mississippi, or some low part 
of the plain, to become fit for the growth of cypress, yet to be 
occasionally flooded, so that the soil is slowly raised by fine mud, 
drift wood, or vegetable matter like peat. As the cypress ( Taxo- 
diuin distichum} often attains to the age of three or four centu 
ries, and, according to many accounts, occasionally in Louisiana 
to that of two thousand years, it is clear that the bottoms of the 
oldest trees will often be enveloped in soil several feet deep, before 
they die, and rot down to the point where they have been covered 
up with mud. In the mean time other trees will have begun to 
grow on adjoining spots, at different and considerably higher levels, 
and eventually some of these will take root in soil deposited directly 
over the stump or decayed trunk of some of the first or oldest 
series of cypresses. They who have studied the delta affirm that 
such successive growths of trees are repeated through a perpendic 
ular height of twenty-five feet without any change occurring in 
the level of the land.* 

Proceeding up the river, we soon passed Bayou Sara on our 
right hand, and came to the isthmus called the Raccourci cut 
off, across which a trench nine feet deep has been dug, in the 
hope that the Mississippi would sweep out a deep channel. This 
" cut-off/ should it ever become the main channel, would enable 
a steamer to reach, in one mile, a point, to gain which costs 
now a circuit of twenty-six miles, and two and a half hours. 
Unfortunately, when they cleared the forest in this spot, the soil 
of the new canal was found to consist of a stiff blue clay, 

* See Dickeson and Brown, Silliman s Journal, Second Series, vol. v. p. 
17, Jan. 1848. 



CHAP. XXXI.] RACCOURCI CUT-OFF. 1 19 

strengthened by innumerable roots of trees, and, in the flood of 
1845, the surplus waters of the Mississippi poured through the 
cut with great velocity, yet failed to deepen it materially. By 
shortening the channel twenty-five miles, the fall of the river 
would be augmented, and the engineer flattered himself that the 
effect might extend as far up as the mouth of the Red River. 
By accelerating the current there it was hoped that a deeper 
passage might be kept open in the sand-bar, which now blocks 
up the navigation of that important tributary for the greater 
part of the year. 

Some experienced pilots assured me, that the supposed short 
ening of the channel of the Mississippi, between its junction with 
the Ohio and New Orleans, was, in a great degree, a delusion. 
Instead of the boasted gain of fifty miles, they say that not a 
third of this distance has been realized. Immediately after the 
completion of a new cut-off", the Mississippi begins to restore the 
natural curvature of its channel by eating away one bank and 
throwing out a sand-bar on the opposite side. 

Another fifty miles brought us to the mouth of the Red River, 
where I saw the formidable bar, before alluded to, covered, for 
the most part, by a growth of young willows and cotton-wood 
(Populus angulata). After leaving the mouth of Red River, 
we passed two bluffs on the left or eastern bank, one that of 
Fort Adams, a very picturesque line of precipices, the other called 
Ellis s Cliffs. In both I observed a predominance of white sand, 
similar to that seen in part of the bluff at Port Hudson. 

At Natchez (where I rejoined my wife), there is a fine range 
of bluffs, several miles long, and more than 200 feet in perpen 
dicular height, the base of which is washed by the river. The 
lower strata, laid open to view, consist of gravel and sand, desti 
tute of organic remains, except some wood and silicified corals, 
and other fossils, which have been derived from older rocks ; 
while the upper sixty feet are composed of yellow loam, present 
ing, as it wastes away, a vertical face toward the river. From 
the surface of this clayey precipice are seen, projecting in relief, 
the whitened and perfect shells of land-snails, of the genera Helix, 
lldiclna, Pupa, C//clostoma, Achatina, and Succinca. These 



150 FRESH-WATER LOAM OF NATCHEZ. [CHAP. XXXI. 



shells, of which we collected twenty species, are all specifically 
identical with those now inhabiting the valley of the Mississippi. 
The resemblance of this loam to that fluviatile silt of the val 
ley of the Rhine, between Cologne and Basle, which is generally 
called " loess" and " lehm" in Alsace, is most perfect. In both 
countries the genera of shells are the same, and as, in the ancient 
alluvium of the Rhine, the loam sometimes passes into a lacus 
trine deposit containing shells of the genera Lymnea, Planorbis, 
and Cydas, so I found at Washington, about seven miles inland, 
or eastward from Natchez, a similar passage of the American 
loam into a deposit evidently formed in a pond or lake. It con 
sisted of marl containing shells of Lymnea, Planorbis, Paludiiia, 
PUysa, and Cyclas, specifically agreeing with testacea now 
inhabiting the United States. With the land-shells before men 
tioned are found, at different depths in the loam, the remains of 
the mastodon ; and in clay, immediately under the loam, and 
above the sand and gravel, entire skeletons have been met with 
of the megalonyx, associated with the bones of the horse, bear, 
stag, ox, and other quadrupeds, for the most part, if not all, of 
extinct species. This great loamy formation, with terrestrial 
and fresh-water shells, extends horizontally for about twelve 
miles inland, or eastward from the river, forming a platform 
about 200 feet high above the great plain of the Mississippi. 
In consequence, however, of the incoherent arid destructible 
nature of the sandy clay, every streamlet flowing over what 
must originally have been a level table-land, has cut out for 
itself, in its way to the Mississippi, a deep gully or ravine. This 
excavating process has, of late years, proceeded with accelerated 
speed, especially in the course of the last thirty or thirty-five 
years. Some attribute the increased erosive action to partial 
clearings of the native forest, a cause of which the power has 
been remarkably displayed, as before stated, within the last 
twenty years, in Georgia.* Others refer the change mainly to 
the effects of the great earthquake of New Madrid, in 181112, 
by which this region was much fissured, ponds being dried up 
and many landslips caused. 

* See tonte, p. 29. 



CHAP. XXX I.] FOSSIL HUMAN BONE. 151 

In company with Dr. Dickeson and Colonel Wales, I visited 
a narrow valley, hollowed out through the shelly loam recently 
named " the Mammoth ravine," from the fossils found there. 
Colonel Wiley, a proprietor of that part of the State of Mississippi, 
who knew the country well before the year 1812, assured me 
that this ravine, although now seven miles long, and in some parts 
sixty feet deep, with its numerous ramifications, has been entirely 
formed since the earthquake. He himself had plowed some of 
the land exactly over one spot which the gully now traverses. 

A considerable sensation was recently caused in the public 
mind, both in America and Europe, by the announcement of the 
discovery of a fossil human bone, so associated with the remains 
of extinct quadrupeds, in " the Mammoth ravine," as to prove 
that man must have co-existed with the rnegalonyx and its con 
temporaries. Dr. Dickeson showed me the bone in question, 
admitted by all anatomists to be part of a human pelvis, and 
being a fragment of the os innominatmn. He felt persuaded 
that it had been taken out of the clay underlying the loam, in 
the ravine above alluded to, about six miles from Natchez. I 
examined the perpendicular cliffs, which bound a part of this 
water-course, where the loam, unsolidified as it is, retains its 
verticality, and found land-shells in great numbers at the depth 
of about thirty feet from the top. I was informed that the fossil 
remains of the mammoth (a name commonly applied in the Unit 
ed States to the mastodon) had been obtained, together with the 
bones of some other extinct mammalia, from below these shells 
in the undermined cliff. I could not ascertain, however, that 
the human pelvis had been actually dug out in the presence of 
a geologist, or any practiced observer, and its position unequivo 
cally ascertained. Like most of the other fossils, it was, I 
believe, picked up in the bed of the stream, which would simply 
imply that it had been washed out of the cliffs. But the evi 
dence of the antiquity of the bone depends entirely on the part 
of the precipice from which it was derived. It was stained 
black, as if buried in a peaty or vegetable soil, and may have 
been dislodged from some old Indian grave near the top, in 
which case it may only have been five, ten, or twenty centuries 



152 TORNADO AT NATCHEZ. [CHAP. XXXI. 



old ; whereas, if it was really found in situ at the base of the 
precipice, its age would more probably exceed 100,000 years, as 
1 shall endeavor to show in a subsequent chapter. Such a posi 
tion, in fact, if well authenticated, would prove that man had 
lived in North America before the last great revolution in the 
physical geography of this continent had been accomplished ; in 
other words, that our race was more ancient than the modern 
valley, alluvial plain, and delta of the Mississippi nay, what is 
more, was antecedent to the bluffs of Port Hudson and Natchez, 
already described. Now that elevated fresh-water formation, as 
I shall by and by endeavor to show, is the remnant of a river- 
plain arid delta of extremely high antiquity ; and it would follow, 
if the human race was equally ancient, that it co-existed with 
one group of terrestrial mammalia, and, having survived its 
extinction, had seen another group of quadrupeds succeed and 
replace it. 

In our excursion through the forest, from Washington to the 
Mammoth ravine, I crossed the path of the last tornado, which 
occurred May 17, 1840, one of three which have devastated 
this region since the year 1809. They all came from Texas, 
moving along from southwest to northeast, and laid waste a 
long strip of country, about a mile wide. The courses of each 
of the three whirlwinds were within a few miles of the other, 
and the last threw down many houses at Natchez, unroofed 
others, and leveled to the ground a railway terminus, causing 
the abandonment of a scheme for a rapid communication between 
Natchez, Vicksburg, and the State of Tennessee. On each side 
of the path of the tornado the land was finely timbered ; but 
where its force had been expended, old trees lay uprooted, and a 
growth of young wood w r as rising. Many large trunks had been 
broken off ten or twelve feet above the ground, and portions of 
the solid wood, torn and twisted into shreds, were still waving 
in the air. 

This tornado checked the progress of Natchez, as did the 
removal of the seat of legislature to Jackson ; but it has suffered 
still more, since steam navigation has been so much improved, 
by the all-absorbing importance acquired by New Orleans as the 



CHAP. XXXI.] COUNTRY-HOUSES. 



great emporium of the whole trade of the Mississippi. There 
are, however, so few bluffs on the great river, so few places 
where the channel will remain constant for ages to the same 
spot, that I can not doubt that this city must, in time, become 
large and prosperous. 

It augurs favorably of the future prospects of civilization in 
America, that here, as elsewhere, we found the society most 
agreeable in places which have been the longest settled. If the 
political opinions and notions of honor cherished by the majority 
of the citizens of Natchez, had had their due weight in the legisla 
tion of the state, the fair fame of Mississippi, and her credit, would 
have stood as high as that of any other southern state. Many 
of the country-houses in the neighborhood are elegant, and some 
of the gardens belonging to them laid out in the English, others 
in the French style. In the latter are seen terraces, with statues 
and cut evergreens, straight walks with borders of flowers, ter 
minated by views into the wild forest, the charms of both being 
heightened by contrast. Some of the hedges are made of that 
beautiful North American plant, the Gardenia, miscalled in 
England the Cape jessamine, others of the Cherokee rose, with 
its bright and shining leaves. It had already put forth some of 
its white flowers, which a month later would be in full blow. 
The woods here, when all the trees are in full foliage, and the 
tall magnolias in blossom, must be truly beautiful. But so 
intense is the heat, and such the danger of ague and the torment 
of musquitos, that, at that season, they who can afford to move, 
fly to some higher or more northern retreat. 

On the steep slope of the bluffs at Natchez, below the vertical 
face of shelly loam, the Judas-tree, or red-bud (Cercis. canademis), 
was now in full flower, displaying a blaze of pink blossoms before 
it has put forth any leaves. I saw four landslips on these bluffs 
which have occurred within the last tea years, for the springs 
which burst from the sand ancterra^ne. the clayey loam. They 
are instructive, as showing How the bluffs give way as the Mis 
sissippi gradually extends. \ta course eastward. There is one 
hollow of ancient date, caused by a similar undermining, called 
the Devil s Punch-bowl, a picturesque, crater-shaped basin, of 

G* 



154 INDIAN ANTIQUITIES. [CHAP. XXXI. 

about 300 yards diameter at the top, and 100 yards at the bot 
tom, where cypresses and gum-trees are growing. At the top 
are seen the cotton-wood, the maple, and the magnolia, mixed 
with pines. 

The name of Natchez has been derived from an Indian tribe, 
and on the highest part of the bluff, on an eminence called St. 
Rosalie, are some Indian mounds, from which Dr. Dickeson has 
obtained some curious remains of pottery, showing that some of the 
aboriginal inhabitants of the great valley had made much greater 
progress in the arts than their descendants whom the Europeans 
drove out. One morning, close to the spot where these antiqui 
ties were dug up, we saw a wild-looking group of Indians, whose 
aspect gave no token that their contact with Europeans had 
tended to revive the spirit of improvement which must once have 
animated some of their predecessors in this region. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

Natchez. Vidalia and Lake Concordia. Hibernation of Alligator. 
Bonfire on Floating Raft. Grand Gulf. Magnolia Steamer. Vicksburg 
to Jackson (Mississippi) by Railway. Fossils on Pearl River. Ordinary 
at Jackson. Story of Transfer of State-House from Natchez. Vote by 
Ballot. Popular Election of Judges. Voyage from Vicksburg to Mem 
phis. Monotony of River Scenery. Squall of Wind. Actors on Board. 
Negro mistaken for White. Manners in the Backwoods. Inquisitive- 
ness. Spoiled Children. Equality and Leveling. Silence of English 
Newspapers on Oregon Question. 

March 15, 1846. FROM Natchez we crossed the river, by 
the ferry, to Vidalia, situated on the low river plain, on a level 
with the base of the bluffs before described. We were accompa 
nied by Mr. Davis, a large proprietor, who took us to see his 
negro-houses, all neatly built and well whitewashed. Even in 
this cursory view we could perceive how much the comfort and 
bodily wants of the slaves had been attended to. We had now 
left the country where sugar and cotton are the staple products, 
and had just entered the region where cotton and Indian corn 
are cultivated together. Here, as in Louisiana, the negroes 
constitute half, and sometir^s more than half, the population on 
the borders of the Mississippi. 

At Vidalia we were joined by Mr. Forshey, the engineer, 
who went with us to Lake Concordia, a fine example of an old 
bend of the Mississippi, recently detached and converted into a 
crescent-shaped lake, surrounded by wood. It is a fine sheet of 
water, fifteen miles long, if measured by a curved line drawn 
through the middle. The old levee, or embankment, is still 
seen ; but it is no longer necessary to keep it in repair, for, a 
few years ago, the channel which once connected this bend with 
the main river was silted up. Opposite Natchez the depth of 
the Mississippi varies from 100 feet to 150 feet, but Lake Con 
cordia has nowhere a greater depth than 40 feet. There are 



156 LAKE CONCORDIA. [CHAP. XXXII. 

thirteen similar lakes between the mouth of the Arkansas and 
Baton Pvouge, all near the Mississippi, and produced by cut-offs ; 
and so numerous are the channels which communicate from one 
to the other, that a canoe may pass, during the flood season, 
from Lake Concordia, and reach the Gulf of Mexico without once 
entering the Mississippi. We were shown a cypress tree on the 
borders of this deserted river bend, from under the roots of which, 
a few days before the time of our visit, a she alligator had come 
out on a warm day, the place of her hybemation appearing to be 
half in the mud and half in the water. She brought out with 
her two broods, one born in the preceding summer, which were 
six inches long, and the others, an older set, about a foot long. 
When Mr. Forshey approached them, the young ones yelped like 
puppies, and the old one hissed. On the shore of the lake we 
caught a tortoise, called here the snapping-turtle, and found that 
all its feet had been bitten off devoured, our companions sup 
posed, by predaceous fish. The fresh-water shells, of which we 
obtained specimens from the lake, belong to the genera Lymnea, 
Planorbis, Paludina, Anchylotus, Physa, Cyclas, and Unio. 
W r e put up flights of water-fowl of various species, chiefly wild 
ducks, which were swimming about. On the top of a pole, 
driven into the mud near the margin of the lake, was perched a 
kingfisher, and two cormorants were wheeling round it, one with 
a fish in its mouth, which the other was trying to snatch away. 
The water, although much clearer than the Mississippi, was not 
transparent, for it had communicated, during the late inunda 
tions, with the great river. In this manner sediment is annually 
introduced into such basins, and in the course of ages Lake Con 
cordia may become so shallow as to support a forest of swamp 
timber. Some modern concretions of clay and lime, and of clay 
containing iron, which I picked up from the mud of the Missis 
sippi bordering this lake, were so like those associated with the 
ancient buried forest at Port Hudson, and the shelly loam of 
Natchez, as to confirm me in the opinion before expressed, that 
the cliffs there, although of very high antiquity, correspond in 
origin with the recent fluviatile formations of the alluvial plain. 
March 17. We established ourselves in the wharf-boat at 



CHAP. XXXII. ] BONFIRE ON FLOATING RAFT. 157 

Natchez, prepared for a start in the first steamer which would 
take us to Grand Gulf, fifty miles higher up. We amused our 
selves by watching a party of young negro boys, who collected 
the drift wood which bordered the river, and, having tied it 
together into a raft, heaped some dead branches of trees upon it, 
placing a layer of shavings under the pile. Having set it on 
fire, they pushed it off from the shore, and exulted as they saw 
the floating bonfire, in the dusk of the evening, throwing a glar 
ing light on the bluffs, town, and shipping. The raft was car 
ried round and round in the great eddies near the bank, and the 
urchins shouted when their love of mischief was gratified by 
seeing the alarm of the boatmen, each of whom was observing 
the wandering fire with some anxiety, lest it should come too 
near his own craft. In the cabin of the wharf-boat we found no 
furniture, but were supplied with two chairs, which, like the 
walls and ceiling, were of unpainted wood. As it grew dark, 
they brought in a table and a single candle. We were not sorry 
when the Peytona was announced, and we were ushered into a 
splendid saloon, 150 feet long, lighted by two large chandeliers sus 
pended from the ceiling, and supplied with brilliant gas, manufac 
tured on board. The mattresses of our beds were clastic, made 
of India rubber, no unmeaning luxury, for we were awakened 
before morning by the bumping of the boat against one floating 
log after another, and, in spite of the frequent stoppage of the 
engine, no small damage was done to the paddle-wheels, which 
got entangled with the drift timber. We reached Grand Gulf 
when morning had scarcely dawned, and found the floor of the 
saloon covered with the sleeping colored servants, over whom we 
had to step. The river had risen twenty-five feet in two days, 
and was more turbid than we had yet seen it. 

The blulf at Grand Gulf is about 180 feet high, the upper 
most 60 feet, composed, as at Natchez, of yellow loam or loess, 
beneath which was white quartzose sand, partially concreted into 
solid sandstone, which is quarried here for building. From the 
summit, the river-plain to the westward seemed as level, blue, 
and boundless as the ocean. As we had now traveled two 
degrees of latitude northward, the spring was not more advanced 



158 GRAND GULF MAGNOLIA STEAMER. [CHAP. XXXII. 

than when we left New Orleans, but the woods crowning the 
bluffs are beautiful from the variety of trees, many of them ever 
greens, and we were charmed with the melody of the mocking 
birds, and the warm sun brought out many large and brilliantly 
colored butterflies, and more insects of other kinds than I had 
yet seen in the south. Among these were a beetle (Phaneus 
carnifex), with green and gold wing-cases, and a horn on the 
thorax. The name of bug is given to all beetles (Coleopteral) 
here, and does not seem to awaken the same unpleasant associa 
tions as it suggests to English ears. Even the elegant fire-fly is 
called a lightning-bug, and ladies who have diamond beetles set 
in brooches, ask you to admire their beautiful bugs. The Lon 
doners, by way of compensation, miscall the cockroach a black 
beetle. 

From Grand Gulf we embarked in the Magnolia, which had 
brought my wife to Natchez, and, having since made a trip to 
St. Louis and New Orleans, was on its return up the river. It 
is a new boat, and, among other improvements, has a separate 
sleeping cabin for the colored servants. The furniture in the 
principal saloon is of fine Utrecht velvet, and the hanging lusters 
for gas very brilliant : the beds excellent ; but the powerful 
vibration caused by the machinery far from agreeable. Our 
state room contained a chest of drawers, and cupboards for hang 
ing up ladies dresses. Ample time was allowed for dinner, and 
we thought the fare only too sumptuous. The repast began 
with turtle soup, and two kinds of fish ; then followed a variety 
of made dishes, admirably cooked, and then a course of cocoa-nut 
pies, jellies, preserved bananas, oranges, grapes, and ice-creams, 
concluding with coffee. The claret was excellent, and it may 
seem strange, at first, that they who indulge in such luxuries, 
can drink freely of the opaque, unfiltered water of the Mississippi. 
But this fluid has, at least the merit of being cool on a hot day, 
and is believed to be very wholesome. We found it pleasant to 
the taste, however untempting to the sight. Few of the praises 
bestowed by Denham on the Thames can be lavished on the 
Mississippi ; for, though deep, it is not clear, nor is it " without 
o erflowing full." Yet, in spite of the occasional undermining 



CHAP. XXXII.] VICKSBURG TO JACKSON. 159 

of forests on its banks, it may be truly characterized as " strong, 
without rage ;" absorbing, as it does, in its course, one great 
tributary after another, several of them scarcely inferior in width 
to itself, without widening its channel, and in this manner car 
rying down noiselessly to the sea its vast column of water and 
solid matter, while the greater part of its alluvial plain is left 
undisturbed. 

A settler at Natchez told us he had lived on the great river 
long enough to admire it, for the ease with which it performs its 
mighty work ; and to fear it, so often had he witnessed the wreck 
of vessels and the loss of lives. " If you fall overboard," he said, 
" in the middle of the Atlantic, you may rise again and be saved ; 
but here you are sucked down by an eddy, and the waters, closing 
over you. are so turbid, that you are never seen again." 

March 19. At Vicksburg, where we next landed, I found 
the bluffs, forming the eastern boundary of the great plain, similar, 
in their upper part, to those of Natchez ; but beneath the fresh 
water loam and sand were seen, at the base of the cliffs, a marine 
tertiary deposit, of the Eocene period, in which we collected many 
shells and corals. (See fig. 10, p. 193 ; and 3, fig. 11, p. 196.) 

Leaving my wile to rest at the hotel, I made a rapid trip by 
railway, fifty-five miles eastward, to Jackson, the capital of the 
State of Mississippi. For the first ten miles, the cars traversed 
a table-land, corresponding in height with the summit of the bluff 
at Vicksburg, and preserving an even surface, except where gullies 
had been hollowed out in the soft shelly loam or loess. These 
are numerous, and it had been necessary to throw bridges over 
many of them so as to preserve the level of the road. It was 
curious to observe, in the cuttings made through the loam, that 
each precipitous face retained its perpendicularity, as in natural 
sections, although composed of materials wholly uriconsolidated. 
Farther to the east, the Eocene strata, belonging to the same 
series, which are seen at the bottom of the bluffs at Vicksburg, 
rise up to the surface from beneath the fresh-water loam, which 
attains an elevation of about 250 feet above the sea, and then 
gives place to older rocks. 

We passed through large forests of oaks and beeches, just 



1GO FOSSILS ON PEARL RTVER. [CHAP. XXXII. 

coming into leaf, in which Avere some green hollies. The red- 
bud, in. blossom, was conspicuous in some of the woods. In the 
wet grounds were cane-brakes, willows, and magnolias. I observed, 
in a large clearing, three plows following each other, one guided 
by a man, and the others each by a negro woman. When we 
reached the Big Black River, twelve miles from Vicksburg, we 
passed over a long wooden bridge arid viaduct, built on piles, 
nearly a mile in length. In about four hours, we arrived at the 
town of Jackson. I was wholly without letters of introduction, 
having suddenly determined on this excursion, arid knew not the 
name of a single individual ; which I regretted the more, as I 
had only a few hours of daylight at my disposal, and was to return 
by the cars at noon the day following. I inquired, as I had often 
done in France on similar occasions, for the nearest pharmacien, 
or chemist, and, being shown a shop, asked if they knew any one 
who was interested in geology. The chemist informed me that 
Dr. Gist, a physician, lodged in the floor above, and might assist 
me. Fortunately, this gentleman was at home, and, telling me 
he had read my work on Geology, he presented me with some 
fossil shells and corals collected by him in the neighborhood ; and, 
within ten minutes of my " landing" from the cars, \ve were on 
our way together to explore the dried-up channel of a small 
tributary of the Pearl River, where I found a rich harvest of 
fossil marine shells and zoophytes. When we parted, my excellent 
guide agreed to accompany me, early the next morning, many 
miles in another direction. 

On entering my hotel, after dark, I was informed that supper 
was ready, and was conducted to a large ordinary, crowded chiefly 
by lawyers, who were attending the courts here. The landlord, 

General A , formerly of the Tennessee militia, played the 

part of master of the ceremonies, much to my amusement. He 
first obtained silence by exclaiming, with the loud voice of a herald, 
" Gentlemen, we are a great people," and then called out the 
names of all the viands on his long table and sideboard, beginning 
with " Beef-steak, with or without onions, roast turkey, pork, 
hominy, fish, eggs, &c., and ending with a list of various drink 
ables, the last of which was " tea, foreign and domestic." 



CHAP. XXXII.] TRANSFER OF STATE-HOUSE. Id 

Curiosity led me to order the last-mentioned beverage ; but I 
soon repented, finding it to be a liquid of a pink color, made of the 
root of the sassafras tree, and having a very medicinal taste. I 
was told that many here drink it for their health ; but the general, 
seeing that I did not relish it, supplied me with some good " foreign" 
tea. My host then introduced me to several of the lawyers who 
sat near me, which gave me an opportunity of asking whether 
there was any truth in the story told me by some of the Whigs 
at New Orleans, of the manner in which the seat of legislature 
had been transferred from Natchez to Jackson. I related the 
story, which was as follows : Natchez was the metropolis of 
the state, and the chief town of Adams County, which was so 
wealthy as to pay a third of all the taxes in Mississippi. It was 
a city to which the richest and best-informed citizens resorted, 
representing both the landed and moneyed interests of the state. 
It was, moreover, a center of communication, because it com 
manded the navigation of the great river. That the Houses of 
Legislature should meet here, was so natural and convenient, so 
fitted to promote good government, that the Democratic party 
could not be expected to put up, for many years, with an arrange 
ment of affairs so reasonable and advantageous. They accord 
ingly decided, by a majority, that some change must be made, 
and gave orders to a surveyor to discover the exact geographical 
center of the state. He found it in a wilderness, about fifty miles 
in a straight line east of Natchez, and pointed out an old cypress 
tree, in the middle of a swamp, accessible only by a canoe, as the 
spot they were in search of. This was welcome news ; all might 
now be placed on a footing of equality, the spot being equally 
inaccessible and inconvenient for all. When the architect, how 
ever, came to build the capitol, he took the liberty, instead of 
erecting the edifice on piles in the center of the swamp, to place 
it on an adjoining rising ground, from which they had cleared 
away the native wood, a serious abandonment of principle, as it 
was several hundred yards from the true geographical center. 1 

When my auditors had done laughing at this Louisiana version 
of a passage in their history, they said, the tale, after all, was 
not so exaggerated as it might have been, considering the vexation 



1G2 VOTE BY BALLOT. [CHAP. XXXIT. 



under which the New Orleans Whigs were smarting, in having 
to go to Baton Rouge. They could show me, they said, the 
swamp on the Pearl River, which must have been alluded to. 
That river, though now only beatable, might, they declared, be 
made navigable to steamboats, when the rafts of drift timber 
were cleared away, and they might then have a direct commer 
cial intercourse with the Gulf of Mexico. The soil, also, sur 
rounding Jackson, had proved to be very fertile, and the railway 
had brought the place within three or four hours of Natchez, now 
their port. In short, their town was flourishing, by aid of natural 
advantages, and the patronage of the Legislature and Law Courts. 

Next day, after a geological excursion, I wras taken to see the 
State House and Governor s Mansion, both handsome and com 
modious, arid built in a good style of architecture, but at great 
expense, at a time when the price of labor happened to be un 
usually high. I heard much regret expressed at the debts they 
had incurred, and at the refusal to acknowledge them in 1841. 
One lawyer, a member of the Legislature, declared his conviction 
that the repudiation of the state debt would not have been carried 
in his county, but for the facility afforded by secret voting. The 
same individuals, he said, who openly professed a more honorable 
line of conduct, must, out of selfishness, have taken advantage of 
the ballot-box to evade an increase of taxation, otherwise there 
could riot have been a majority in favor of disowning their liabil 
ities. This w r as one of the few instances in which I heard the 
ballot condemned in the United States ; yet the position of the 
laboring and middle classes is, comparatively, so independent 
here, in relation to their rich employers, that the chief arguments 
relied upon in England in favor of secret voting, would seem to 
be inapplicable. 

The dependence of the judges, for their election, on the popular 
suffrage, appears to have been carried farther in Mississippi than 
in any other state. I was told that rival candidates for the bench 
and chancellorship, have been known to canvass for votes in 
taverns, and have been asked what construction they put on 
certain statutes relating to banks chartered by the state, just as, 
in an ordinary election for representatives, men are asked what 



CHAP. XXXII.] VICKSBURG TO MEMPHIS. 163 

are their opinions, and how they would vote on certain questions. 
I met with more men of property in Mississippi who spoke as if 
they belonged to an oppressed class, governed by a rude, ignorant, 
and coarse democracy, than in any other part of my tour. "Many 
of our poorest citizens," they said, " would freely admit, that nothing 
is so difficult, for the individual, as self-government, and yet hold 
that nothing is so easy and safe as self-government for the million, 
even where education has been carried no farther than here, where 
there are still seven counties without a single school-house, and 
large districts where the inhabitants have but recently been con 
verted to Christianity by itinerant Methodists. They forgot that 
even honorable and enlightened men will sometimes do, in their 
corporate capacity, what each individual would be ashamed to do 
if he acted singly." When I heard these remarks, and reflected 
that even in those parts of the state where the whites are most 
advanced, as in Adams County, more than half the population 
are slaves, I felt more surprise that English capitalists had lent 
so much money to Mississippi, than that they had repented of it. 
At the same time there is more hope for the future, for education 
must come. 

The town of Vicksburg is beautifully situated on the slope of 
a wooded bluff, about 180 feet high, and walks might be made, 
commanding the river, which would be delightful. At present 
no one can roam along the paths in the suburbs, as they are dis 
gracefully filthy. * 

We took our passage in the Andrew Jackson steamer, from 
Vicksburg to Memphis, a distance of 390 miles, and paid only 
six dollars each (25 shillings), board and lodging included. The 
monotony of the scenery on the great river for several hundred 
miles together, is such as to grow wearisome. Scarcely any ves 
sels with sails are seen, all the old schooners and smaller craft 
having been superseded by the great steam-ships. The traveler 
becomes tired of always seeing a caving bank on one side, and 
an advancing sand-bar, covered with willows and poplars, on the 

* For observations on the Geology of Jackson and Vicksburg, see a paper 
by the Author, Journ. of Geol. Soc. London, vol. iv. p. 15, 1847, and Silli- 
man s Journal, Second Series, vol. iv. p. 186, Sept. 1847. 



1G4 MONOTONY OF SCENERY. [CHAP. XXXII. 

other ; the successive growths of young trees rising to greater 
heights, one tier above another, as before described, below New 
Orleans. The water, at this season, is too turbid to reflect the 
sky or the trees on its bank. The aspect of things, day after 
day, is so exactly similar, that it might seem as necessary to take 
astronomical observations, in order to discover what progress one 
lias made, as if the voyage were in mid-Atlantic. That our 
course is northward, is indicated by the willows on the banks 
growing less green, and a diminishing quantity of gray moss 
hanging from the trees. The red maple has also disappeared. 
When I landed at wooding stations, I saw, on the damp ground 
beneath the trees, abundance of mosses, with scarcely a blade of 
grass, while the only wild flowers w^ere a few violets and a white 
bramble. The young leaves of the poplars are most fragrant in 
the night air. We were now in latitude 34 north, passing the 
mouths of the Arkansas and White rivers. 

The village of Napoleon, 212 miles above Vicksburg, at the 
mouth of the Arkansas, had suffered much by the floods of ] 844. 
Its red, muddy waters are hardly mixed up thoroughly with the 
Mississippi till they reach Vicksburg. They often bring down 
much ice into the Mississippi. The White River is said to be 
navigable for about six hundred miles above its mouth. 

Our steamer, the Andrew Jackson, bound for Cincinnati, car 
rying a heavy cargo of molasses, was eight feet deep in the 
water. To avoid the drift wood, which impeded her progress, 
the captain, on arriving at Island Eighty-four (for they are all 
numbered, beginning from the mouth of the Ohio), determined to 
take a short cut between that island, and the left river bank. 
The lead was heaved, and the decreasing depth, from ten feet to 
eight and a half, was called out ; our vessel then grazed the bot 
tom for a moment, but fortunately got off again. There w r as so 
much sameness in the navigation, that such an incident was 
quite a relief. Soon afterward, March 23d, some variety was 
afforded by a squall of wind, accompanied by lightning. I never 
expected to see waves of such magnitude, and was surprised to 
learn, that in some reaches, where the water extends ten miles 
in a straight line, a strong wind blowing against the current will 



CHA.P. XXXII.] ACTORS ON BOARD. 165 

cause large steamers to pitch so as to make many passengers sea 
sick ; but this rarely happens. In the night we had often to 
draw up to the bank, wherever a signal-fire was lighted, finding 
sometimes a single passenger waiting to be taken on board. 

There were many actors on board, and, among others, a 
pleasing young woman, who turned out to be the manager s 
wife, returning with her family of young children and sick hus 
band from Vicksburg, where she complained that the drama was 
at a low ebb, and where, as in many other cities in the south, the 
drunken habits of the inferior actors made the profession by no 
means a pleasant one for a woman. She was longing for an 
engagement in some " eastern theater," where, she told rny wife, 
she would willingly take less pay, and would not object to under 
take the part of " first old woman" for eighteen dollars a week, 
as most of the actresses, being desirous of looking young and pretty, 
compete eagerly for the character of " first juvenile." She liked 
much to act chambermaid, as then she was not expected to learn 
her part so accurately. She had a real feeling of enthusiasm for 
her art, and great admiration for Mrs. Kean, and spoke with 
satisfaction of having once acted second to her when she was 
Miss Ellen Tree. During her husband s illness at Vicksburg, 
she had been obliged to take the management of the theater 
herself, and had good reason to lament that the temperance move 
ment had not reached so far west. The physician, after attend 
ing his patient for many weeks in a fever, remitted to them a 
bill of fifty dollars, one only of many similar acts of generosity in 
the members of this profession which came to my knowledge in 
the course of my tour. This actress had with her a young 
maid, fairer than many an English brunette, but who, though a 
free woman, did not happen to belong to the white aristocracy. 
The stewardess came into the cabin and summoned her to dinner, 
and she, doing as she was bid, sat down at the second table, 
where the officers of the ship and the white children were dining. 
When her repast was half finished, her master and mistress sud 
denly discovered the prodigious breach of decorum which their 
attendant was perpetrating, and, calling her away from the table, 
began explaining to one lady after another, especially those with 



ItiG MANNERS IN THE BACKWOODS. [CHAP, XXXII. 

whose children she had been sitting, that she was really a good 
girl, who knew no better. The stewardess also, knowing she 
should incur blame, came and apologized for her mistake, ob 
serving that the girl was quite undistinguishable by her com 
plexion from a white. There was a quadroon lady on board, 
of very respectable appearance and manners, who w^as taking all 
her meals in her own state-room, thus avoiding the risk of meet 
ing with similar indignities. It is not surprising, in such a state 
of society, that they who belong to the degraded race, should 
make every effort to conceal the fact ; or, if that be impossible, 
to assimilate themselves, as far as they can. to individuals of the 
dominant race. In proportion to the mixture of white blood, the 
woolly, short hair of the negro lengthens and straightens, and the 
ambition of the black women is to contend with nature in tortur 
ing their hair, by combing and plaiting, till it resembles, as near 
as possible, the flowing locks of the whites. 

At one of the wooding stations, a countryman came on board with 
his wife, a half-breed Indian. She had straight black hair, and a 
soft, mild eye. She sat at table with us, taking her place on terms 
of perfect equality, no distinction of caste being made in this case. 

As I was pacing the deck, one passenger after another eyed 
my short-sight glass, suspended by a ribbon round my neck, with 
much curiosity. Some of them asked me to read for them the 
name inscribed on the stern of a steamer so far off that I doubted 
whether a good telescope would have enabled me to do more than 
discern the exact place where the name was written. Others, 
abruptly seizing the glass, without leave or apology, brought their 
heads into close contact with mine, and, looking through it, ex 
claimed, in a disappointed and half reproachful tone, that they 
could see nothing. Meanwhile, the wives and daughters of pas 
sengers of the same class, were sitting idle in the ladies cabin, 
occasionally taking my wife s embroidery out of her hand, without 
asking leave, and examining it, with many comments, usually, 
however, in a complimentary strain. To one who is studying 
the geology of the valley of the Mississippi, the society of such 
companions may be endurable for a few weeks. He ought to 
recollect that they form the great majority of those who support 



CHAI. XXXII.] INQUISITIVENESS. 167 

these noble steamers, without which such researches could not 
be pursued except by an. indefinite sacrifice of time. But \vo 
sometimes doubted how far an English party, traveling 1 for mere 
amusement, would enjoy themselves. If they venture on tho 
experiment, they had better not take with them an English 
maid-servant, unless they are prepared for her being transformed 
into an equal. It would be safer to engage some one of that too 
numerous class, commonly called "humble companions/ who 
might occasionally enter into society with them. Ladies who 
can dispense with such assistance, will find the maids in the inns, 
whether white or colored, most attentive. 

We were not asked more questions in regard to our private 
affairs than we had often been accustomed to submit to when 
traveling in France and Scotland. Nor had I any reason to 
complain ; for when I had satisfied the curious as to my age, the 
number of my children, how we liked the country, and many other 
particulars, often asked very abruptly by one just come on board, I 
had no ceremony in retaliating on him, and putting to him as many 
queries in my turn. Every one must admit that the answers you 
commonly receive are most intelligent. Americans of the higher 
classes seemed more put out than we were, when thus catechised. 

One of them, before we left Boston, as if determined that 
nothing should surprise me, related many diverting anecdotes to 
illustrate the inquisitive turn of his countrymen. Among other 
stories he gave a lively description of a New Englander who was 
seated by a reserved companion in a railway car, and who, by 
way of beginning a conversation, said, " Are you a bachelor ?" 
To which the other replied, drily, " No, I m not." "You are a 
married man ?" continued he. " No, I m not." " Then you 
must be a widower?" "No, I m not." Here there was a short 
pause ; but the undaunted querist returned to the charge, observ 
ing, " If your are neither a bachelor, nor a married man, nor a 
widower, what in the world can you be?" " If you must know," 
said the other, " I m a divorced man !" 

Another story, told me by the same friend, was that a gentle 
man being asked, in a stage coach, how he had lost his leg, made 
his fellow travelers promise that if he told them they would put 



SPOILT CHILDREN. [CHAP. XXXII. 



no more questions on the subject. He then said, " It was bitten 
off." To have thus precluded them for the rest of a long jour 
ney from asking how it was bitten off, was a truly ingenious 
method of putting impertinent curiosity on the rack. 

ftVhen my wife first entered the ladies cabin, she found every 
one of the numerous rocking-chairs filled with a mother suckling 
an infant. As none of them had nurses or servants, all their other 
children were at large, and might have been a great resource to 
passengers suflering from ennui, had they been under tolerable 
control. As it was, they were so riotous and undisciplined, as to 
be the torment of all who approached them. " How fortunate 
you are," said one of the mothers to my w r ife, " to be without 
children ; they are so ungovernable, and, if you switch them, they 
sulk, or go into hysterics." The threat of " I ll switch you," is 
forever vociferated in an angry tone, but never carried into execu 
tion. One genteel and pleasing young lady sat down by my wife, 
and began conversation by saying, ; You hate children, don t you ?" 
intimating that such were her own feelings. A medical man, in. 
large practice, in one of the southern states, told us he often lost 
young patients in fevers, and other cases where excitement of the 
nerves was dangerous, by the habitual inability of the parents to 
exert the least command over their children. We saw an instance 
where a young girl, in considerable danger, threw the medicine into 
the physician s face, and heaped most abusive epithets upon him. 
The Director of the State Penitentiary, in Georgia, told me, 
that he had been at some pains to trace out the history of the 
most desperate characters under his charge, and found that they 
had been invariably spoilt children ; and, he added, if young 
Americans were not called upon to act for themselves at so early 
an age, and undergo the rubs and discipline of the world, they 
would be more vicious arid immoral than the people of any other 
nation. Yet there is no country where children ought to be so 
great a blessing, or where they can be so easily provided for. 
Parents have not the excuse of Mrs. MacClarty, in the " Cottag 
ers of Glenburnie," when she exclaims, " If I don t give the boy 
his own way, what else have I to give him ?" but it is probably 
because so many of these western settlers have risen recently from 



CHAP. XXXil.l EQUALITY AND LEVELING. 169 



Mrs. MacClarty s grade in society, that they have retained her 
maxims for the management of their children ; for the young 
people in the families of the best class of society in the United 
States, are often kept in as good order, and are as engaging in 
their manners, as they are in any part of Europe. 

Many young Americans have been sent to school in Switzer 
land, and I have heard their teachers, who found them less 
manageable than English or Swiss boys, maintain that they 
must all of them have some dash of wild Indian blood in their 
veins. Englishmen, on the other hand, sometimes attribute the 
same character to republican institutions ; but, in fact, they are 
spoilt long before they are old enough to know that they are not 
born under an absolute monarchy. 

Some officers of the army, who had been educated at West 
Point, a lieutenant in the navy, and a judge, with his family, 
from a southern state, were agreeable companions on this voyage, 
and differed as much in manners from the majority of our mess 
mates, as persons of the same rank in Europe would have done. 
There seemed, to us, to be a great want, in such steamers, of a 
second cabin, at a price intermediate between that of the first 
cabin and the deck. A poor emigrant, who waB roughing it in 
the latter place, remarked to me truly, that they were treated 
there like dogs, and had nothing but a plank to sleep upon. He 
was paying highly for his wife and family, who had places in 
the first cabin. Among all who have paid for these, a recogni 
tion of perfect equality is scrupulously exacted. Not only would 
a man of rank and ancient family, but one of the most refined 
manners, and superior knowledge and education, find himself 
treated as entitled to no more deference or respect than the rud 
est traveler. Plato s definition of a man, " bipes implume," "a 
featherless biped," would be most appropriate to one who was 
journeying in such company. To a certain extent, however, the 
manners of the ruder members of this society are improved by 
such intercourse, and there is some leveling up as well as level 
ing down. The European traveler must also bear in mind, that 
it would be no discredit to those who are settling in this wilder 
ness especially when Europe pours into it, annually, her hun- 

VOL. I!. II 



170 ENGLISH NEWSPAPERS. [CHAP. XXXII. 

dreds of thousands of ignorant and disappointed emigrants if 
the accommodation was of the rudest kind ; if there were no 
steamers in whose machinery the latest improvements had been, 
adopted, many of them invented in the United States ; and if 
the cabin was not provided with good libraries, or the table cov 
ered with newspapers, literary magazines, and reviews. It is 
precisely because there is so much civilization in the western 
states, that foreigners criticise them unfairly, contrasting their 
condition with the highest standard of older countries. 

The authority of the captain is absolute, and he does not hesi 
tate, if any unruly spirit is refractory, and refuses to conform to 
the regulations of the ship, to put him ashore at the nearest 
place on the bank where he can be landed ; but I never hap 
pened to see so strong a measure resorted to. 

The newspapers on the cabin table of the Andrew Jackson 
had a column headed in capitals, " Five Weeks later from Eu 
rope." The mail packet had been detained by adverse winds 
longer than usual, and the uneasiness respecting the chances of a 
war with England, still the subject of debate in Congress, had 
risen to a great height. Many lovers of peace had misgiving s 
lest the English democracy, growing at last impatient, should 
express themselves with violence, and excite the war party here. 
The first glance at the news relieved them from anxiety, for the 
English were entirely absorbed with Free Trade, Cheap Bread, 
and the admission of foreign grain without duty. The Cabinet 
were too well satisfied that the people s attention was drawn off 
from foreign affairs to obtrude the American question unneces 
sarily on their attention. One of the politicians on board, who 
had been reading an account of the proceedings of the Anti-Corn- 
Law League, and the parliamentary debates on the Corn Duties, 
confessed to me, that the omission of all allusion to America 
the English being so entirely occupied with their domestic affairs 
Avounded his feelings, "Here we have been talking," he said, 
"for three months about nothing else but Oregon, imagining that 
the whole world was looking on in suspense, at this momentous 
debate, and even in Great Britain it has been forgotten for five 
entire weeks ! What an absurd figure we are cutting !" 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

Bluffs at Memphis. New Madrid. No Inn. Undermining of River Bank. 
Examination of Country shaken by Earthquake of 1811-12. Effects 
of Passage of Waves through Alluvial Soil. Circular Cavities or Sand- 
Bursts. Open Fissures. Lake Eulalie drained by Shocks. Borders of 
Sunk Country, west of New Madrid. Dead Trees standing erect. A 
slight Shock felt. Trade in Peltries increased by Earthquake. Trees 
erect in new-formed Lakes. Indian Tradition of Shocks. Dreary Forest 
Scene. Rough Quarters. Slavery in Missouri. 

March 24, 1816. AT length we reached Memphis, in the 
State of Tennessee. The town on which this ancient and vener 
able name is conferred, appears the newest of the large places 
we have yet seen on the Mississippi. It is growing with great 
rapidity, standing on a bluff now fifty-two feet above the level 
of the water when the river is high. The cliff is the abrupt 
termination of deposits similar to those of fresh-water origin, which 
I have before alluded to at Natchez and Vicksburg. A mass of 
yellow loarn, forty feet thick, reposes on sand with quartz pebbles, 
which rests on clay, not visible at the time of my visit. Such a 
site for a town, in spite of the slow undermining of the cliffs, is 
permanent by comparison with the ordinary banks of the river 
for hundreds of miles continuously ; for, as a general rule, the 
stream in the alluvial plain is either encroaching a foot or more 
annually, so as to wash away buildings, if there be any on the 
bank, or is retreating, so that a port soon becomes an inland 
town. The people of Memphis are ambitious that their city 
should be a great naval arsenal, and there are considerable naval 
stores here ; but as frigates require from eighteen to twenty- 
three feet water, and men-of-war thirty feet, while the bar at 
the mouth of the Mississippi affords at present no more than six 
teen feet water, their hopes can riot be realized till a ship canal 
is made from some point on the Mississippi to the Gulf of Mexico. 
After we left Memphis, we were shown, on the Tennessee 



172 MEW MADRID. [CHAP. XXXIIL 



bank of the river, a log cabin, where they said General Jackson 
began his career ; one of his claims to popularity with the demo 
cratic party consisting in his having risen from a very humble 
origin. The advantages of a more liberal education, which a 
rival might have possessed who had begun life in easier circum 
stances, would not have countervailed, in the present stage of 
progress of the Union, the prestige which attaches to the idea of 
a man s having made his way by his own merits. 

JMarcli 25. From Memphis we sailed in a smaller steamer 
for 170 miles, first between the states of Tennessee and Arkan 
sas, and then between Tennessee and Missouri, and arrived very 
late at night at New Madrid, a small village on the western 
bank of the river, where I intended to stay and make geological 
observations on the region shaken by the great earthquake of 
181 112. So many of our American friends had tried to dissuade 
us from sojourning in so rude a place, that we were prepared for 
the worst. In the wharf-boat, at least, I expected to find a bed 
for the first night, and proposed to seek accommodation elsewhere 
the next day ; but, to my dismay, the keeper of this floating 
tavern told me, when I landed, that he had just come there, had 
nothing as yet " fixed," and could not receive us. I also learnt 
that the only inn in New Madrid had been given up for want 
of custom. Leaving, therefore, my wife sitting by the stove in 
the wharf-boat, and taking a negro as my guide, I began to pace 
the dark and silent streets. First I applied in vain for admit 
tance at the old tavern, then to a storekeeper in the neighbor 
hood, who informed me that a German baker, near the river, 
sometim.es took in lodgers. I next roused this man and his wife 
from their slumbers ; their only spare room was occupied, but 
they asked their lodger if he would give it up to us. No sum 
of money would have bribed him to comply, as I was satisfied 
when I knew him better, but his good nature led him at once to 
assent cheerfully. We were soon shown into the apartment, a 
kind of scullery, with a mattress on the floor, on which we slept, 
and did not make our appearance next morning till half-past 
eight o clock. We then apologized, fearing we had kept them 
waiting for breakfast. They said, good humoredly, they had 



CHAP. XXXIII.] UNDERMINING OF RIVER-BANK. 173 

indeed waited from six o clock, and it was now near their dinner 
time ! The young German, originally from near Strasburg, a 
man of simple manners, regarded himself as belonging to a differ 
ent station in society, and would have acted as waiter till we 
had finished our repast, had not his wife, a native-born American, 
from the State of Indiana, insisted on his sitting down to table. 
They were so poor, that they had no servants, not even a negro 
boy or girl, and two children to look after. The fare was of the 
humblest kind, bread of Indian corn, bacon, and thick coffee. 
Some of the indispensable articles of the breakfast table equipage 
had been purchased, as we afterward discovered, expressly for 
our use that morning. The lodger, " Uncle John," was an old 
bachelor in easy circumstances, fond of fishing, who had come 
here to indulge in that sport. He was an old pilot, who had 
visited half the ports in the Mediterranean, as well as Great 
Britain, and was quite a character. He could tell many a good 
story of his adventures, and, like many natives of Louisiana, 
could bear to be contradicted on any point rather than hear the 
healthiness of New Orleans called in question. His manners, 
and those of our host and hostess toward each other and to us, 
were very polite, and never approached undue familiarity. Uncle 
John assured me that the Mississippi is now flowing where New 
Madrid stood in 1811, and that the old grave-yard has traveled 
over from the State of Missouri into Kentucky. How this had 
happened, it was easy for me to divine when I went out after 
breakfast to look at the place by daylight. 

The river bank is now about twenty -five feet high, and would 
be forty-five feet at the lowest water level. It is giving way rapid 
ly, three houses having fallen in during the last week, and some 
proprietors are in the act of shifting their quarters half a mile 
inland. At the bottom of the wasting bank, there is a semi-fluid 
quick-sand, which greatly accelerates the process of destruction. 
Yesterday, the ruins of a house, with the wooden fence of a gar 
den, were precipitated into the river, and some of the wreck has 
formed a talus, up which I saw some hogs, after several unsuc 
cessful attempts, clamber at last into a garden, where they began 
to uproot the flowers. The steamboats, which are now sailing 



174 EARTHQUAKE OF 1811-12. [CHAP. XXXITI. 

close to the bank, will, in a few years, pass freely over the site of the 
humble mansion where we had been sleeping ; and the geographer, 
in constructing a map half a century hence, may have to transfer to 
the State of Kentucky, the spot where I saw a garden flourish. 

I examined the perpendicular face of the bank with some 
interest, as exemplifying the kind of deposits which the Missis 
sippi throws down near its margin. They differ in no way 
from accumulations of sand and loam of high antiquity with 
which the geologist is familiar ; some beds are made up of hori 
zontal layers, in others they are slanting, or in what is called 
cross stratification. Some are white, others yellow, and here 
and there a seam of black carbonaceous matter, derived apparent 
ly from the destruction of older strata, is conspicuous. 

I next set out on an excursion to examine those districts, 
where I heard that some superficial effects of the great earth 
quake of 1811 were still visible. The reader should be remind 
ed that this convulsion occurred contemporaneously with one of 
the most fatal earthquakes of South America, when the towns 
of Guayra and Caraccas were laid in ruins. The shocks were 
also felt in South Carolina. Humboldt has remarked that the 
shocks of New Madrid are the only examples on record, of the 
ground having quaked almost incessantly for three months, at a 
point so far remote from any active volcano. The shocks were 
most violent in part of the region called the Little Prairie, to 
the southward of New Madrid, and they extended as far south 
as the river St. Francis, and, northward, as far as the mouth of 
the Ohio. Although the country was thinly settled, and most 
of the houses built of logs, the loss of life was considerable. 
From accounts published at the time, it appears that the grave 
yard of New Madrid was precipitated into the Mississippi, the 
banks of which gave way in many places, and the ground swelled 
up so that the current of the river flowed backward for a time, 
carrying several flat boats northward, against the stream. In 
various parts of the region above alluded to as having been con 
vulsed, lakes twenty miles and upward in extent were formed, 
while others which pre-existed were drained.* Hundreds of 
* SiJliman s Journal, vol. xv. 1829. 



CHAP. XXXIIL] SAND-BURSTS. 175 



chasms opened, and new islands appeared in the Mississippi and 
its tributaries. Flint, the geographer, who visited the country 
seven years after the event, says that, at the time of his visit, 
a district west of New Madrid still remained covered with water, 
and that the neighboring forest presented a scene of great con 
fusion many trees standing inclined in every direction, and 
others having their trunks and branches broken. He also saw 
hundreds of deep chasms remaining in the alluvial soil, which 
were produced, according to the inhabitants, by the bursting of 
the earth, which rose in great undulations, and discharged vast 
volumes of water, sand, and coaly matter, thrown up as high as 
the tops of the trees. As the shocks lasted throughout a period 
of three months, the country people remarked that, in given dis 
tricts, there were certain prevailing directions in which these fis 
sures opened, arid they accordingly felled the tallest trees, making 
them fall at right angles to the direction of the chasms. By 
stationing themselves on these, they often escaped being swal 
lowed up when the earth opened beneath them. Some of the 
shocks were perpendicular, while others, much more desolating, 
were horizontal, or moved along like great waves. 

Before I left New Orleans, Mr. Bringier, the engineer, related 
to me that he was on horseback near New Madrid, in 1811, 
when some of the severest shocks were experienced, and that, as 
the waves advanced, he saw the trees bend down, and often, the 
instant afterward, when in the act of recovering their position, 
meet the boughs of other trees similarly inclined, so as to become 
interlocked, being prevented from righting themselves again. The 
transit of the wave through the woods was marked by the crash 
ing noise of countless branches, first heard on one side and then 
on the other. At the same time powerful jets of water, mixed 
with sand, mud, and bituminous coaly shale, were cast up with 
such force, that both horse and rider might have perished, had 
the undulating ground happened to burst immediately beneath 
them. He also told me that circular cavities, called sink-holes, 
were formed where the principal fountains of mud and water 
were thrown up. 

Hearing that some of these cavities still existed near the town, 



176 LAKE EULALIE. [CHAP. XXXIII. 

I went to see one of them, three quarters of a mile to the west 
ward. There I found a nearly circular hollow, ten yards wide, 
and five feet deep, with a smaller one near it, and I observed, 
scattered about the surrounding level ground, fragments of black 
bituminous shale, with much white sand. Within a distance 
of a few hundred yards, were five more of these " sand-bursts," 
or " sand-blows," as they are sometimes termed here, and, rather 
more than a mile farther west, near the house of Mr. Savors, 
my guide pointed out to me what he called " the sink-hole where 
the negro was drowned." It is a striking object, interrupting 
the regularity of a flat plain, the .sides very steep, and twenty- 
eight feet deep from the top to the water s edge. The water 
now standing in the bottom is said to have been originally very 
deep, but has grown shallow by the washing in of sand, and 
the crumbling of the bank caused by the feet of cattle coming to 
drink. I was assured that many wagon loads of matter were 
cast up out of this hollow, and the quantity must have been con 
siderable to account for the void ; yet the pieces of lignite, and the 
quantity of sand now heaped on the level plain near its borders, 
would not suffice to fill one-tenth part of the cavity. Perhaps a 
part of the ejected substance may have been swallowed up again, 
and the rest may have been so mixed with water, as to have 
spread freely like a fluid over the soil. 

My attention was next drawn to the bed of what was once a 
lake, called Eulalie ; Mr. W. Hunter, the proprietor of the estate, 
accompanying -me to the spot. The bottom, now dried up, is 
about 300 yards long, by 100 yards in width, and chiefly com 
posed of clay, covered with trees, the whole of them less than 
thirty-four years old. They consist of cotton- wood (Populus 
angulata), willows, the honey locust, and other species. Some 
single cotton-wood trees have grown so fast as to be near two 
and a half feet in diameter, and had not my guide known their 
age accurately, I should have suspected their origin to have been 
prior to 1811. All the species on the bottom differ from those 
covering the surrounding higher ground, which is more elevated 
by twelve or fifteen feet. Here the hickory, the black and white 
oak, the gum, and other trees, many of them of ancient date, are 



CHAP. XXXIII.] EXCURSION TO "SUNK COUNTRY." 177 

seen to flourish. On all sides, the ascent from the old bed of 
the lake to its boundary, is by a steep slope, on ascending which 
you reach a platform on a level with the top of the bank of the 
Mississippi, which is about a mile distant. Mr. Hunter in 
formed me that Lake Eulalie was formerly filled with clear 
water, and abounded in fish, until it was suddenly drained by 
the earthquake. In the clayey bottom, I traced the course of 
two parallel fissures, by which the waters escaped. They are 
separated from each other by a distance of about eight yards, 
and are not yet entirely closed. Near their edges, much sand 
and coal shale lie scattered, which were throw r n out of them when 
they first opened. 

In regard to the origin of this black bituminous shale, so 
abundantly cast out of chasms in this region, it belongs to the 
alluvial formation, and is found, in digging wells, fifteen feet 
deep, or sometimes nearer the surface. It was probably drifted 
down at a former period by the current of the Mississippi, from 
the coal-fields farther north. 

Having learned that still more striking monuments of the 
earthquake were to be seen in the territory farther to the west 
ward of New Madrid, I endeavored, but in vain, to hire a horse. 
At length a merchant s widow kindly lent me a steed. To pro 
cure a guide was impossible, all hands being fully employed. I 
therefore set out alone through the forest, skirting the borders of 
a swamp called the Bayou St. John, where I observed a great 
many fallen trees, and others dead and leafless, but standing 
erect. After riding some miles, I found my way to a farm, the 
owner of which had witnessed the earthquake when a child. He 
described to me the camping out of the people in the night when 
the first shocks occurred, and how some were wounded by the 
falling of chimneys, and the bodies of others drawn out of the 
ruins. He confirmed the published statements of the inhabitants 
having availed themselves of fallen trees to avoid being engulfed 
in open fissures, and I afterward heard that this singular mode 
of escape had been adopted in distant places, between which 
there had been no communication, and that even children threw 
themselves on the felled trunks. My new acquaintance then 

H* 



178 SLIGHT SHOCK FELT. [CHAP. XXXIII. 

took me to see several fissures still open, which had been caused 
by the undulatory movement of the ground, some of them jagged, 
others even and straight. I traced two of them continuously for 
more than half a mile, and found that a few were parallel ; but, 
on the whole, they varied greatly in direction, some being ten 
and others forty-five degrees west of north. I might easily have 
mistaken them for artificial trenches, if my companion had not 
known them within his recollection to have been " as deep as 
wells." Sand and black shale were strewed along their edges. 
They were most of them from two to four feet wide, and five or 
six feet deep ; but the action of rains, frost, and occasional inun 
dations, and above all the leaves of the forest blown into them 
every autumn in countless numbers, have done much to fill them up. 

Continuing my ride, I came to the house and farm of Mr. Love, 
who had long resided in this district, and he took me to part of 
the forest, on the borders of what is called the " sunk country," 
where all the trees of a date prior to 1811, although standing 
erect and entire, are dead and leafless. They are chiefly oaks 
and walnuts, with trunks three or four feet in diameter, and many 
of them 200 years old. They are supposed to have been killed 
by the loosening of the roots during the repeated undulations 
which passed through the soil for three months in succession. 
The higher level plain, where these dead trees stand, terminates 
abruptly toward the Bayou St. John, and the sudden descent 
of eight or ten feet throughout an area four or five miles long, 
and fifty or sixty broad, was caused, my informant assured me, 
by the earthquake. At the lower level are seen cypresses and 
cotton- wood, and other trees which delight in wet ground, all 
newer than 1812. I was told that there are some places where 
the descent from the upper level to that of the sunk country is 
not less than twenty and even thirty feet. In part of this sunk 
ground I saw not only dead oaks and hickory still erect, but aged 
gum-trees also and cypresses (Cupressus disticha). 

While I was riding with Mr. Love he stopped his horse, and 
asked me if I did not feel the shock of an earthquake. When 
my attention was called to it, I fancied I had perceived it, but 
was not sure. He said they were frequent, although he had not 



CHAP. XXXIII.] "SUNK COUNTRY." 179 

felt one for the last fortnight. It was now three years since they 
had been seriously alarmed by any movement. We looked at our 
watches, and when we returned to the farm he inquired of the 
family if any thing had happened. They said they had felt a 
shock, and heard a sound like distant thunder, at twenty-five 
minutes past eleven o clock, which agreed exactly with the time 
when my companion had felt the motion. 

If the information I obtained from several quarters be correct, 
in regard to the country permanently submerged by the earth 
quake of 181112, the area must exceed in magnitude what 
was stated in former accounts. The " sunk country," I am told, 
extends along the course of the White Water and its tributaries 
for a distance of between seventy and eighty miles north and south, 
and thirty miles east and west. A trapper, who had been hunting 
on the Little River, told me, that large spaces there were obviously 
under water, owing to the great shake, because the dead trees were 
still standing. In the true hunter spirit, he regarded the awful 
catastrophe of 181112 as a blessing to the country, and expati- 
ited with delight on the vast area turned into lake and marsh, 
id the active trade carried on ever since in the furs of wild animals, 
j^had been the making of New Madrid, he affirmed, which would 
)me a rival of St. Louis, and exported even now at least half 
my peltries. There had been taken last year 50,000 racoon 
skin^and 25,000 musk-rats for making hats and caps ; 12,000 
mink for trimming dresses; 1000 bears and 1000 otters; 2500 
wild oats, 40 panthers, and 100 wolves. Beavers there were 
none, or only five or six had been trapped. He had gone in his 
canoe, which carried his hut, his gun, and his baggage, over the 
whole sunk country, and described to me the villages or hummocks 
built in the swamps by the musk-rats, which he called " French 
settlements," a piece of impertinence in which the Anglo- Americans 
indulge toward the Creoles of Louisiana. He told me that within 
the area of the sunk country in Arkansas, about eighty miles from 
New Madrid, is a space called Buffalo Island, containing about 
twenty-five square miles, where, two years ago (1844), a herd 
of buffaloes, 300 or 400 strong, was surprised, and six of them 
taken. 



180 TRADITION OF EARTHQUAKES. [CHAP. XXXIII. 

The sunk country is not confined to the region west of the 
Mississippi ; for, on my way up the river, I learnt from Mr. 
Fletcher, a farmer, who had a wooding station in Tennessee, that 
several extensive forest tracts in that state were submerged during 
the shocks of 181112. and have ever since formed lakes arid 
swamps, among which are those called Obion and Reelfoot. He 
had observed, in several of these, that trees which had been killed, 
and had stood for a long time partially submerged, had in many 
places rotted down to the water s edge. In some swamps caused 
by the earthquake, they had all decayed to within a few inches 
of the base of the trunk. It is therefore evident, that should the 
turbid waters of the Mississippi overflow that region, and deposit 
their sediment on such stumps, they would present to the geologist 
a precise counterpart of the buried stools of trees with their roots 
before described as occurring at the bottom of the b]uff at Port 
Hudson.* Mr. Fletcher also told me, that he knew several fis 
sures in Tennessee, formed in 181112, where the ground on one 
side of the rent remained higher by two feet than that on the 
other side. 

I was informed at New Madrid that the Indians, before 
year 1811, had a tradition of a great earthquake which h 
previously devastated this same region. Yet there is so wide an 
area of forest without sink-holes, or any great inequalities of sur 
face, and without dead trees like those above alluded to, that w r o 
can not suppose any convulsion of equal magnitude to have 
occurred for many centuries previous to 1811. 

Having explored the margin of the Great Prairie, and seen 
the sunk country several miles west of New Madrid, I returned 
by a different path through the woods, often losing my way, till 
I fell into the main road for the last six miles, which was cut 
straight through the forest, and was at this season singularly 
monotonous and dreary. It was furrowed with long, deep ruts, 
cut in black mud. and full of miry water. The sky was cloudy, 
and the plain as level as if it had never been disturbed by the 
slightest subterranean movement since it originated. The trees 
were, for the most part, leafless, and almost all of the same height, 
* Ante, pp. 137-140. 



CHAP. XXXIII.] ROUGH QUARTERS. 181 

with no evergreens below them, and no grass ; but, instead of it, 
a somber brown covering of damp and dead oak leaves, strewed 
evenly over the ground. At one point I saw the rotting trunks 
of several fallen trees, and near them an old oak, on the boughs 
of which, near the base, a group of five turkey-buzzards were 
perched, in perfect character with the rest of the scene. Twilight 
was coming on, and the woods were silent ; but, as I approached 
the river, the silence was agreeably broken by the varied and 
liquid notes of a mocking-bird, and, at the same time, one of the 
large woodpeckers, with its brilliant plumage, flew over my head, 
as if to remind me that at other seasons the solitude is cheered 
by the song and bright colors of birds, when the leaves of the 
trees unfold themselves, and the sun s heat would then be so in 
tense, that a traveler would gladly retreat into the shades of the 
dense forest. 

When I took back my horse to its owner in New Madrid, I 
received a pressing invitation to exchange our present homely 
quarters for her comfortable house. Some of the other principal 
merchants made us hospitable offers of the same kind, which 
were exceedingly tempting. We thought it right, however, to 
decline them all, as we might have hurt the feelings of our 
German host and his wife, who, in their anxiety to accommodate 
us, had purchased several additional household articles. Among 
these was a table-cloth, and, when I entered the house, T was amused 
at the occupations of my wife and her companion. The baker s 
lady had accepted the offer of her guest to hem the new table-cloth, 
in which task she was busily engaged ; while the settler in the 
backwoods, having discovered that my wife had brought from 
New Orleans a worked collar of the latest Parisian fashion, had 
asked leave to copy it, and was intent on cutting out the shape, 
thus qualifying herself to outdo all the " fashionists" of the sunk 
country. 

A great spirit of equality was observable in the manners of the 
whites toward each other at New Madrid, yet with an absence 
of all vulgar familiarity. But what I saw and heard, convinced 
me that the condition of the negroes is least enviable in such out- 
of-the-way and half civilized districts, where there are many ad- 



182 SLAVERY IN MISSOURI. [CHAP. XXXIII. 

venturers, and uneducated settlers, who have little control over 
their passions, and who, when they oppress their slaves, are not 
checked by public opinion, as in more advanced communities. 
New comers of a higher tone of sentiment are compelled some 
times to witness cruelties which fill them with indignation, 
heightened by the necessity of being silent, and keeping on good 
terms with persons of whose conduct they disapprove. To the 
passing stranger, they can enlarge on this source of annoyance, 
and send him away grieving that so late as the year 1821, Mis 
souri should have been added to the Union as a slave state, against 
the wishes of a respectable minority of its own inhabitants, and 
against the feeling of a majority of the more educated population 
of the north. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

Alluvial Formations of the Mississippi, ancient and modern. Delta defined. 
Great Extent of Wooded Swamps. Deposits of pure Vegetable Mat 
ter. Floors of Blue Clay with Cypress Roots. Analogy to ancient Coal- 
measures. Supposed " Epoch of existing Continents." Depth of Fresh 
water Strata in Deltas. Time required to bring down the Mud of the 
Mississippi. New Experiments and Observations required. Great Age 
of buried and living Cypress-trees. Older and Newer Parts of Alluvial 
Plain. Upraised Terraces of Natchez, &c., and the Ohio, the Monuments 
of an older Alluvial Formation. Grand Oscillation of Level. The ancient 
Valleys inhabited by Quadrupeds now extinct. Land-shells not changed. 
Probable Rate of Subsidence and Upheaval. Relative Age of the an 
cient Alluvium of the Mississippi, and the Northern Drift. 

BEFORE leaving the valley of the Mississippi, I shall take this 
opportunity to offer some general remarks on the modern delta and 
alluvial plain of the great river, and on those fresh-water deposits 
before described in the bluffs of Port Hudson, Natchez, Vicksburg, 
and Memphis, which I regard as the monuments of a more an 
cient alluvial formation, one of high antiquity, yet formed when 
the physical geography of the country already bore a great re 
semblance to that now existing, and when, moreover, the land 
and waters were inhabited by the same species of terrestrial, 
fluviatile, and lacustrine mollusca, which now inhabit this region, 
although the land quadrupeds were almost entirely different. 

The delta of the Mississippi may be defined as that part of the 
great alluvial slope, which lies below, or to the south of the 
branching off of the highest arm, or that called the Atchafalaya. 
Above this point, which is the head of the delta, the Mississippi 
receives water from its various tributaries ; below, it gives out 
again, through numerous arms or channels, the waters which it 
conveys to the sea. The delta, so defined, is about 14,000 
square miles in area, and elevated from a few inches to ten feet 
above the level of the sea The greater part of it protrudes into 
the Gulf of Mexico, beyond the general coast line. The level 
plain to the north, as far as Cape Girardeau, in Missouri, above 



184 DELTA OF THE MISSISSIPPI. [CHAP. XXXIV. 

the junction of the Ohio, is of the same character, including, 
according to Mr. Forshey, an area of about 16,000 square miles, 
arid is, therefore, larger than the delta. It is very variable in 
width from east to west, being near its northern extremity, or at 
the mouth of the Ohio, 50 miles wide, at Memphis 30, at the 
mouth of the White River 80, and contracting again further 
south, as at Grand Gulf, to 33 miles. The delta and alluvial 
plain rise by so gradual a slope from the sea as to attain at the 
junction of the Ohio (a distance of 800 miles by the river) an 
elevation of only 200 feet above the Gulf of Mexico. 

First, in regard to the whole alluvial slope, whether above or 
below the present head of the delta, it will appear, from what has 
been already said, that sand is thrown down near the borders of 
the main river and its tributaries, arid fine mud at more distant 
points. The larger portion, however, of the whole area consists 
of swamps, supporting a luxuriant growth of timber, interspersed 
with lakes, most of which are deserted river bends. These lakes 
are slowly filling up, and every swamp is gradually becoming 
shallower, the substances accumulated in them being, for the 
most part, of vegetable origin, unmixed with earthy matter. It 
is only on their exterior margins (except after a sudden subsidence, 
daring an earthquake like that of 181112), that the waters of 
the Mississippi throw down sediment in the interior of any large 
swamp or lake, for the reeds, canes, and brushwood, through 
which the waters must first pass, cause them to flow slowly, 
and to part with all the matter previously held in mechanical 
suspension. Long before they reach the central parts of a morass 
or lake, they are well filtered, although still deeply stained by 
vegetable matter in a state of decomposition. 

Over a large portion of the submerged areas of the great plain, 
trees are seen growing every where in the water. Into the deeper 
water, where no forest can grow, the trunks of trees are floated, 
and many of these sink, when water-logged, to the bottom, which 
is also raised by an annual deposit of leaves, and of peaty matter 
derived from decaying plants, of which there is an exuberant 
growth round the borders of every swamp. That the admixture 
of inorganic matter is very small, has been shown by the observ- 



CHAP. XXXIV.] FLOORS OF BLUE CLAY. 18! 

ations of Messrs. Dickeson and Brown, who state, " that wher 
the woods are burning 1 , after an unusually dry season, pits ar% 
found burnt into the ground as far as the fire can descend Avithout 
coming into contact with water, and scarcely any residuum or 
earthy matter is left."* They also state that at the bottom of 
all the cypress swamps or brakes, there is found a peculiar layer 
of tenacious blue clay, which forms the foundation, or floor, on 
which the vegetable matter accumulates. We may conclude, 
therefore, that as the roots of the cypress penetrate far beneath 
the soil, and project horizontally far and wide, those of one tree 
interlacing with another, such root-bearing beds of argillaceous 
loam must be very analogous to what are called fire-clays, so well 
known to the geologist as occurring underneath almost every seam 
of coal in the ancient carboniferous rocks. f 

Other points of analogy might also be indicated between the 
deposits, whether of organic or inorganic matter, now accumulat 
ing in the valley-plain and delta of the Mississippi, and those of 
the ancient carboniferous rocks. When, for example, depressions 
are suddenly caused, as in the " sunk country" before described, 
certain wooded areas being submerged, the lower parts of the 
erect trees become enveloped with sand arid mud, the upper por 
tions rotting away, as must have happened in the case of the 
celebrated fossil forest of Dixon-fold, in Lancashire, belonging to 
the ancient coal-measures. $ In the modern alluvial plain, also, 
river-sand will be often thrown down, as the Mississippi shifts its 
course over spaces on which pure vegetable matter had been pre 
viously accumulating for hundreds or thousands of years, just as 
we find sandstone sometimes resting immediately upon the old 
coal-seams ; and, if there be a long succession of downward move 
ments, the thickness of strata, all formed in shallow water or in 
swamps, may be indefinitely great. Should the hilly country, 
moreover, be distant, pebbles will no more be seen in the modern 

* Silliman s Journal, Second Series, vol. v. p. 17, January, ] 848. 

t In my former "Travels," I have alluded to the fire-stones with Stig- 
maria (now acknowledged to be the root of Sigillaria), underlying the 
American coal-seams, as they do those of South Wales, 3000 miles distant. 
" Travels in North America," vol. i. p. 62. 

t Proceedings of Geol. Society, 1839. p. 139. 



136 DEPTH OF FRESH- WATER STRATA. [CHAP. XXXIV. 



sand strewed over the buried trees and layers of vegetable mat 
ter, than they usually are in the grits associated with the coal of 
ancient date. The phenomena, also, of the New Madrid earth 
quake, may help us to explain the vast geographical area over 
which, in the course of ages, dense fluviatile and lacustrine strata, 
with intercalated beds of vegetable origin, may be made to ex 
tend without any inroads of the sea. For the inland parts of any 
hydrographical basin may be augmented indefinitely in length 
and breadth, while the seaward portions continue unaltered, as 
the delta around New Orleans, and the low lands bordering the 
Gulf of Mexico, preserved their level unchanged, while parts of 
Missouri and Tennessee were lowered. 

By duly appreciating the permanent geographical revolutions 
which would result from a succession of such earthquakes as that 
of 181112, in the territory of New Madrid, we shall be pre 
vented from embracing the theory implied in the language of 
those who talk of " the epoch of existing continents." In treat 
ing of deltas, they are in the habit of assuming that the present 
mass of alluvial matter which has been thrown into the sea at 
the mouths of great rivers, began to be deposited in all the great 
hydrographical basins of the world at one and the same fixed 
period namely, when the formation of the existing continents 
was completed ; as if the relative levels of land and sea had, 
during that time, remained stationary, or had been affected to so 
inconsiderable an amount, as to be unimportant in their influence 
on the physical geography of each region, in comparison with the 
changes wrought by the rivers, in converting sea into land. But 
what we already know of the deltas of the Po, Indus, Ganges, 
and other rivers, leads to a very different conclusion. The bor 
ing of an artesian well at Calcutta, was carried to the depth of 
481 feet, the greater part of the section being below the level of 
the sea, and yet all the beds pierced through were of fresh-water 
origin, without any intermixture of marine remains. At differ 
ent depths, even as far down as 380 feet, lacustrine shells, arid 
a stratum of decayed wood, with vegetable soil, which appears to 
have supported trees, was met with.* These appearances may 
* See " Principles of Geology," Seventh Edition, 1847, p. 266. 



CHAP. XXXIV.] AGE OF DELTA OF MISSISSIPPI. 187 

readily be accounted for, by assuming that there was a gradual 
subsidence of the ground for ages, which was as constantly raised 
by the accession of fluviatile sediment, so as to prevent any in 
cursion of the sea. Occasionally there were pauses in the down 
ward movement, when trees grew on the soil, and vegetable mat 
ter of some thickness had time to accumulate. 

Recent observations, by Morlat and others, have demonstrated 
that, since the time of the Romans, there has been a general 
subsidence of the coast at the head of the Adriatic, to the amount 
of five feet, which has not prevented the delta of the Po and 
other rivers from advancing on the sea, although it must have 
checked their progress. Of the much greater movements of ele 
vation and depression which have taken place in the delta of the 
Indus, especially those wrought in the year 1819, I have else 
where given an account.^ It would, therefore, be perfectly con 
sistent with analogy to find, in the neighborhood of New Orleans, 
ancient swamp formations, with the roots and stumps of erect 
trees, unmixed with marine remains, far below the level of the 
sea, as is the fact, if I can rely on the information given me in 
1846-f 

Finding it impossible to calculate the age of the delta, from 
the observed rate of the advance of the land on the Gulf in each 
century, I endeavored to approximate, by a different method, to 
a minimum of the time required for bringing down from the upper 
country that large quantity of earthy matter which is now depos 
ited within the area of the delta. Dr. Riddell communicated to 
me, at New Orleans, the result of a series of experiments which 
he had made, to ascertain the proportion of sediment contained in 
the waters of the Mississippi. He concluded that the mean an 
nual amount of solid matter was to the water as r .^ 5 in weight, 
or about ^ in volume. $ Since that period, he has made 
another series of experiments, and his tables show that the quan- 

* Principles, Seventh Edition, p. 437. t See ante, p. 109. 

J The calculations here given, were communicated to the British Asso 
ciation in a Lecture which I delivered at Southampton, in September, 1846. 
See "Athenaeum Journal," Sept. 26, 1846, and "Report of British Asso 
ciation," 1846, p. 117. 



188 AGE OF DELTA OF MISSISSIPPI. [CHAP. XXXIV. 

tity of mud held in suspension, increases regularly with the in 
creased height arid velocity of the stream. On the whole, com 
paring the flood season with that of clearest water, his experi 
ments, continued down to 1849, give an average annual quantity 
of solid matter somewhat less than his first estimate, but riot va 
rying materially from it. From these observations, and those of 
Dr. Carpenter and Mr. Forshey (an eminent engineer, to whom 
I have before alluded), on the average width, depth, and velocity 
of the Mississippi, the mean annual discharge of water and sedi 
ment was deduced. I then assumed 528 feet, or the tenth of a 
mile, as the probable thickness of the deposit of mud and sand in 
the delta ; founding my conjecture chiefly on the depth of the 
Gulf of Mexico between the southern point of Florida and the 
Balizc, which equals, on an average, 100 fathoms, and partly 
on some borings, 600 feet deep, in the delta near Lake Pont- 
chartrain, north of New Orleans, in which the bottom of the 
alluvial matter is said not to have been reached. The area 
of the delta being about 13.600 square statute miles, and the 
quantity of solid matter annually brought down by the river 
3,702.758,400 cubic feet, it must have taken 67,000 years for 
the formation of the whole ; and if the alluvial matter of the 
plain above be 264 feet deep, or half that of the delta, it must 
have required 33,500 more years for its accumulation, even if its 
area be estimated as only equal to that of the delta, whereas it is 
in fact larger. 

From information since received, I think it not improbable 
that the quantity of water may have been underrated in this 
estimate ;* and, if so, a larger amount of sediment would have 

* I allude chiefly to the observations and experiments, on the velocity of 
the Mississippi at various depths, made by Mr. W. H. Sidell. during a Gov 
ernment survey, communicated to me through the kindness of Mr. Ruggles, 
of New York, which, if correct, would lead to the inference that the average 
number of cubic feet of water discharged into the Gulf per second, is con 
siderably greater than Mr. Forshey and Dr. Carpenter deduced from their 
observations on the velocity of the stream at different depths. If, as I un 
derstand, there exist documents in the hydrographer s office at Washington, 
which would afford more ample data for such calculations, the Government 
would confer a boon on the scientific world by publishing them without 



CHAP. XXXIV.] AGE OF DELTA OF MISSISSIPPI. 189 

been brought down from the interior in a given time, and conse 
quently a deduction would have to be made from the number of 
centuries above stated on that account. But, on the other hand, 
if it could be shown, by more accurate experiments and calcula 
tions, that the quantity of water in the above computation was 
greatly deficient, say even one-third less than the real quantity, I 
do not imagine that any exaggeration has been made in the time 
supposed to have elapsed since the rivers began to transport their 
earthy ingredients to the alluvial plains of Louisiana. The delta 
is, after all, a mere fragmentary portion of a larger body of mud, 
the finer particles of which never settle down near the mouths 
of the Mississippi, but are carried far out into the Gulf, and there 
dispersed. 

The description which I have given of the great distance to 
which the yellow and lighter streams of fresh water are seen 
extending, from the various mouths, in the flood-season, into the 
Gulf; and still more, the destruction of the banks and bars of 
mud and sand caused by the tide scouring out the channels when 
the river is low,^ and the strength of the marine current, run 
ning ten miles an hour, and the stories of anchors and heavy 
ballast cast up by the breakers high and dry on the shifting 
shoals near the extremity of the delta, make me doubt whether 

delay. Such experiments as Mr. Sidell s, which give the velocity at various 
depths and at different distances from the banks, are the more needed, 
because it seems doubtful whether any correct mathematical formulae have 
as yet been furnished for calculating the mean rate at which so deep a river 
as the Mississippi flows, from observations made simply on its superficial 
velocity. I placed all the data given me by Messrs. Riddell, Forshey, and 
Carpenter, in the hands of my friend, Mr. George Rennie, F.R.S., to whom 
we are indebted for many valuable papers on the application of the science 
of hydraulics to rivers (see Report of British Association, vol. iii. p. 415, 
1834), and, after examining them, he came to conclusions which did not 
vary materially from those which I had previously announced. Mr. James 
Nicol, Assistant Secretary of the Geological Society of London, before he 
had seen Mr. Sidell s experiments, had expressed to me his belief that the 
quantity of water carried to the Gulf by the Mississippi, must be greater 
than I had assumed from Mr. Forshey s calculations, judging from the 
amount usually assigned as the annual discharge of rivers having hydro- 
graphical basins smaller than that of the Mississippi. 
* See ante, p. 121. 



190 AGE OF DELTA OF MISSISSIPPI. [CHAP. XXXIV. 

the larger part of that impalpable mud, which constitutes the 
bulk of the solid matter carried into the sea by the Mississippi, 
is not lost altogether, so far as the progress of the delta is con 
cerned. So impalpable is the sediment, and so slowly does it 
sink, that a glass of water taken from the Mississippi, may 
remain motionless for three weeks, and yet all the earthy matter 
will not have reached the bottom. If particles so minute are 
carried by the current, setting for a great portion of the year 
from west to east, across the mouth of the river, into the Gulf 
Stream, and so into the Atlantic, they might easily travel to the 
banks of Newfoundland before sinking to the bottom ; and some 
of them, which left the head waters of the Missouri in the 49th 
degree of north latitude, may, after having gone southward to 
the Gulf, and then northward to the Great Banks, have found 
no resting-place before they had wandered for a distance as far 
as from the pole to the equator, and returned to the very latitude 
from which they set out. Were it not for the peculiar manner 
in which the Mississippi forms long bars of sand, which frequently 
unite with some part of the coast, so as to dam out the sea and 
form lagoons, the deposition of sediment in the delta would be 
much less considerable. A lagoon, like Lake Pontchartrain, 
once formed, becomes a receptacle of the finest mud, poured into 
it by an arm of the great river during the flood season, and the 
space thus parted off from the Gulf by bars of sand, is protected 
from the action of the breakers and marine currents. 

When I inquired what might be the depth of the fluviatile 
mud in the suburbs of New Orleans, I was told that, in making 
a railroad near Lake Pontchartrain, piles were driven down sixty 
feet into the soft mud or slush, and when a boring was made 
there, 600 feet deep, beds of gnathodon were found, but no 
marine shells. 

The depth of the alluvium may vary in different parts of the 
great sloping plain ; for certain areas, such as the " sunk coun 
try," for example, west of New Madrid, may have been repeat 
edly depressed, and have been always brought up again to the 
same superficial level, by the deposition of the river rnud, or the 
growth of vegetable matter. 



CHAP. XXXIV.] CYPRESS TREES. 191 

The age of stumps and erect trunks of the deciduous cypress, 
whether living or buried, retaining their natural position, at 
points near the present termination of the delta, ought to be 
carefully examined, as they might afford evidence of the minimum 
of time which can be allowed for the gain of land on the sea. 
Some single trunks in Louisiana are said to contain from 800 to 
2000 rings of annual growth, and Dr. M. W. Dickeson and Mr. 
A. Brown state, that the cypress brakes or basins, which fill up 
gradually, give place at length to other timber ; but before this 
happens, the buried cypress stumps often extend through a de 
posit of vegetable and sedimentary matter twenty-five feet thick. 
" Sections of such filled-up cypress basins, exposed by the changes 
in the position of the river, exhibit undisturbed, perfect, arid erect 
stumps, in a series of every elevation with respect to each other, 
extending from high-water mark down to at least twenty-five 
feet below, measuring out a time when not less than ten fully- 
matured cypress growths must have succeeded each other, the 
average of whose age could not have been less than 400 years, 
thus making an aggregate of 4000 years since the first cypress 
tree vegetated in the basin. * There are also instances where 
prostrate trunks, of huge dimensions, are found imbedded in the 
clay, immediately over which are erect stumps of trees, number 
ing no less than 800 concentric layers." 

Michaud, in his famous work on the forest trees of North 
America, mentions that stems of this deciduous cypress ( Taxodi- 
um distichum) are met with in Florida, and in southern Louisi 
ana, forty feet in circumference above the enlarged base, which 
is three or four times that size ; but such individuals dwindle to 
nothing before the gigantic trunk near Santa Maria del Tule, in 
the province of Oaxaca, in Mexico, which was first mentioned by 
Exeter, who found its circumference to be 117-10 French feet. 
Zuccarini, has lately removed the doubts of Do Candolle respect 
ing this measurement, which was taken above the dilated base, 
for that was no less than 200 feet in circumference. In this 
stem there would be 5352 rings of annual growth, if one line a 
year was taken as the average growth, the deposit of wood 

* Silliraan s Journal, Second Series, vol. v. p. 17. January, 1848. 



192 ALLUVIAL PLAIN. [CHAP. XXXIV. 

becoming always much smaller in trees of great age ; but Zuc- 
carini, in his estimate, thinks it may be safer to assume 1-6 line 
as the average, which would even then give the age of 3512 
years for this single tree. 

The great number of crescent-shaped lakes to the westward of 
the Mississippi, which formerly constituted bends in its ancient 
channel, are also monuments of the antiquity of the great plain 
over which the river has been wandering. Darby, the geogra 
pher, observed that, in the steep banks of the Atchafalaya, there 
are alternations of the bluish clay of the Mississippi arid of the 
red ocherous earth peculiar to Red River, proving that the 
waters of these two streams once occupied alternately consider 
able tracts below their present point of union. ^ Since their 
junction (an event, the date of which is unknown), the waters 
and sediment of the Red River and Mississippi have been thor 
oughly mixed up together, before any deposition of their mud 
takes place in the lower country. It is evident, therefore, that, 
when we are enabled, by geological observations such as those of 
Darby, to distinguish the older from the newer portions, even of 
the modem alluvial plain, we may obtain more aid in our chro 
nological computations founded on rings of growth in buried trees ; 
for we may then add the years deduced from stumps buried in 
the modern parts of the delta, to those proved by the structure 
of trees included in mud of earlier date. 

After considering the age and origin of the modem deposits of 
the Mississippi and its tributaries, we have still to carry back 
our thoughts to the era of the fresh-water strata seen in the bluffs 
which bound the great valley. These, in their southern termina 
tion, have evidently formed an ancient coast-line, beyond which 
the modern delta has been pushed forward into the sea. Let a, 
b (fig. 10) represent the alluvial plain of the Mississippi, bound 
ed on its eastern side at Vicksburg, as before described, by the 
bluffs d, at the foot of which are seen the Eocene strata, f t the 
upper part of the bluff being composed of shelly loam, or loess, of 
fresh- water origin, d, e (No. 2). 

At Memphis, Port Hudson, and many other places, loam of 
* Darby s Louisiana, p. 103. 



CHAP. XXXIV.] UPRAISED TERRACES. 1;3 

the same age as No. 2, rising from 50 to 200 feet above the 
level of the sea, constitutes the entire bluffs, forming a table-land 
like that represented at d, e. Similar deposits, #, c (fig. 10), 
recur in Louisiana, on the western side of the great valley ; but 
they are not, I am informed, denuded so as to present a steep 
bluff at a. They rest equally on Eocene strata, /(No. 3). 

From what has been said of the species of shells contained in 
the loam, d, e, at Natchez, and in other localities, from the 
remains also of associated terrestrial animals, and from the 
buried trees of Port Hudson, we have inferred that these deposits 
(No. 2), are the monuments of an ancient alluvial plain, of an 
age long anterior to that through which the Mississippi now 

Fig. 10. 

VALLEY OF THE MISSISSIPPI. 
Louisiana. c 




1. Alluvium. 2. Loess. 3. /. Eocene. 4. Cretaceous. 

flows, which was inhabited by land and fresh-water mollusca 
agreeing with those now existing, and by quadrupeds now for 
the most part extinct. 

In my former " Travels in North America," I described some 
ancient terraces of gravel, sand, and loam, occurring every where 
in the valley of the Ohio, and gave a section of them as they are 
seen at Cincinnati.* I pointed out that the included fossil 
shells demonstrate the fluviatile and modem origin of the 
deposits, and suggested that their present position could only be 
explained by supposing, first, a gradual sinking down of the land 
after the original excavation of the valley, during which period 
the gravel and sand were thrown down, and then an upheaval 
of the same valley, when the river cut deep channels through 
the fresh-water beds.f Certain swamp formations observable in 

* Travels in North America, fig. 9, vol. ii. p. 59, chap. xvii. 
t The second terrace (c, fig. 9, ibid.) at Cincinnati, may imply a second 
oscillation. 

VOL II.. I 



194 EXTINCT QUADRUPEDS. [CHAP. XXXIV. 

the valleys of small tributaries of the Ohio, such as those of Big 
Bone Lick, in Kentucky, and Mill Creek, near Cincinnati, are 
of geological celebrity, in consequence of the great number of 
skeletons of extinct mammalia, such as the megalonyx, mastodon, 
elephant, and others, which seem to have lived, and have been 
mired in ancient morasses, before the land began to sink ; for the 
great mass of fluviatile loam and gravel forming the terraces, has 
been superimposed on the black bog earth containing such bones. 
The teeth, however, and bones of similar extinct quadrupeds, 
especially the mastodon, are occasionally met with scattered 
through the incumbent gravel and loam, so that the same 
assemblage of quadrupeds continued to inhabit the valleys while 
the first change of level or the subsidence was going on. By sim 
ply extending to the valley of the Mississippi, the theory before 
applied to that of the Ohio, we may, as already stated at p. 142, 
in reference to the Port Hudson bluffs, account for the geological 
appearances seen in the larger and more southern area. 

It has been long ascertained that in Norway and Sweden a 
gradual rise of the land above the sea has been going on for 
many centuries, producing an apparent fall in the waters of the 
adjoining ocean. The rate of elevation increases as we proceed 
northward from Gothenburg to the North Cape, the two extremi 
ties of this line being distant more than a thousand geographical 
miles from each other, and we know not how much farther north 
or south the motion may be prolonged under water. The rise of 
the land, which is more than five feet in a hundred years at the 
North Cape, gradually diminishes to a few inches in a century 
iu the neighborhood of Stockholm, to the south of which the 
upward movement ceases ; and in Scania, the southernmost part 
of Sweden, appears to give place to a slight movement in an 
opposite or downward direction. 1 * 

We also know that part of the west coast of Greenland, ex 
tending about 600 miles north and south, has been subsiding for 
three or four centuries, between latitudes 60 arid 69 N.f But 
whether, in this instance, the rate of depression varies in different 
parts of the sinking area, has not yet been determined. In spec- 
* Principles of Geology, 7th Ed. p. 506. t See " Principles," ibid. 



CHAP. XXXIV.] OSCILLATION OF LEVEL. 195 

ulating, however, on the manner in which the valleys of the Mis 
sissippi and its tributaries may have been affected by subterranean 
movements, we are at least authorized by analogy to assume that 
the downward movement may have been greater in the more 
inland part of the continent, just as we have seen in 181112, 
that the " sunk country" west of New Madrid subsided, while 
the level of the delta at New Orleans underwent no sensible- 
change. If, then, the vertical movement in the interior, in and 
near the valley of the Ohio, for example, were greater than near 
the Gulf, as, if. in the former case, it were two and a half feet in 
a century, and near the sea only half that amount, it would fol 
low that the general fall of the rivers would be lessened. They 
would deposit all their heavier, and some even of their finer sedi 
ment, in their channels, instead of having power to carry it to the 
sea. They would fill up their beds, and often overflow the ad 
joining plains, raising their level by repeated layers of fluviatile 
matter or silt, frequently containing the shells of land and amphib 
ious mollusks. 

If, even now, the Mississippi, when flooded, dams up the mouths 
of its great tributaries, and transforms them for months into tem 
porary lakes, it must have produced the same effect to a far greater 
extent if at any time the general fall of the country toward the 
sea was less rapid. 

In narrow valleys bounded by ancient rocks 500 or 600 feet 
high, such as that of the Ohio, the alluvial formation could never 
acquire great breadth. Its thickness would depend entirely on 
the length of time throughout which the subsidence was prolong 
ed. But nearer the sea, where the continent falls with a gentle 
slope toward the Gulf, the encroachment of the fresh-water de 
posits (No. 2, fig. 11, p. 196), of the great river on the tertiary 
strata (No. 3), constituting the original bluffs on its eastern and 
western boundaries, might be very great. 

If we then suppose the downward movement to cease, and to 
be at length converted into an ascending one, the rate of up 
heaval being greatest in the more inland country, the fall of every 
river, and consequently its velocity, would begin immediately to 
augment. Their power of carrying earthy matter seaward, and 



s f ;. 

s "~ 

e 

| V 

s-Mi 

* ^ S 

O S3 S 

85* = 
Jl-^l 
1 I d l 



I" 

a 


i: 
^ 

*o 

s 

> 

s 
"5 
a 
5 


S 

j^ 

7 

~ 
- 

a 

CR 




I 

r -3 
-i 
Z 

| 



1 


r 
S 

^ 



>. 

ri 



_ 


g 

OJ 


| 

~ 

t 

-i 

7^ 

s 

,: 

9) 

1 


1-measures of Alabama (Palaeo 
nite- 




CHAP. XXXIV.] OSCILLATION OF LEVEL. 197 

of scouring 1 out and deepening their channels, would be greater 
and greater, till at length, after a lapse of many thousand years, 
each of them would have eroded a deep channel or valley through 
the fluviatile formation previously accumulated. The surface of 
what was once the river-plain at the period of greatest depression, 
would remain fringing the valley sides as a terrace, apparently 
flat, but in reality sloping down with the general inclination of 
the valley. Every where this terrace would present clifis of 
gravel and sand facing the river. 

After these changes, the fundamental strata (Nos. 3,4, 5, fig. 
1 1, p. 196) might be restored nearly to their ancient positions ; 
the fresh- water beds (No. 2) having been raised, and having suf 
fered great denudation. 

It is not improbable that the same series of movements gave 
rise to the accumulation and present position of marine strata of 
comparatively modern date, forming the lower terrace near Da- 
rien in Georgia* 1 which is indicated at 2*, in the annexed section 
(fig. 11). The reader will remember that the remains of the 
megatherium, mastodon, elephant, Harlanus, equus, and other ex 
tinct species of land quadrupeds, are there associated with marine 
shells, of species agreeing with those now inhabiting the Atlantic. 

On the other hand, there are proofs in Texas of the prevalence 
of the same succession of subterranean movements far to the south 
west, along the country bordering the Gulf of Mexico ; for on the 
Brazos River there are beds of loam, or loess, examined by Dr. 
Dickeson, and, when at New Orleans, I saw the bones of extinct 
quadrupeds brought from that deposit. Among them was the 
jaAv-bone of a tapir, apparently identical with the South Ameri 
can species ; remains of the mastodon, elephant, ox, and other 
mammalia, much resembling, on the whole, those found at Nat 
chez and on the Ohio. 

As to the seaward extremity of the ancient delta, the effect of 
the gradual depression of land above assumed would be to cause 
its mud and sand to increase in thickness, instead of augmenting 
in area. When at length the movement was reversed, and the 
fresh- water deposits began to rise, the action of the sea would un- 
* See ante, vol. i. p. 257. 



198 PROBABLE RATE OF SUBSIDENCE. [CHAP. XXXIV. 

dermine them, and, aided by the river and tides, sweep much of 
them away, and perhaps shape out a bay. But the swamp-mud, 
with innumerable interlaced roots of cypress and other trees, might 
offer considerable resistance ; and, after a time, the river charged 
with sediment would throw down bars, and form a breakwater, 
to protect the newly upraised deposits from annihilation. 

In regard to the time consumed in accomplishing the great 
oscillation of level which first depressed so large an area to the 
depth of 200 feet or more, and then restored it to its former po 
sition, it is impossible, in the present state of science, to form more 
than a conjecture as to the probable mean rate of movement. 
To suppose an average sinking and upheaval of two and a half 
feet in a century, might be sufficient, or would, perhaps, be too 
great, judging from the mean rate of change in Scandinavia, 
Greenland, the north of the Adriatic, and other regions. Even 
such an oscillation, if simultaneously continuous over the whole 
area, first in one direction, and then in another, and without any 
interruptions or minor oscillations, would require sixteen thousand 
years for its accomplishment. But the section at Cincinnati 
seems to imply two oscillations, and there would probably be 
pauses, and a stationary period, when the downward movement 
ceased, and was not yet changed into an upward one. Nor 
ought we to imagine that the whole space was always in motion 
at once. 

When we have at length done our best to trace back the his 
tory of the more modern and more ancient alluvial formations of 
the Mississippi, the question still remains, what may be their age 
relatively to the great body of the drift containing erratic blocks 
in the northern latitudes of this same continent. The terraces 
of gravel and loam bordering the Ohio, and those on a larger 
scale, but of the same age, which constitute many of the eastern 
bluffs of the Mississippi, are evidently features of subordinate im 
portance in the physical configuration of the continent. But to 
explain the origin of the northern drift of the Canadian lake dis 
trict, and of the St. Lawrence, as I have endeavored to show in 
my former " Travels," requires a reference to such changes as 
would imply the submergence of a great part of the continent 



CHAP. XXXIV.] NORTHERN DRIFT. 199 

drained by the head waters of the Mississippi, Missouri, and their 
northern tributaries.* For this and other reasons, into which I 
can not now enter, I presume that the great mass of the most 
elevated drift in the north, and the glacial grooving and polishing 
of the rocks, although they belong to a very modern era in the 
earth s history, were nevertheless anterior in date to the loam of 
Natchez and Vicksburg. 

There exist in Canada, in the Niagara district, in New York, 
and other states north of the Ohio, lacustrine and swamp deposits 
of marl and bog-earth, including the bones of extinct quadrupeds, 
such as the mastodon, elephant, castoroides, and others, associated 
with land and fresh-water shells of recent species, which are 
decidedly post-glacial, and often found in hollows in the drift. 
These may be of contemporaneous date with the loam of Port 
Hudson and Natchez. 

The northern drift, however, is by no means all of the same 
age, and as the period of glaciers and icebergs freighted with 
erratics is still going on, and has now a wide range in the tem 
perate parts of the Atlantic, bordering the eastern shores of North 
America, so must we naturally suppose that certain parts of the 
drift, especially those found at lower levels, and near the sea, 
may not be more ancient than the loam of the western bluffs of 
the Mississippi. 

* See vol. i. ch. ii. p. 47, and vol. ii. ch. xix. p. 99. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

Departure from New Madrid. Night-watch for Steamers. Scenery of the 
Ohio River. Mount Vernon, Ornithology. No Undergrowth in Woods. 
Spring Flowers. Visit to Dr. Dale Owen, New Harmony. Fossil 
Forest of erect Trees in Coal-measures. Movers migrating Westward. 
Voyage to Louisville. Professional Zeal of one of " the Pork Aristo 
cracy." Fossil Coral-reef at the Falls of the Ohio, Louisville. Fossil 
Zoophytes as perfect as recent Stone-corals. 

March 27, 1846. -WE took up our quarters in the wharf- 
boat at New Madrid in readiness to sail by the first steamer 
bound for the Ohio, for I wished to visit New Harmony in In 
diana, and there was some risk of being detained several days. 
The first steamer we hailed, was bound for St. Louis, the next 
for the Cumberland river, Tennessee, and a third which might 
have taken us to Mount Vernon, in Indiana, where I meant to 
disembark, was unwilling to lose time by stopping, the captain 
shouting out that she was full of passengers, and heavily laden. 

Before retiring to rest, I engaged with the keeper of the boat 
that he should appoint a good night-watch, and an hour after 
dark, I was awakened by the loud puffing and splashing of a 
steamer, evidently close at hand. Going on deck, I found the 
faithless black sentinel fast asleep. It was already too late to 
hail the vessel, but we made out that she was the Nimrod, and 
I afterward learnt, that in the course of her voyage she was 
snagged, both her chimneys thrown down, and her boiler pierced, 
so that we had a narrow escape. I now gave the keeper of the 
wharf-boat to understand that the whole town of New Madrid 
should be informed next day in what manner their night-watches 
were kept, which piqued him, and he then lighted a large fire on 
the bank ; but having no longer any faith in the sentinel, I could 
not sleep, so I determined to keep a look-out myself. Fortunately 
another steamer soon appeared ; and, almost before she was fairly 
alongside, a party of active negroes leapt upon our deck, each 



CHAP. XXXV.] SCENERY ON THE OHIO. 201 

snatching up an article of our luggage, while the clerk ushered 
us over the plank into a brilliantly lighted saloon. The change 
of scene to travelers who had been roughing it for several days 
under a humble roof, talking with trappers about the watery wil 
derness of the " sunk country," and who had just stepped out of 
a dark half-furnished wharf-boat, was more like the fiction of a 
fairy tale, than a real incident in an ordinary journey. Some 
musicians were playing at one end of the room, which was 150 
feet long, and a gay young party from New Orleans were danc 
ing a quadrille. At the other end we were delighted to see a 
table covered with newspapers, for we were nearly a week in 
arrear of news, and their columns were filled with the recent de 
bates of the English House of Commons. There were also many 
articles reprinted from the best European periodicals, quarterly 
and monthly, besides those published in New England and New 
York. Nor were any of the advantages afforded by this floating 
palace more like an eastern tale of enchantment, than the thought, 
as we went to our berths, that before we rose next morning to 
breakfast we should be transported more than a hundred miles on 
our route northward against the current of a mighty river. 

March 29. Passed Cairo in the night, and next morning 
were at Smithland on the Ohio, at the mouth of the Cumber 
land Hiver, having Kentucky on our right hand, and Illinois on 
the left. Limestone cliffs, bounding the valley, were a welcome 
sight, after the eye had been dwelling for so many weeks on flat 
and level regions. Although we had not yet ascended the river 
to a height of much more than 200 feet above the level of the 
sea, the climate had changed, and we were told that snow had 
fallen the day before. We observed that the red-bud, or Judas- 
tree, was not yet in flower. 

On reaching the mouth of the Wabash River, which divides Illi 
nois from Indiana, I learnt that when the ice breaks up there in 
the spring, it is often packed into such masses that, before melt 
ing, they float down with gravel frozen on to them as far as New 
Madrid. This fact may explain the coarseness of the materials 
observable in the shoals of the Mississippi, at low water, near 
Natchez, and still farther down ; and may perhaps throw light 

i* 



202 ORNITHOLOGY. [CiiAP. XXXV. 

on some large boulders, of a former period, in the ancient gravel 
below the shelly loam of Natchez. 

At Mount Vernon we landed, and I collected there many fossil 
shells, of fresh-water and land species, from a terrace of yellow 
loam, elevated many yards above high- water mark, on the Ohio. 
Returning from my excursion, I fell in with a naturalist of the 
place, armed with a rifle, and carrying some wild birds which he 
had shot. He was a shoemaker by trade, and had a collection 
of more than 150 well-stuffed birds from the neighborhood. He 
told me that the notes I heard here in the woods were chiefly 
those of the red-bird, but that some of the most musical were the 
song of a brown thrush, called, in Indiana, the mocking bird, but 
differing from the real musician of that name, which, though 
abounding at New Madrid, does not range so far north as the 
Ohio. Conversing with him, I learnt that the loud tapping of 
the large red-headed woodpecker, so common a sound in the 
American forests, is not produced, as I had imagined, by the 
action of the beak perforating the bark or wood, but is merely a 
succession of sharp blows on the trunk of the tree, after which 
the bird is seen to listen attentively, to know if there are any 
insects within. Should they stir in their alarm, and betray the 
fact of their being "at home," the woodpecker begins immediately 
to excavate a hole in the rotten timber. 

I had promised to pay a visit to Dr. David Dale Owen, the 
state geologist of Indiana, and hired a carriage which conveyed 
us to New Harmony, situated on the Wabash River sixty miles 
above its junction with the Ohio. On our way across the coun 
try, we went through a continuous forest, consisting chiefly of 
oak, beech, and poplar, without any undergrowth, and in this 
respect differing remarkably from the wooded valleys and hills of 
the Alleghanies, and the region eastward of those mountains, as 
well as all parts of New England. Here there were no kalmias 
or azaleas, or sweet fern, or candleberry, or other evergreens. 
The green carpet beneath the trees was made up largely of 
mosses, and among them was that beautiful European species 
of feather-moss, Hypnum prolifcrum, in great plenty. The 
trunks of many trees were spotted by a jet-black fungus resem- 



CHAP. XXXV.] NEW HARMONY. 203 

bling a lichen. Below the branches we were pleased to gather 
several spring flowers, the white anemone, the blood-root (San- 
guinaria canadensis), the dog-tooth violet (Erythronium ameri- 
canum), and the spring-beauty (Claytonia virginica). 

Though a large proportion of the mosses and other cryptogamia 
are identical with those of Europe, we saw no flower which was 
not peculiar to America. Many European plants, however, are 
making their way here, such as the wild camomile, and the 
thorn-apple (Datura Stramonium) ; and it is a curious fact, 
which I afterward learnt from Dr. Dale Owen, that when such 
foreigners are first naturalized they overrun the country with 
amazing rapidity, and are quite a nuisance. But they soon grow 
scarce, and after eight or ten years can hardly be met with. 

We spent several days very agreeably at New Harmony, where 
we were most hospitably welcomed by Dr. and Mrs. Dale Owen. 
The town is pleasantly situated in a valley watered by the 
Wabash, which here divides the states of Indiana and Illinois. 
Some large buildings, in the German style of architecture, stand 
conspicuous, and were erected by Rapp ; but the communities 
founded by him, and afterward by Robert Owen of Lanark, have 
disappeared, the principal edifice being now appropriated as a 
public museum, in which I found a good collection of geological 
specimens, both fossils and minerals, made during the state survey, 
and was glad to learn that the Legislature, with a view of en 
couraging science, has exempted this building from taxes. Lec 
tures on chemistry and geology are given here in the winter. 
Many families of superior intelligence, English, Swiss, and Ger 
man, have settled in the place, and there is a marked simplicity 
in their manner of living which reminded us of Germany. They 
are very sociable, and there were many private parties where 
there was music and dancing, and a public assembly once a week, 
to one of which we went, where quadrilles and waltzes were 
danced, the band consisting of amateur musicians. 

Say, the eminent conchologist, who died at the age of forty- 
five, formerly resided at New Harmony ; and recently Prince 
Maximilian, of Neuwied, and the naturalists who accompanied 
him, passed a winter here. We found also, among the residents, 



204 FOSSIL, TREES, INDIANA. [CHAP. XXXV. 



a brother of Mr. Maclure, the geologist, who placed his excellent 
library and carriage at our disposal. He lends his books freely 
among the citizens, and they are much read. We were glad to 
hear many recent publications, some even of the most expensively 
illustrated works, discussed and criticised in society here. We 
were also charmed to meet with many children happy and merry, 
yet perfectly obedient ; and once more to see what, after the ex 
perience of the last two or three months, struck us as a singular 
phenomenon in the New World, a shy child ! 

I made some geological excursions with Dr. Owen and his 
friend, Mr. Bolton, to see the " carboniferous rocks," of which 
this region is constituted, and the shelly loam, like that of 
Natchez, which has evidently once filled up to a considerable 
height the valley of the Wabash, and through which the running 
waters have re-excavated the present valley. 

There is no church or place of public worship in New Harmony, 
a peculiarity which we never remarked in any town of half the 
size in the course of our tour in the United States. Being here 
on week-days only, I had no opportunity of observing whether on 
Sundays there are any meetings for social worship. I heard that 
when the people of Evansville once reproached the citizens of this 
place for having no churches, they observed that they had also no 
shops for the sale of spirituous liquors, which is still a character 
istic of New Harmony ; whereas Evansville, like most of the 
neighboring towns of Indiana, abounds in such incentives to in 
temperance. 

April 3. Left New Harmony for Evansville, on the Ohio, 
Mr. Maclure having kindly lent us his carriage and horses. We 
were accompanied by Dr. Dale Owen and Mr. Bolton. On the 
way, we visited KimbalFs mill, in the township of Robinson, in 
Poser County, fourteen miles northwest of Evansville, where a fine 
example is seen of upright fossil trees belonging to a species of 
Sigillaria. These are imbedded in strata of argillaceous shale, 
or hardened mud, which constitute the upper part of the great 
Illinois coal-field, and above them lies a horizontal layer of sand 
stone, while a seam of coal, eighteen inches thick, is observed 
about eighteen feet below the roots. Having borrowed spades 



CHAP. XXXV.] MOVERS MIGRATING WESTWARD. 205 

from the neighboring mill, we dug out the earth from round one 
of the buried trees, and exposed a trunk four feet eight inches 
high, from the bottom of which the roots were seen spreading 
out as in their natural position. There were two other fossil 
trees near it, both apparently belonging to the same species of 
SigiUaria. The bark, converted into coal, displayed the scars 
left by the attachment of the leaves, but no internal structure 
was preserved in the mud, now forming a cylindrical mass within 
the bark. The diameter of the three trunks was from 18 inches 
to two feet, and their roots were interlaced. A great number of 
others, found in like manner in an erect posture, have been removed 
in working the same quarry. The fossil plants obtained here and 
in other parts of the Indiana coal-field, are singularly like those 
in other carboniferous strata in Ohio, Pennsylvania, Nova Scotia, 
and Europe. Among them occur species of ferns of the genera 
Pecopteris and Cydopteris, and three plants, Neuropteris flexu- 
osa, N. cordata, and Lcpidodendron obovatum, all European 
species, and common to the Alleghanies and Nova Scotia. 

The three large fossil trees above described as newly exposed 
to view, were standing erect under the spreading roots of one 
living oak, and it is wonderful to reflect on the myriads of ages 
which have intervened between the period when the ancient 
plants last saw the light, and the era of this modern forest, the 
vegetation of which would scarcely afford, except in the case of 
the ferns, any generic resemblance, yet where the trees are similar 
in stature, upright attitude, and the general form of their roots. 

As we approached Evansville, we passed a German farm, 
where horses were employed to tread out the maize, and another 
where vines were cultivated on the side of a hill. At one turn 
of the road, in the midst of the wood, we met a man with a rifle, 
carrying in his hand an empty pail for giving water to his horse, 
and followed at a short distance by his wife, leading a steed, on 
which was a small sack. " It probably contains," said our com 
panions, " all their worldly goods ; they are movers, and have 
their faces turned westward, a small detachment of that great 
army of emigrants, which is steadily moving on every year toward 
the Pvocky Mountains. This young married couple may perhaps 



206 VOYAGE TO LOUISVILLE. [CHAP. XXXV. 

go down to the Mississippi, and buy, for a few dollars, some acres 
of land, near a wooding station. The husband will fell timber, 
run up a log cabin, and receive ready money from the steamboats, 
which burn the wood. At the end of ten or fifteen years, by 
which time some of their children will have become profitable 
servants, they may have put by 2000 dollars, bought a farm, and 
be living in a frame-house." 

The very moment of our arrival at Evansville, a fine steam 
boat, the Sultana, came in sight, and we found, among the pas 
sengers, some agreeable acquaintances, whom we had known at 
New Orleans and Natchez. 

As some of these large vessels are much more expensive than 
others, Americans of the richer class, when making a long voyage, 
choose them purposely, as in England we take places in a first- 
class railway carriage, that they may be less thrown into contact 
with ruder travelers. One of our friends, a naval officer, speaking 
of the improvement of society in the western states, said that 
dueling and drinking had greatly diminished in the last fifteen 
years. He related one of the strange scenes he had witnessed at 
a dinner-party, only a few years ago, at the house of a judge, in 
a town on the banks of the Mississippi. A quarrel had arisen, 
when one of the guests took out a pen-knife, and stabbed the judge 
in the side, so that the blood spirted out. The judge himself 
immediately drew out a bowie knife, and his antagonist, at the 
same instant, a pistol, and it then appeared that every other 
individual was armed with knives or pistols. The narrator 
admitted, that as he was traveling, he had also pistols upon him. 
Fortunately some cool, judicious persons of the party interposed 
in time to prevent farther mischief. 

I fell into conversation with an intelligent well-dressed pas 
senger, who, as we sailed by the town of Utica, in Indiana, re 
marked that it was too near the large city of Louisville to thrive 
greatly ; and in speculating on the future prospects of the west, 
he said that by the census of 1840, it was proved that the At 
lantic states had about nine and a half millions of inhabitants, 
while the states lying west of the mountains, and^between the 
great lakes and the Gulf of Mexico, numbered about six millions 



CHAP. XXXV.] FORK MERCHANT. 207 

four hundred thousand. Now it is believed that the census of 
1850 will show the population of the whole country to have 
changed its center to the west of the mountains, and under a 
system of universal suffrage, the center of population becomes the 
center of political power. After having been much interested 
with the information which I gained from this companion, although 
occasionally struck with his violation of the rules of ordinary good 
manners, I was trying to divine to what class in society he might 
belong, when he began to enlarge on the number of hogs killed 
last year in Cincinnati, which exceeded all former seasons, 
amounting to 300,000, and to describe to me how the streets, 
in killing time, were blocked up with barrels of salt pork for ex 
portation, so that it was not easy to pass in a carriage. He then 
asked me abruptly, " How many hogs do you think I killed last 
season?" Imagining that he might be a farmer, I said, 300. 
He exclaimed, " 18,000, and all of them dispatched in thirty-five 
days !" He next began to boast that one of his men could evis 
cerate more hogs in one day than any other hand in Kentucky ; 
and, placing himself in the attitude of his favorite executioner, he 
gave me such a minute description of his mode of operating, and 
dwelt on it with so much zest, as to make me feel satisfied that, 
as Thomas Diafoirus, in the " Malade Imaginaire," proposed to 
treat his mistress with " a dissection," so this member of the 
" pork aristocracy" of the west, would never doubt that such 
feats of professional dexterity as he loved to dilate upon, must 
command the admiration of all men who have the slightest feeling 
for superior artistical skill. 

The distance from Evansville to Louisville was 205 miles, 
and on both sides of the river were hills of limestone or sandstone, 
of the coal formation, 300 feet high, frequently presenting steep 
and picturesque cliffs. Every where I observed a^flat terrace of 
loam, or loess, bordering the river, sometimes on the side of Ken 
tucky, sometimes on that of Indiana. 

I had found this ledge, both at Mount Vernon and at Evans 
ville, to contain land and fresh-water shells. At the last-men- 
tione dtown, where the terrace was from twenty to thirty feet high, 
one of the lower beds of coarse materials was full of PalndincB 



208 FOSSIL CORAL REEF. [CHAP. XXXV. 



and the valves of a Unio, both of living species ; yet with them 
were included in the same gravelly and shelly mass, the well- 
preserved bones of the megalonyx. 

The coal-measures had given place to an older series of strata, 
the Devonian, when we reached the Falls of the Ohio, at Louis 
ville, where we saw the river foaming over its rocky bed. I 
first landed at New Albany, in Indiana, nearly opposite Louis 
ville, that I might visit Dr. Clapp, and see his splendid collection 
of fossil corals. He accompanied me to the bed of the river, 
where, although the water was not at its lowest, I saw a grand 
display of what may be termed an ancient coral reef, formed by 
zoophytes, which flourished in a sea of earlier date than the 
carboniferous period. The ledges of horizontal limestone, over 
which the water flows, belong to the old red sandstone, or De 
vonian group, and the softer parts of the stone have decomposed 
and wasted away, so that the harder calcareous corals stand out 
in relief. Many branches of these zoophytes project from their 
erect stems precisely as if they were living. Among other spe 
cies I observed large masses, not less than five feet in diameter, 
of Favosites gothlandica, with its beautiful honeycomb structure 
well displayed, and, by the side of it, the Favistella, combining 
a similar honeycombed form with the star of the Astrcea. There 
was also the cup-shaped Cyathophyllum, and the delicate net 
work of the Fcnestella, and that elegant and well-known Euro 
pean species of fossil, called "the chain coral," Catenipora cscha- 
roides, with a profusion of others, which it would be tedious to 
all but the geologist to enumerate. These coralline forms were 
mingled with the joints, sterns, and occasionally the heads, of lily 
encrinites. Although hundreds of fine specimens have been de 
tached from these rocks, to enrich the museums of Europe and 
America, another crop is constantly working its way out, under 
the action of the stream, and of the sun and rain, in the warm 
season when the channel is laid dry. The waters are now 
twenty feet above their lowest, and more than forty feet below 
their highest level, so that large spaces of bare rock are exposed 
to view. 

On one of the window-sills of Dr. Clapp s library was displayed 



CHAP. XXXV.] FOSSIL CORAL REEF. 209 

a group of these ancient corals, and, in the other window, a set 
of recent corals from the West Indian seas, of the genera Mean- 
drina, Astrea, Madrepora, and others ; some of them as heavy 
and stony as those of older date, their pores, foramina, and 
minute microscopic structure, not being more distinctly preserved. 
No one but a zoologist would have been able to guess which set 
were of modern, and which of ancient origin. Yet so old are 
the fossils, that they are referable to an era antecedent to the 
Alleghanies, the Alps, and the Pyrenees, nay, even to the time 
when by far the greater part of the materials composing these 
mountain-chains were slowly elaborated beneath the ocean. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

Louisville. Noble Site for a Commercial City. Geology. Medical Stu 
dents. Academical Rotation in Office. Episcopal Church. Preaching 
against the Reformation. Service in Black Methodist Church. Im 
proved Condition of Negroes in Kentucky. A colored Slave married as 
a free White. Voyage to Cincinnati. Naturalized English Artisan 
gambling. Sources of Anti-British Antipathies. Progress of Cincinnati. 
Increase of German Settlers. Democracy of Romanists. Geology of 
Mill Creek. Land Tortoises. Observatory. Cultivation of the Vine. 
Sculpture by Hiram Powers. 

April 5, 1846. FROM New Albany we. crossed the river to 
Louisville, the metropolis of Kentucky, and found the Gait 
House the best hotel we had been in since we left the St. Louis 
at New Orleans. On our way through the streets, we saw 
written in large letters, over a smith s shop, the word " black- 
smithy," and another inscription ran thus : " Cash paid for 
coon, mink, wild-cat, beaver, musk-rat, otter, bear, wolf, arid 
deer- skins ;" which reminded us that this city, being the first 
place where large vessels coming up the river are stopped by the 
Falls, is the natural emporium for the produce of the western 
hunting grounds. A more noble site for a great commercial 
town can not be imagined ; and several merchants expressed to 
me their opinion, that Cincinnati, founded at a later date, would 
not have outstripped her rival in the race, so as to number now 
a population of nearly 100,000 souls, more than double that of 
Louisville, but for the existence of slavery, and a large negro 
population in Kentucky. Besides the disadvantages always 
arising from the partition of a country between two races, evils 
which emancipation can not put an end to, Kentucky suffers 
from the decided preference shown to the right bank of the river 
by the best class of new settlers from the northeastern states, 
who choose the free s-tate of Ohio for their residence, instead of 
the slave state on the left bank. 



CHAP. XXXVL] MEDICAL STUDENTS. 211 

I made a geological excursion with Dr. Yandell, one of the 
Professors of the University of this place, into the neighborhood, 
going to the summit of a hill called Button-Mould Knob, so 
named from the joints of encrinites with which the lower strata 
of the carboniferous formation are charged. Here we enjoyed a 
wide prospect of the surrounding country, which,, if all the val 
leys were filled up, would form an even table-land, the nearly 
horizontal strata having been evidently planed off at a certain 
level by the denuding action of the sea. The valley of the Ohio 
forms the principal break in a region otherwise void of any strik 
ing feature in its natural scenery. A few spring flowers only 
were to be seen, the most plentiful being the Houstonia and the 
Claytonia. 

We went to an evening party at the house of one of the Pro 
fessors of the University, and met many of his colleagues, and 
some medical students. Two of the latter informed me, that 
they had been sent to London to finish their course of study, 
having been brought up to feel great respect and veneration for 
English educational establishments. They had been received 
kindly and politely by the professors, but the prejudices of the 
majority of their fellow pupils against the institutions of the 
United States, and still more their rude remarks about the vul 
garity of all Americans (of whom they knew scarcely any thing), 
had so wounded their national feelings, that they had written 
home to entreat their parents to allow them to attend classes at 
Paris, or in some German University, to which they had reluct 
antly assented. These young men, being of good families in 
Kentucky, were gentlemanlike in their manners, in this respect 
decidedly above the average standard of students of the same 
profession in England, and they spoke with no bitterness even on 
this annoying topic. Talking over academical matters, some 
elders of the company complained of the wish of the democratic 
party to apply their favorite dogma of " rotation in office," or, 
" le.t every man have his turn," not only to members of the 
executive and the election of judges, but actually to University 
professors. "You may amuse your countrymen," said they, "on 
your return, by telling them of the wisdom of our sovereign rulers, 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

Louisville. Noble Site for a Commercial City. Geology. Medical Stu 
dents. Academical Rotation in Office. Episcopal Church. Preaching 
against the Reformation. Service in Black Methodist Church. Im 
proved Condition of Negroes in Kentucky. A colored Slave married as 
a free White. Voyage to Cincinnati. Naturalized English Artisan 
gambling. Sources of Anti-British Antipathies. Progress of Cincinnati. 
Increase of German Settlers. Democracy of Romanists. Geology of 
Mill Creek. Land Tortoises. Observatory. Cultivation of the Vine. 
Sculpture by Hiram Powers. 

April 5, 1846. FROM New Albany we.crossed the river to 
Louisville, the metropolis of Kentucky, and found the Gait 
House the best hotel we had been in since we left the St. Louis 
at New Orleans. On our way through the streets, we saw 
written in large letters, over a smith s shop, the word " black- 
smithy," and another inscription ran thus : " Cash paid for 
coon, mink, wild-cat, beaver, musk-rat, otter, bear, wolf, arid 
deer- skins ;" which reminded us that this city, being the first 
place where large vessels coming up the river are stopped by the 
Falls, is the natural emporium for the produce of the western 
hunting grounds. A more noble site for a great commercial 
town can not be imagined ; and several merchants expressed to 
me their opinion, that Cincinnati, founded at a later date, would 
not have outstripped her rival in the race, so as to number now 
a population of nearly 100,000 souls, more than double that of 
Louisville, but for the existence of slavery, and a large negro 
population in Kentucky. Besides the disadvantages always 
arising from the partition of a country between two races, evils 
which emancipation can not put an end to, Kentucky suffers 
from the decided preference shown to the right bank of the river 
by the best class of new settlers from the northeastern states, 
who choose the free state of Ohio for their residence, instead of 
the slave state on the left bank. 



CHAP. XXXVI. ] MEDICAL STUDENTS. 211 

I made a geological excursion with Dr. Yandell, one of the 
Professors of the University of this place, into the neighborhood, 
going to the summit of a hill called Button-Mould Knob, so 
named from the joints of encrinites with which the lower strata 
of the carboniferous formation are charged. Here we enjoyed a 
wide prospect of the surrounding country, which,, if all the val 
leys were filled up, would form an even table-land, the nearly 
horizontal strata having been evidently planed off at a certain 
level by the denuding action of the sea. The valley of the Ohio 
forms the principal break in a region otherwise void of any strik 
ing feature in its natural scenery. A few spring flowers only 
were to be s-een, the most plentiful being the Houstonia and the 
Claytonia. 

We went to an evening party at the house of one of the Pro 
fessors of the University, and met many of his colleagues, and 
some medical students. Two of the latter informed me, that 
they had been sent to London to finish their course of study, 
having been brought up to feel great respect and veneration for 
English educational establishments. They had been received 
kindly and politely by the professors, but the prejudices of the 
majority of their fellow pupils against the institutions of the 
United States, and still more their rude remarks about the vul 
garity of all Americans (of whom they knew scarcely any thing), 
had so wounded their national feelings, that they had written 
home to entreat their parents to allow them to attend classes at 
Paris, or in some German University, to which they had reluct 
antly assented. These young men, being of good families in 
Kentucky, were gentlemanlike in their manners, in this respect 
decidedly above the average standard of students of the same 
profession in England, and they spoke with no bitterness even on 
this annoying topic. Talking over academical matters, some 
elders of the company complained of the wish of the democratic 
party to apply their favorite dogma of " rotation in office," or, 
" let every man have his turn," not only to members of the 
executive and the election of judges, but actually to University 
professors. "You may amuse your countrymen," said they, "on 
your return, by telling them of the wisdom of our sovereign rulers, 



212 EPISCOPAL CHURCH. [CHAP. XXXVJ. 

who would shorten to a minimum the term of service even of 
men who fill literary or scientific chairs." I informed them 
that nearly the whole University lectures at Oxford and Cam 
bridge, had of late years, in opposition to earlier usage, been 
transferred to temporary occupants of tutorships, who looked for 
ward to the resigning of their academical functions as soon as 
they could afford to marry, or could obtain church preferment ; 
so that the extreme democracy of Kentucky would at least have 
no claim to originality, should they apply their maxim of rotation 
in office to a body of academical lecturers. 

On Sunday we attended service in an Episcopal church. The 
young preacher dwelt largely on the supreme authority of the 
Church, and lamented that many dogmas and pious usages, 
which had received the unbroken sanction of fifteen centuries, 
should have been presumptuously set at naught by the rebellious 
spirit of the sixteenth century, the great intellectual movement 
of which he described as marked by two characteristics, " non 
sense and philosophy ;" nor was it easy to discover which of 
these two influences, in their reference to matters ecclesiastical, 
were most evil in his sight. After a long dissertation in this 
strain, he called up to him a number of intelligent looking young 
girls to be catechized, and I never saw a set of children with 
more agreeable or animated countenances, or who displayed more 
of that modest reverence and entire, unreflecting trust in their 
teacher, which it is so pleasing to see in young pupils. That 
some of the questions should have reference to the doctrines just 
laid down in the preceding discourse was to be expected. One 
of the last interrogatories, " Who wrote the Prayer-book?" puz 
zled the whole class. After waiting in vain for an answer, the 
minister exclaimed, " Your mother ;" and made a short pause, 
during which I saw the girls exchange quick glances, and I 
found time to imagine that each might be exclaiming mentally 
to herself, " Can he mean my mother ?" when he added, in a 
solemn and emphatic tone, " Your mother, the Church !" Had 
his congregation belonged to any other than the Anglican Church, 
I might simply have felt regret and melancholy at much that I 
had witnessed ; as it was, I came out of the church in a state of 



CHAP. XXXVL] BLACK METHODIST CHUCRH. 213 

no small indignation. I had heard, in the course of my travels, 
several discourses equally at variance with the spirit of the 
Reformation, but none before in which the Reformation itself 
was so openly denounced, and I could not help reflecting on the 
worldly wisdom of those who, wishing in the middle of the nine 
teenth century, to unprotestantize the members of a reformed 
church, begin their work at an age when the mind is yet un 
formed and plastic dealing with the interior of the skull as 
certain Indian mothers dealt with its exterior, when they bound 
it between flat boards, and caused it to grow, not as nature 
intended, but into a shape which suited the fashion of their tribe. 
In the evening we were taken, at our request, to a black 
Methodist church, where our party were the only whites in a 
congregation of about 400. There was nothing offensive in the 
atmosphere of the place, and I learned, with pleasure, that this 
commodious building was erected and lighted with gas by the 
blacks themselves, aided by subscriptions from many whites of 
different sects. The preacher was a full black, spoke good En 
glish, and quoted Scripture well. Occasionally he laid down 
some mysterious and metaphysical points of doctrine with a dog 
matic air, and with a vehement confidence, which seemed to increase 
in proportion as the subjects transcended the human understand 
ing, at which moments he occasionally elicited from his sympa 
thizing hearers, especially from some of the women, exclama 
tions such as " That is true," and other signs of assent, but no 
loud cries and sobs, such as I had heard in a white Methodist 
church in Montgomery, Alabama. It appeared from his explan 
ation of " Whose superscription is this ?" that he supposed the 
piece of money to be a dollar note, to which Caesar had put his 
signature. He spoke of our ancestors in the garden of Eden in 
a manner that left no doubt of his agreeing with Dr. Prichard, 
that we all came from one pair a theory to which, for my own 
part, I could never see any ethnological or physiological objection, 
provided time enough be allowed for the slow growth of races ; 
though I once heard Mr. A. W. Schlegel, at Bonn, pronounce it 
to be a heresy, especially in an Englishman who had read the 
" Paradise Lost." " I could have pardoned Prichard," said the 



214 BLACK PREACHER. [CHAP. XXXVI. 

Professor, " for believing that Adam was the forefather of all the 
Africans, had he only conceded that the fairest of her daughters, 
Eve, never could have been a negress." 

Toward the close of the discourse, the minister said " that a 
protracted meeting would soon be held ; but such assemblies 
were, in his judgment, becoming too frequent." He also an 
nounced that on Easter Sunday there would be a love-feast, 
which no doubt would be very crowded, " and where I hope you 
will all enjoy yourselves." He then said, " Sirs and Madams, I 
have now to warn you of a serious matter, but I see many of 
you are nodding, and let every one wake up his neighbor. The 
sexton, poor man, has more than he can do." This official, by 
the way, had been administering with his cane many admonitory 
taps on the heads of the younger part of the congregation, such 
as must have precluded them from napping for some time, if 
their skulls are not harder than those of their white brethren. 
There was a general stir, and two fat negro women, between 
whom my wife was wedged in (for the two sexes sat on separate 
sides), looked to see if she was awake. " There is a storm 
brewing," said the preacher, "owing to some late doings in Ohio, 
and I hope that none of the membership will get themselves into 
a scrape." The exciting topic on which he then enlarged was 
the late seizure, or kidnaping, as it was termed, of Jerry Phin- 
ney, who, after residing some years in Ohio, had been reclaimed 
by the heirs of his owners, in consequence of some flaw in his 
letters of freedom, and brought back to Kentucky. An attempt 
at a rescue was for a time apprehended, but 500 dollars were 
soon raised and paid to secure his release. 

When I commended the action of the black preacher as grace 
ful, I was assured that he had successfully imitated an eminent 
American player who had lately performed at Louisville. These 
blacks," said my informant, " are such inimitable mimics, that 
they will sometimes go through a whole sermon in the same 
style as they have heard delivered by a white man, only appear 
ing somewhat to caricature it, because they are more pompous 
and declamatory ; which in them is quite natural, for they are a 
more demonstrative race than we are. If he addresses them in 



CHAP. XXXVI.] NEGROES IN KENTUCKY. 215 

a plain, colloquial manner, his sermon would seem tame, and 
make no impression. They can not talk about the price of a 
pair of shoes, or quid of tobacco, without such gesticulations that 
you would fancy it was a matter of life and death they were 
discussing." There was a second colored man in the pulpit, 
who delivered a prayer with a strong nasal twang, and very 
extravagant action. The hymns were some of them in rather a 
wild strain, but, on the whole, not unmusical. 

I learnt that the domestic servants of Louisville, who are 
chiefly of negro race, belong very commonly to a different church 
from their owners. During our short stay here, an instance came 
to my knowledge of ofmaster who, having an untractable black 
servant, appealed to a ne*gro minister, not of his own church, to 
interfere and reprove him for his bad conduct, a measure which 
completely succeeded. We were told of four Sunday schools for 
colored people in the city, and in one of them 170 children 
receive instruction. There are also other schools on week days 
for teaching negroes to read, both in Kentucky and Tennessee. 
When I communicated these facts to Americans in Philadelphia, 
they were inclined to be incredulous, and then said, " If such be 
the condition of negroes in Kentucky, they must be better off in 
slave states than in others called free ; but you must not forget 
that their most worthless runaways take refuge with us." 

A recent occurrence in Louisville places in a strong light the 
unnatural relation in which the two races now stand to each 
other. One of the citizens, a respectable tradesman, became 
attached to a young seamstress, who had been working at his 
mother s house, and married her, in the full belief that she was 
a white, and a free woman. He had lived happily with her for 
some time, when it was discovered that she was a negress and a 
slave, who had never been legally emancipated, so that the mar 
riage was void in law. Morally speaking, it was certainly not 
void ; yet a separation was thought so much a matter of course, 
that I heard the young man s generosity commended because he 
had purchased her freedom after the discovery, and given her the 
means of setting up as a dressmaker. No doubt the lady knew 
that she was not of pure blood, and we were told that only six 



216 VOYAGE TO CINCINNATI. [CHAP. XXXVL 

years before she had run away from her owner. She had also 
concealed this fact from her lover, but at a time, probably, when 
her affections were deeply engaged. On the other hand, we may 
pity the husband who suddenly finds that he is disgraced by 
having made an unlawful marriage, that his children are illegit 
imate, and that the wife of his choice belongs to an inferior caste 
}n society. This incident is important in many points of view, 
and especially as proving to what an extent the amalgamation 
of the two races would take place, if it were not checked by 
artificial prejudices and the most jealous and severe enactments 
of law. I found that many here believe and hope that the time 
of emancipation is near at hand ; but I was sorry to discover that 
the most sagacious seemed to think that the blacks in these mid 
dle states will not be able to stand alone when no longer protected 
by enjoying the monopoly of the labor market. 

April 7. Sailed in the Ben Franklin steamer from Louisville 
to Cincinnati, a distance by the river of 130 miles. The scenery 
much resembled that below the Falls ; the valley of the Ohio being 
bounded by flat-topped hills, 200 or 300 feet high, formed of hor 
izontal beds of sandstone or limestone, with steep slopes or cliffs 
toward the river, and at the base of these a flat terrace of gravel 
or loam on one or both sides of the Ohio, above high- water mark. 

We made twelve miles an hour against the stream, and if we 
were descending, the captain says, we should go at the rate of 
eighteen miles an hour. Among the passengers I saw a thin, 
sallow-faced, anxious looking artisan, whom I mistook for a na 
tive-born Yankee, holding forth to a small circle of idlers about 
" our revolution" and " our glorious victories over the British," 
and calling upon all to prove themselves "true Democrats." 
Soon after we started I saw him take a dram, and then sitting 
down to cards lose sixty dollars in half an hour. The officers 
of the ship, observing this transaction, interfered, and put a stop 
to the game, giving orders to the steward not to sell any more 
brandy to this passenger. I afterward learnt that he was an 
Englishman, a skillful, first-rate mechanic in the iron trade at 
Pittsburg, who had come out from Liverpool about sixteen years 
ago. After drinking and losing all his earnings at the gaming 



CHAP. XXXVI. ] ANTI-BRITISH ANTIPATHIES. i>\7 

table, he has returned again and again to work, and can always 
command high wages. He has read up the history of the 
American revolution, and at an election can harangue a mob of 
newly come emigrants with great effect, and with all the author 
ity of a native, assuming a tone of intense nationality. On other 
occasions I had met with a naturalized Englishman of a different 
stamp, who might equally be described as "ipsis Americanis Ame- 
ricanior," one who, having been born in the middle classes, has 
gone over early in life to the New World, where he has succeeded 
in business, risen to a good social position, and given his children 
an excellent education. He then goes back to visit the " old 
country," and see his friends and relatives, and is surprised and 
mortified that they are separated by so great a gulf from the 
higher classes, greater than exists between the humblest and 
most elevated in his adopted country. He finds, also, the 
religious sect to which he and his kindred belong, only tolerated, 
and not standing on the same footing of "gentility" as the domi 
nant church. His sectarian zeal, his feelings of social pride, and 
his political principles are all up in arms, and he comes back to 
America far more patriotic and more of an optimist than any 
native. If he then ventures to enter on the political arena, his 
opponents warn the electors against one who is an alien by birth 
and feeling, and, in his efforts to disprove such imputations, he 
reaches the climax of anti-British antipathy. 

Such citizens were unaffectedly incapable of comprehending 
that I could have seen so much of the Union, and yet have JLO 
wish whatever to live there. Instead of asking, " Would you 
not like to settle here ?" it would be more prudent for them to 
shape their question thus : " If you were to be born over again, and 
take your chance, by lot, as to your station in society, what coun 
try would you prefer ?" Before choosing, I should then have to 
consider, that the chances are many thousands to one in favor of 
my belonging to the laboring class, and the land where they are 
best off, morally, physically, and intellectually, and where they 
are most progressive, would be the safest one to select. Such 
being the proposition, the Free States of the Union might well 
claim a preference, 
VOL. ii. K 



2lf! PROGRESS OF CINCINNATI. [CHAP. XXXVI. 

Every town we had visited in the last three months, since we 
left Savannah, in January, was new to us, and Cincinnati was 
the first place where we were able to compare the present state 
of things with that observed by us in the summer of 1842. In 
this short interval of four years, great improvements in the build 
ings, streets, and shops were visible ; a vast increase of population, 
and many additional churches, and new cotton factories. The 
soil of the country immediately behind the town is rich, and there 
is an ample supply of laborers, partly indeed because the Catholic 
priests strive to retain in the city all the German emigrants. 
Although they are industrious and thrifty, such an arrangement 
is by no means the best for promoting the progress of Ohio, or 
her metropolis ; for, next to having an "Irish quarter," a "Ger 
man quarter" in a large city is most undesirable. The priests, 
no doubt, judge rightly, both in reference to their notions of dis 
cipline, and with a view of maintaining their power ; for these 
peasants, when scattered over the country, and interspersed with 
Protestants, can not be made to confess regularly, attend mass, 
and read orthodox German newspapers, three of which are pub- 
blished here daily, and one weekly, all under ecclesiastical cen 
sorship. There are a large number of German Protestants, and 
20.000 Catholics, in all twelve churches, where the service is 
performed in the German language. Only half of these are 
Romanist churches, but they are much more crowded than the 
others. The chief emigration has been from Bavaria, Baden, 
Swabia, Wirtemberg, and the Black Forest, and they are almost 
all imbued with extreme democratic notions, which the ordinary 
European training, or the working of semi-feudal institutions, 
evidently fosters in the minds of the million, far more than does 
the republicanism of the United States. The Romanist priests 
feel, or affect, sympathy with this political party, and in the last 
election they instructed the Germans and the Irish to vote for 
Polk against Clay. It ought, indeed, to serve as a warning, 
and afford serious matter of reflection to the republicans of 
America, that a church which requires the prostration of the 
intellect in matters of faith and discipline, and which is most 
ambitious of wordly power, is also of all others the most willing 



CHAP. XXXVI.J GEOLOGY OF MILL CREEK. 019 

to co-operate with the ultra-democratic party. Are the priests 
conscious of having embarked in a common cause with the dema 
gogue, and that they must, like him, derive their influence from 
courting the passions, prejudices, and ignorance of the people ? 
If so, one method alone remains for combating both the removal 
of ignorance by a well-organized government system of schools, 
neither under sectarian or ecclesiastical control, nor under the 
management of any one political party. 

In the city, the New Englanders appeared to me to have lost 
political weight since we were last here. To show me how 
seriously the priests interfere in their domestic affairs, a bookseller 
told me that he had just lost the services of a young shopman 
who, although a Protestant, like his father, found that his mother, 
a Catholic, considered it her duty never to let him rest till he 
adopted some other profession. The priest had told her that he 
was constantly handling dangerous and heretical books in his store, 
with which his mind must be contaminated. 

In many of the large towns, in the valley of the Mississippi, 
the Catholics have established such excellent schools, and enforced 
discipline so well, that the children of Protestants have been at 
tracted there, and many have become proselytes ; but I heard of 
still more Catholics who have become converts to Protestantism, 
and I can not but believe that Romanism itself will undergo many 
salutary modifications under the influence of the institutions of this 
country. 

I made an excursion with Messrs. Buchanan, James, Carley, 
Clark, and Anthony, to Mill Creek, a tributary valley of the 
Ohio, where loam and gravel, with fresh-water shells, overlies a 
deposit of leaves and fossil stems of trees. The shells are of recent 
species, and the layer of vegetable matter of the same age as that 
which contains the bones of the mastodon, elephant, megalonyx, 
and other extinct animals at Big Bone Lick, in Kentucky.* I 
afterward saw in the city some beautiful collections of Silurian 
fossils from the blue limestone, and was struck with the dimen 
sions of some of the trilobites of the genus Isoteles, the most 

* See ante, p. 194, and "Travels in North America," vol. ii. pp. 62, 
65, 67. 



222 SCULPTURE BY POWERS. [CHAP. XXXVI. 

their veins ; they confessed themselves unable to guess, for the 
two girls were not only among the best scholars, but better look 
ing and less dark than many of the other pupils. 

At Mr. Longworth s we saw a beautiful piece of sculpture, an 
ideal head called Ginevra, by Hiram Powers, who had sent it 
from Rome as a present to his first patron. It appeared to me 
worthy of the genius of the sculptor of " Eve" and the " Greek 
Slave." Thorwaldsen, when he saw Powers " Eve," foretold 
that he would create an era in his art ; and not a few of the 
Italians now assign to him the first place in the " Naturalista" 
school, though assuredly there is much of the ideal also in his 
conceptions of the beautiful. It augurs well for the future culti 
vation of the fine arts in the United States, that the Americans 
are as proud of their countryman s success as he himself could 
desire. 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

Cincinnati to Pittsburg. Improved Machinery of Steamer. Indian Mound. 
Gravel Terraces. Pittsburg Fire. Journey to Greensburg. Scenery 
like England. Oregon War Question. Fossil Foot-prints of Air-breath 
ing Reptile in Coal Strata. Casts of Mud-cracks. Foot-prints of Birds 
and Dogs sculptured by Indians. Theories respecting the Geological 
Antiquity of highly organized Vertebrata. Prejudices opposed to the 
Reception of Geological Truths. Popular Education the only Means of 
pi-eventing a Collision of Opinion between the Multitude and the Learned. 

April 13, 1846. FROM Cincinnati we embarked in the Clip 
per steamer for Pittsburg, a distance of no less than 450 miles ; 
so magnificent is the scale of the navigation of this mere tribu 
tary of the Mississippi ! Yet there are other large steamers also 
plying above Pittsburg, on the tributaries of the Ohio. We ob 
serve more punctuality than in 1842, in the starting of the steam 
ers. The Clipper made ten miles an hour against the current, 
including stoppages. We fell in with some large artificial rails 
of wood stretching more than half across the river, and met a 
steamer, which had run foul of one of them, still entangled, and, 
though bound for Pittsburg, floating down the stream with the 
raft. Our steamer only draws 3^ feet water, and her engines 
are of a very peculiar construction, hitherto used in sea-boats only, 
with the exception of one on Lake Erie. The inventor of this 
improvement is Thomas K. Litch. There are two cylinders, one 
twice the size of the other, and the steam escapes from the smaller 
into the larger, instead of issuing into the open air, so that its 
heat is not lost. The economy of fuel arising from this contriv 
ance is great, and the vibrations and noise much less than in 
other boats on the same high-pressure principle. In place of the 
usual bell, signals are made by a wild and harsh scream, pro 
duced by the escape of steam, as in locomotive engines ; a fear 
ful sound in the night, and which, it is to be hoped, some ma 
chinist who has an ear for music will find means to modulate. 



GRAVEL TERRACES. [CHAP. XXXVII. 



There was a Pennsylvania!! farmer on board who told me that, 
having a large family to provide for, he had resolved to settle in 
Indiana, and was returning from that state, after making a pur 
chase of land in "the rolling prairies." He had paid the usual 
government price of 11 dollar, or about 5s. Qd. an acre ; whereas 
he could sell his own property in Pennsylvania, which had a house 
on it, at the rate of 60 dollars an acre. He had been much con 
cerned at finding a strong war party in the west, who were 
eager to have a brush with the English. " It was a short-sighted 
policy," he remarked, " in your country, to exert so little energy 
and put forth so small a part of her strength in the last war with 
the United States. It will one day involve both you and us in 
serious mischief." 

At a point about twenty-four miles below Wheeling, we came 
to the largest of the Indian mounds on the Ohio, of which I have 
spoken in my former "Travels."^ It is between 60 and 70 
feet high, rising from a flat terrace of loam, and a very striking 
object, reminding one, by its shape, of the pyramidal Teocallis of 
the ancient Mexicans, of which Humboldt has given figures, and 
which are so well described by Prescott, in his " History of Cor 
tes." As we approached Wheeling, the valley of the Ohio be 
came narrower, and the hills, composed of strata of the coal form 
ation, sensibly higher. The State of Ohio was on our left hand, 
or the northern bank of the river, and that of Virginia on our 
right. The flat terrace of loam and gravel, extending every 
where from the base of the hills to the river s bank, forms a pic 
turesque contrast to the steep slope of the boundary hills, clothed 
partly with ancient timber, and partly with a second growth of 
trees of less height, which has sprung up where clearings have 
been made. It is worthy of remark, that the materials of the 
great terrace of loam and gravel become more and more coarse 
as we approach nearer the mountains between Wheeling and 
Pittsburg, and at the same time the terrace itself is more and 
more elevated above the level of the river. It appeared to be 
about 60 feet high near the mouth of the Great Kanawha, and 
about 80 feet high at Georgetown, 40 miles below Pittsburg, 
* Vol. ii. p. 32. 



CHAP. XXXVII.] PITTSBURG FIRE. 225 

which I can only explain by reference to the theory before ad 
vanced ;* namely, by supposing the amount of subsidence, as well 
as of the subsequent upward movement, to have been greater 
inland, or farther north, than in the south, or nearer the Gulf of 
Mexico. 

April 16. There had been so hard a frost in the night, that 
the roof of our steamer s cabin was glazed with a thin sheet of 
ice as we approached Pittsburg, and we heard fears expressed 
that the fruit trees would be injured. Four years had elapsed 
since we were last at Pittsburg, and, in the interval, a consider 
able part of the city, covering sixty acres, had been burnt to the 
ground, the great roofed bridge over the Monongahela, all built 
of wood, having shared the same fate. A light suspension bridge 
has already replaced that structure of ponderous aspect, and al 
though the conflagration only happened in April of last year, new 
streets have sprung up every where from the ashes of the old, and 
the town has very far from a ruined or desolate look. Com 
manding the navigation of three great rivers, and an inexhausti 
ble supply of coal, it has every advantage save that of an atmo 
sphere free from coal smoke. 

I learnt that there had recently been a strike of the factory 
girls here for ten instead of twelve hours of daily labor. Their 
employers argue that they are competing with rivals who work 
their girls twelve or more hours per day, and the strike has fail 
ed ; yet many are of opinion, that even without legislative inter 
ference, a ten-hour rule will be eventually established. 

Most of our companions in the steamer were agents of com 
mercial houses going to look out for orders at Pittsburg. On the 
whole they were very intelligent, and conversed well on a variety 
of subjects, while most of them were too gentlemanlike to feel 
ashamed of " the shop." But we had now been living so many 
weeks in public with strangers, and without opportunities of 
choosing our society, that great was our delight to be able to hire 
at Pittsburg a private carriage, and set out alone on an expedi 
tion to Greensburg, 3 2 miles distant, where I had a point of geo 
logical interest to investigate. As we were leaving the hotel, a 
* See ante, p. 195, 



226 JOURNEY TO GREENSBURG. [CHAP. XXXVII. 

news-boy, finding I was supplied with newspapers, offered to sell " 
me a cheap American reprint of the miscellaneous works of Lord 
Jeffrey, assuring me that " it contained all the best articles he 
had written in the Edinburg Review." 

To be once more climbing hills even of moderate height, was 
an agreeable novelty after dwelling so long on the flat plains of 
the Mississippi. We were on the direct road, leading across the 
Alleghanies to Harrisburg. The scenery often reminded us of 
England, for we were traveling on a macadamized road, and 
passing through turnpike gates, with meadows on one side, and 
often on the other large fields of young wheat, of an apple-green 
color, on which a flock of sheep, with their lambs, had been 
turned in to feed. The absence of stumps of trees in the fields 
was something new to us, as was the non-appearance for a whole 
day of any representative of the negro race. Here and there a 
snake-fence, and a tall strong stubble of maize, presented a point 
of contrast with an English landscape. In some of the water- 
meadows the common English marigold (Caltlia palustris) was 
in full flower. At one turn of the road, a party of men on foot 
came in sight, each with his rifle, and they were followed, at a 
short distance, by a wagon with women and children, and a train 
of others laden with baggage. Our driver remarked that they 
were " movers," and I asked him if he ever knew an instance of 
an American migrating eastward. He said that he was himself 
the only example he ever heard of; for he was from Kentucky, 
having come the year before to satisfy his curiosity with a sight 
of the great Pittsburg fire. There he found a great demand for 
work, and so was tempted to stay. 

Our road lay through East Liberty, Wilkinsburg, and Adams- 
burg. Some day-laborers, who were breaking stones on the road, 
told me they were receiving seventy-five cents, or three shillings, 
a day ; and this in a country where food and fuel are much 
cheaper than in England, although clothing is rather dearer. 

Near Turtle Creek, two farmers conducted me to a spot where 
coal was worked, and where the undulating ground consisted of 
sandstone, limestone, and shale, green and black, of the coal- 
formation, precisely resembling strata of the same age in England, 



CHAP. XXXVII.] SCARCITY OF SERVANTS. 227 

both in mineral appearance, and in most of the species of imbed 
ded fossil plants. 

About fifteen miles before we reached Greensburg, we saw, in 
the extreme distance, the blue, faint, long, and unbroken line of 
the most western ridge of the Alleghanies. 

Greensburg is a neat, compact town of about 1000 inhabit 
ants. The houses are all of brick ; there is a court-house and five 
churches, some Lutheran, others Calvinistic, the German language 
being used in some, and the English in others. They publish 
three newspapers. We took up our quarters at a comfortable old- 
fashioned inn, where we were waited upon by the members of 
the family, for the difficulty of hiring or retaining servants here, 
seems to be extreme. One girl had left a lady, whose acquaint 
ance we made, because, being a farmer s daughter, she was not 
allowed to sit down at table with her mistress. The lady s sis 
ter, who was accomplished, and conversed with us on many lit 
erary subjects, was obliged to milk the cow for the whole sum 
mer, though they were in easy circumstances, such was the 
scarcity of " help/ Fortunately for us, my wife and I had, by 
this time, acquired the habit of waiting on ourselves in the inns, 
going occasionally down to the kitchen to ask for things, in a way 
which in England would be thought quite derogatory to one s 
dignity, especially in the eyes of the servants, whose trouble would 
thereby be lessened. Here, on the contrary, we found that it 
made us popular. The general system in America that servants 
at inns receive no gratuities, but are paid ample wages instead, 
is one cause of this difference. Yet much may be said in its 
favor, as it raises the independence of the servants, and relieves 
strangers from the perplexity of determining what fees are suit 
able. 

There was a crowded public meeting the day of our arrival, 
at which several orators were haranguing an audience of the 
lowest class, in favor of war with England about Oregon. The 
walls were placarded with bills, on which were printed, in large 
letters, these words, " Forty-Five, or Fight," which meant that 
the Oregon Territory must extend as far north as the 45th degree 
of latitude. 



223 FOSSIL FOOT-PRINTS IN COAL STRATA. [CHAP. XXXVII. 

This ambition of the people of the west to possess Oregon, is 
at least no new idea, for I happened to purchase at Louisville an 
old guide-book, describing the Falls of the Ohio and the city, in 
which, when speaking of commercial matters, the colonization 
and annexation of Oregon was set forth as the means of "opening 
a direct trade with China." I observed to one of the citizens, 
that it was satisfactory to see that none of the upper, or even 
of the middle classes, were taking any part at Greensburg in this 
agitation. He shook his head, and said, " Very true ; but these 
meetings are most mischievous, for you must bear in mind, that 
your nobody in England is our everybody in America." 

I had determined to visit Greensburg, on my way from Pitts- 
burg to Philadelphia, that I might examine into the evidence of 
the reality of certain fossil foot-prints of a reptile said to have 
been found in strata of the ancient coal-formation, and of which 
Dr. King, of Greensburg, had published an account in 1844. 
The genuineness of these foot-marks was a point on which many 
doubts were still entertained, both in Europe and America, and 
I had been requested by several geological friends not to return 
without having made up my mind on a fact which, if confirmed, 
was of the highest theoretical importance. Up to this period, 
no unequivocal proofs had been detected of the fossil remains of 
vertebrated animals more highly organized than fishes, in strata 
of such antiquity as the carboniferous rocks, and the absence of 
air-breathing quadrupeds or birds, served to constitute negative 
evidence, of peculiar significance, in reference to the coal-meas 
ures, because, as before stated, 1 * they contained the monuments 
of shallow fresh-water swamps, and often of surfaces of land 
covered with a luxuriant vegetation of terrestrial plants, some of 
the buried trees of which still remain with their roots in their 
natural position. That we should never have found, in such 
deposits, the remains of air-breathing creatures, except a few 
insects, that we should not yet have met with a single mammifer 
or bird, or lizard, snake, or tortoise, or the faintest indication of 
their existence, seemed most inexplicable, and led many geolo 
gists to embrace the opinion, that no beings having a higher 
* See ante, p. 185. 



CHAP. XXXVII.] FOSSIL FOOT-PRINTS IN COAL STRATA. 229 

organization than fishes, were created till after the carboniferous 
strata had been elaborated. 

During my stay in Westmoreland County, I was indebted to Dr. 
King for the most active assistance in the prosecution of my inqui 
ries. He kindly devoted several days to this object, and we first 
visited together a stone quarry in Union township, six miles 
southeast of Greensburg, on a farm belonging to Mr. Gallagher, 
where the foot-marks had been first observed, standing out in 
relief from the lower surface of slabs of sandstone, resting on thin 
layers of fine clay. These slabs were extracted for paving-stones, 
and the excavation was begun in the bank of a small stream, 
where there was at first a slight thickness only of shale overlying 
the harder beds ; but as they cut their way into the bank, the 
mass of shale became so dense as to oblige them to desist from 
the work. Between the slabs of stone, each a few inches thick, 
were thin parting layers of a fine unctuous clay, well fitted to 
receive and retain faithful impressions of the feet of animals. On 
the upper surface of each layer, Dr. King saw the foot-steps im 
pressed more or less distinctly ; but, as the clay was left exposed 
to the weather, it had crumbled to pieces before I examined it, 
and I had only an opportunity of seeing the casts of the same 
projecting in relief from the under sides of slabs of argillaceous 
sandstone. I brought away one of these masses, of which the 
annexed figure (fig. 12) is a faithful representation ; and it will 
be observed that it displays not only the marks of the foot-prints 
of an animal, but also casts of cracks, a, a , of various sizes, 
which must have existed in the clay. Such casts are produced 
by the drying and shrinking of mud, and they are usually detect 
ed in sandstones of all ages in which foot-marks appear. It will 
be seen that some of these cracks, as at b, c, traverse the foot 
prints, and they not unfrequently produce distortion in them, as 
might have been expected, for the mud must have been soft 
when the animal walked over it and left the impressions, where 
as, when it afterward dried up and shrank, it would become too 
hard to receive such indentations. I have alluded, in my former 
"Travels,"* to the recent foot-prints of birds called sand-pipers 
* Vol. ii. p. 168. 



230 FOSSIL FOOT-PRINTS IN COAL STRATA. [CHAP. XXXVII. 



Fig. 12. 




Scale one-sixth the original. 

Slab of sandstone from the coal-measures of Pennsylvania, with foot- prints of air-breathing 
leptile and casts of cracks. 



CHAP. XXXVII.] FOSSIL FOOT-PRINTS IN COAL STRATA. 231 




Fig. 13. 





Series of reptilian foot-prints in the coal-^trataTof Westmoreland County, 
Pennsylvania. 

a. Mark of nail ? 



232 FOSSIL FOOT-PRINTS IN COAL STRATA. [CHAP. XXXVII. 

(Tringa mimtta), which I saw running, in 1842, over the red 
mud thrown down by every tide on the borders of estuaries con 
nected with the Bay of Fundy. When this mud, which extends 
over thousands of acres, has been baked by the hot summer sun 
of Nova Scotia, it shrinks and cracks to the depth of several 
inches or even feet, and acquires such consistency as to be divisi 
ble into the successive layers of which it is composed, presenting 
on many upper surfaces impressions of birds feet and cracks, and 
on the under sides the casts of the same standing out in relief. ^ 

I have also stated f that on the sea beach near Savannah, in 
Georgia, I saw clouds of fine sand drifted by the wind, filling up 
the foot-prints of racoons and opossums, which a few hours before 
had passed along the shore, after the retreat of the tide. This 
process will account, in a satisfactory manner, for the sharpness 
of many fossil casts of animals in ancient rocks, as the grains of 
uniformly fine sand were poured into the newly made cavities, 
not by a current of water, which could scarcely have failed to 
disturb the soft mud, but by the air, which could not cause the 
slightest derangement of the most delicate imprints. 

No less than twenty-three foot-steps were observed by Dr. 
King on slabs in the stone quarry of Union township, before 
mentioned, before its abandonment, and the greater part of these 
were so arranged (see fig. 13) as to imply that they were the 
marks of the successive foot-steps of the same animal. Every 
where there was seen a double row of tracks, occurring in pairs, 
each pair consisting of a hind and fore foot, and each being at 
nearly equal distances from the next pair. The toes in each of 
these parallel rows turn the one set to the right, the other to the 
left. It is instructive to compare these impressions with those 
which had previously been met with in an ancient European 
rock (although one of less antiquity than the coal-formation), 
namely, the new red sandstone or Trias of Saxony and Cheshire. 
The accompanying figure (fig. 14) represents the Saxon Cheiro- 

* I have presented specimens of this red mud, with the foot-prints of 
birds, to the British Museum, Geological Society, and Museum of Eco 
nomic Geology. 

t Travels, vol. i. p. 167. 



CHAP. XXXVII.] FOSSIL FOOT-PRINTS IN COAL STRATA. 233 





therium, so called by Professor Kaup, because the marks 
both of the fore and hind feet resemble the shape of a 
human hand. Now in these European hand-shaped 
foot-marks, both the hind and fore feet have each five 
toes, and the size of the hind foot is about five times 
as large as the fore foot ; but in the American fossil 
(fig. 13), the posterior foot-print is not nearly twice 
as large as the anterior, and the number of toes is 
unequal, being five in the hinder and four in the 
anterior foot. In the Greensburg animal, as in the 
European Cheirotherium, the fifth toe stands out near 
ly at a right angle with the foot, and somewhat resem 
bles the human thumb. On the external side of all 
the Pennsylvanian tracks, both the larger and smaller, 
there is a protuberance like the rudiment of another 
toe. The average length of the hind foot is five and 
a half inches, and of the fore foot four and a half. 
The fore and hind feet being in pairs, follow each 
other very closely, there being an interval of about 
one inch only between them. Between each pair 
the distance is six to eight inches, and between the 
two parallel lines of tracks there is about the same 
distance. 

In the case of the European Cheirotherium, whether English 
or German, the hind and fore feet occur in pairs, but they form 
only one row, as in fig. 14, in consequence of the animal having 
put its feet to the ground nearly under the middle of its body, and 
the thumb-like toes are seen to turn to the right and to the left 
in the alternate pairs. But in the American tracks, which form 
two parallel rows, all the thumb-like toes in one set turn to the 
right, and in the other set to the left. We may infer, therefore, 
that the American Cheirotherium belongs to a new genus of 
reptilian quadrupeds, wholly distinct from that which characterizes 
the triassic strata of Europe, and such a generic diversity might 
have been expected in reptilian fossils of such different ages. 

The geological position of the sandstone of Greensburg is per 
fectly clear, being situated in the midst of the Appalachian coal- 




234 SCULPTURED FOOT-PRINTS. [CHAP. XXXVII. 

field, having the main bed of coal, called the Pittsburg seam, three 
yards thick, a hundred feet above it, worked in the neighborhood, 
and several other seams of coal at lower levels. The impressions 
of Lepidodendron, Sigillaria, Stigmaria, and other characteristic 
carboniferous plants, are found both above and below the level of 
the reptilian loot-steps. 

We may safely assume that the huge reptile which left these 
prints on the ancient sands of the coal-measures was an air- 
breather, for its weight would not have been sufficient under 
water to have made impressions so deep and distinct. The 
same conclusion is also borne out by the casts of the cracks above 
described, for they show that the clay had been exposed to the 
air and suri, so as to have dried and shrunk. As we so often see 
the ripple mark preserved in sandstones of all ages, and in none 
more frequently than in the American and European coal strata, 
we ought not to feel surprised that superficial markings, such as 
foot-prints, which are by no means more perishable or evanescent 
in their nature, should have been faithfully preserved down to 
our times, when once the materials had been hardened into stone. 

There are some bare ledges of rock, composed of pure white 
quartzose grit of the coal-measures, standing out exposed above 
the general level of the ground, in many places near Greensburg, 
especially near Derry, in Westmoreland County, about fourteen 
miles north of G-reensburg. They are so bare that scarcely any 
lichens grow upon them, and on some of them the foot-prints oi 
birds, as well as those of dogs and some other quadrupeds have 
been artificially cut. After examining them carefully, I entertain 
no doubt that they were sculptured by Indians, for there are many 
Indian graves near Deny, arid one of their paths, leading through 
the forest from the Alleghany Mountains to the west, lay precisely 
in the line of these curious carvings. The toe joints in the feet 
of the birds thus cut are well indicated, as might have been ex 
pected, for the aboriginal hunting tribes of North America were 
skillful in following the trail of all kinds of game, and are known 
to have carved in some places on rocks, many rude imitations of 
the external forms of animals. If, therefore, they were sometimes 
tempted to use the representation of foot-prints as symbols of the 



CHAP. XXXVII. ] OPPOSITION TO GEOLOGICAL TRUTHS. 235 

birds or quadrupeds which they hunted, they would be not unlikely 
to give very accurate copies of markings with which they were 
so familiar. The important observations made by Dr. King 
relatively to the fossil imprints, called the attention of the whole 
country to the Indian antiquities of comparatively modern date ; 
but the popular notion that there was a connection between them 
is wholly erroneous. 

Since the announcement, by Dr. King, in 1844, of the proofs 
of the existence of reptiles at the period when the coal strata of 
Pennsylvania were formed, Professor Goldfuss, of Bonn, has pub 
lished the description of more than one saurian found in the an 
cient coal-measures of Saarbruck, near Treves. 

Never, certainly, in the history of science, were discoveries 
made more calculated to put us on our guard for the future 
against hasty generalizations founded on mere negative evidence. 
Geologists have been in the habit of taking for granted, that at 
epochs anterior to the coal there were no birds or air-breathing 
quadrupeds in existence ; and it seems still scarcely possible to 
dispel the hypothesis that the first creation of a particular class 
of beings coincides in date with our first knowledge of it in a fossil 
state, or the kindred dogma that the first appearance of life on 
the globe agrees, chronologically, with the present limits of our 
insight into the first creation of living beings, as deduced from 
organic remains. These limits have shifted, even in our own 
times, more than once, or have been greatly expanded, without 
dissipating the delusion, so intense is the curiosity of man to trace 
back the present system of things to a beginning. Rather than 
be disappointed, or entertain a doubt of his power to discern the 
shores of the vast ocean of past time, into which his glances are 
penetrating, like the telescope into the region of the remoter ne 
bulae, he can not refrain from pleasing his imagination with the 
idea that some fog-banks, resting on the bosom of the deep, are, 
in reality, the firm land for which his aching vision is on the 
stretch. 

I can not conclude these remarks on the geological discoveries 
made in these remote valleys of the Alleghanies, without alluding 
to a moral phenomenon, which was forcibly brought before my 



236 OPPOSITION TO GEOLOGICAL TRUTHS. [CHAP. XXXVIL 

mind in the course of the investigation. The interest excited by 
these singular monuments of the olden times, naturally led to 
animated discussions, both in lecture-rooms and in the columns 
of the daily journals of Pennsylvania, during which the high 
antiquity of the earth, and the doctrine of former changes in the 
species of animals and plants inhabiting this planet before the 
creation of man, were assumed as established truths. But these 
views were so new and startling, and so opposed to popular pre 
possessions, that they drew down much obloquy upon their pro- 
mulgators, who incurred the censures not only of the multitude, 
but also of some of the Roman Catholic and Lutheran clergy. 
The social persecution was even carried so far as to injure pro 
fessionally the practice of some medical men, who had given 
publicity to the obnoxious doctrines. Several of the ministers 
of the Lutheran church, who had studied for years in German 
universities, were too well informed not to believe in the conclu 
sions established by geologists, respecting the immensity of past 
time and former vicissitudes, both in animal and vegetable life : 
but although taking a lively interest in discoveries made at their 
own door, and joining in the investigations, they were compelled 
by prudence to conceal their opinions from their congregations, or 
they would have lost all influence over them, and might perhaps 
have seen their churches deserted. Yet by maintaining silence 
in deference to the opinions of the more ignorant, they become, in 
some degree, the instruments of countenancing error ; nay, they 
are rearing up the rising generation to be, in their turn, the per 
secutors of many of their contemporaries, who may hereafter be 
far in advance in their scientific knowledge. 

" To nothing but error," says a popular writer of our times, 
" can any truth be dangerous ; and I know not," he exclaims, 
" where else there is seen so altogether tragical a spectacle, as 
that religion should be found standing in the highways, to say, 
< Let no man learn the simplest laws of the universe, lest they 
mislearn the highest. In the name of God the Maker, who said, 
and hourly yet says, Let there lie light, we command that you 
continue in darkness ! "* 

* Letter on Secular Education, by T. Carlyle, July, 1848. 



CHAP. XXXVII.] INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM. 



Goldsmith, in the " Vicar of Wakefield," makes his traveler 
say, that after he had walked through Europe, and examined 
mankind nearly, he found that it is not the forms of government, 
whether they be monarchies or commonwealths, that determine 
the amount of liberty enjoyed by individuals, but that " riches in 
general are in every country another name for freedom." I agree 
with Goldsmith that the forms of government are not alone suffi 
cient to secure freedom they are but means to an end. Here 
we have in Pennsylvania a free press, a widely extended suffrage, 
and the most perfect religious toleration nay, more than tolera 
tion, all the various sects enjoying political equality, and, what is 
more rare, an equality of social rank , yet all this machinery is 
not capable, as we have seen, of securing even so much of intel 
lectual freedom as shall enable a student of nature to discuss 
freely the philosophical questions which the progress of science 
brings naturally before him. He can not even announce with 
impunity, results which half a century of observation and reason 
ing has confirmed by evidence little short of mathematical demon 
stration. But can riches, as Goldsmith suggests, secure intellectual 
liberty ? No doubt they can protect the few who possess them 
from pecuniary penalties, when they profess unpopular doctrines. 
But to enable a man to think, he must be allowed to communi 
cate freely his thoughts to others. Until they have been brought 
into the daylight and discussed, they will never be clear even to 
himself. They must be warmed by the sympathy of kindred 
minds, and stimulated by the heat of controversy, or they will 
never be fully developed and made to ripen and fructify. 

How, then, can we obtain this liberty ? There is only one 
method ; it is by educating the millions, and by dispelling their 
ignorance, prejudices, and bigotry. 

Let Pennsylvania not only establish numerous free schools, but 
let her, when she organizes a system of government instruction, 
raise the qualifications, pay, and station in society of the secular 
teachers, as highly as Massachusetts is now aspiring to do, and 
the persecution I have complained of will cease at once and for 
ever. 

The project of so instructing the millions might well indeed be 



238 POPULAR EDUCATION. [CHAP, XXXVII. 

deemed Utopian, if it were necessary that all should understand 
the patient and laborious trains of research and reasoning by which 
we have arrived at grand generalizations in geology, and other 
branches of physical science. But this is not requisite for the 
desired end. We have simply to communicate the results, and 
this we are bound to do, without waiting till they have been 
established for half a century. We ought rather carefully to 
prepare the public mind for new conclusions as soon as they 
become highly probable, and thus make impossible that collision 
of opinion, so much to be deprecated, between the multitude and 
the learned. 

It is as easy to teach a peasant or a child that the earth moves 
round the sun, as to inculcate the old exploded dogma that it is 
the motionless center of the universe. The child is as willing to 
believe that our planet is of indefinite antiquity, as that it is only 
6000 years old. Tell him that the earth was inhabited by other 
races of animals and plants before the creation of man, as we now 
know it to have been, and the idea is not more difficult for him 
to conceive than the notion which is usually allowed to take root 
in his mind, that man and the species of animals and plants, now 
our contemporaries, were the first occupants of this globe. All 
that we require, when once a good system of primary and normal 
schools has been organized, is a moderate share of moral courage 
and love of truth, on the part of the laity and clergy ; and then 
the academical chair and scientific lecture-room, and every pulpit, 
and every village school, may be made to speak the same lan 
guage, in regard to those natural phenomena, which are of a kind 
to strike and interest the popular mind.* 

* The substance of the above remarks, on the fossil foot-prints of Greens- 
burg, was given by me in a Lecture to the Royal Institution, London, Feb. 

4, 1848. 



/ V 

Jsfff j 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

Greensburg to Philadelphia. Crossing the Alleghany Mountains. Scenery. 
Absence of Lakes. Harrisburg. African Slave-trade. Railway 
Meeting at Philadelphia. Borrowing Money for Public Works. Negro 
Episcopal Clergyman. Washington. National Fair and Protectionist 
Doctrines. Dog-wood in Virginia. Excursion with Dr. Wyman. Nat 
ural History. Musk-rats. Migration of Humming-birds to New Jersey. 

April 19, 1846. LEFT Greensburg, intending to cross the 
Alleghariy Mountains to Harrisburg, and go thence to Philadel 
phia. We started in the evening in a large stage coach, in which 
were nine inside passengers, so that our night journey through 
Youngstown, Stony town, and Shellsburg was fatiguing, and not 
the less so by our having twice to turn out in the dark, while all 
the luggage was shifted to a new vehicle. The last of these 
broke down, one of the wheels having given way, and we had an 
opportunity of witnessing the resources and ingenuity displayed on 
such occasions by American travelers. A large bough of a tree 
was cut off with an ax, and tied on to the axletree with ropes, 
so as to support the body of the carriage, and in this way we 
went several miles without inconvenience. During one of the 
night transfers of our luggage a carpet bag of mine was left be 
hind, and when I afterward missed it at Philadelphia I wrote to 
three places to claim it. After five days I found it in my room 
in the hotel, no one knowing whence it came, and nothing having 
been paid for it. Before reaching 1 Philadelphia it must have been 
transferred to three distinct conveyances, including two railways. 
I may state here a fact highly creditable to the public convey 
ances in the United States, that I never lost a package in either 
of my tours, although I sent more than thirty boxes of geological 
specimens from various places, often far south of the Potomac, 
and west of the Alleghanies ; some by canals, some by river 
steamers, others by coaches or railways. Every one of them 
sooner or later found their way safely to my house in London. 



240 ABSENCE OF LAKES. [CHAP. XXXV11I. 

On leaving Greensburg we crossed one after another of the long 
parallel ridges of which the Alleghany chain is composed, de 
scending into each of the long intervening valleys, the hills be 
coming higher and higher as we advanced eastward. The char 
acter of the forest changed as we came to higher ground, espe 
cially by the intermixture of trees of the fir tribe, and by the 
undergrowth of azaleas, kalmias, and rhododendrons, for I had 
seen none of these evergreens since I left Indiana, not even under 
the oak wood round Greensburg. When day dawned we had 
reached the highest part of our road, and enjoyed a splendid 
mountain view, the steep wooded slopes being relieved by the 
contrast of green meadows bordering the rivers in the bottom of 
each deep valley, while in many parts of the landscape a pictur 
esque effect was produced by what appeared to be extensive lakes. 
All who were strangers to the scene required to be assured that 
they were not really sheets of water ; yet they were simply banks 
of dense white fog resting on the low grounds, which the heat of 
the sun would soon dissipate. It is singular that there are no 
lakes in the Appalachian chain, all the rivers escaping from the 
longitudinal valleys through gorges or cross fissures, which seem 
invariably to accompany such long flexures of the strata as char 
acterize the Alleghanies or the Jura. 

In Campbell s " Gertrude of Wyoming," indeed, we see 

"Lake after lake interminably gleam," 

amidst the Appalachian ridges ; but such characteristics of the 
scenery of this chain are as pure inventions of the poet s imagina 
tion, as the flamingoes, palrns, and aloes with which he adorns 
the banks of the Susquehanna. 

Near the highest summit of the chain I saw two seams of ex 
cellent coal, one of them twelve feet thick, in strata belonging to 
the same series which I had examined near Greensburg. After 
descending from the highest level, we followed for a time the 
windings of the Juniata River, the road often bounded by high 
rocky cliffs, on the ledges of which we saw the scarlet columbine, 
blue hepatica, and other wild flowers in blossom. 

We slept at Chambersburg, where, on the roof of the court- 



CHAP. XXXVIII.] AFRICAN SLAVE-TRADE. 241 

house, stands a statue of Franklin, holding a lightning conductor 
in his hand. A company of firemen were exercising their en 
gines in the great square, throwing up powerful jets of water 
high enough to wash the statue. 

From Chambersburg we went on by railway at the rate of 
fourteen miles an hour, only slackening our pace when we passed 
through the middle of towns, such as Shippensburg and Carlisle, 
where we had the amusement of looking from the cars into the 
shop windows. 

On reaching the Susquehanna we came in sight of Harrisburg, 
the seat of Legislature of Pennsylvania, a cheerful town, which 
makes a handsome appearance at a distance, with its numerous 
spires and domes. The railway bridge over the river had been, 
burnt down, and the old bridge carried away by a recent freshet, 
when large fragments of ice were borne down against the piers. 

Among the passengers in the railway to Philadelphia, was an 
American naval officer, who had just returned from service on 
the coast of Africa, fully persuaded that the efforts made by the 
English and United States fleets to put down the slave-trade, 
had increased the misery and loss of life of the negroes, without 
tending to check the traffic, which might, he thought, have been 
nearly put an end to before now, if England and other countries 
had spent an equally enormous sum of money in forming settle 
ments such as Liberia ; although he admitted that negroes from 
the United States, whose families had been acclimatized in Amer 
ica for several generations, and who settled in Liberia, were cut 
off by fever almost as rapidly as Europeans. 

Returning to Philadelphia, after an absence of six months, we 
were as much pleased as ever with the air of refinement of the 
principal streets, and the well-dressed people walking on the neat 
pavements, under the shade of a double row of green trees, or 
gazing, in a bright, clear atmosphere, at the tastefully arranged 
shop windows ; nor could we agree with those critics who com 
plain of the prim and quakerish air, and the monotonous same 
ness, of so regularly built a city. 

During our stay, a large meeting was held to promote a scheme 
for a new railway to Pittsburg, through Harrisburg, the interest 

VOL. II. L 



242 NEGRO CLERGYMAN. [CHAP. XXXVIII. 

of the money to be raised chiefly by city rates. Some of rny 
friends here are opposed to the measure, declaring that such pub 
lic works are never executed with economy, nor thriftily man 
aged. The taxation always falls on some districts, which derive 
no profit from the enterprise, and they demand other grants of 
public money as a compensation, and these are laid out with equal 
extravagance. The good sense of the New Englanders, say they, 
has almost invariably checked them from entering upon such un 
dertakings, and in one of the few instances in which they have 
deviated from sound policy, they have repented. For when, in 
opposition to the richer inhabitants, a branch railway was made 
to connect Bridgeport, in Connecticut, with the main line of road, 
the bonds of that small inland town were pledged as security for 
the money borrowed. The traffic proved insufficient to meet 
their liabilities, and a majority of the citizens then determined to 
repudiate. The rich alleged that they had opposed the project, 
and the poor, who had voted away their money, were quite will 
ing that no new taxes should be imposed. The creditors, how 
ever, went to law, and, by aid of the courts, compelled payment, 
as the Supreme Court might have done in the case of the delin 
quent states (had not the original constitution of the Union been 
altered before any of them repudiated), which might have given 
a wholesome check to rash enterprises guaranteed by state bonds. 

The booksellers tell me that their trade is injured by the war- 
panic, arid I observe that most of the halfpenny, or cent papers, 
are still very belligerent on the Oregon question. 

On Sunday, I attended service, for the first time, in a free 
black Episcopal church. Prayers were read well by a negro 
clergyman, who was evidently an educated man. The congre 
gation consisted wholly of the colored race. Where there is a 
liturgy, and where written sermons are read, there is small oppor 
tunity of comparing the relative capabilities of Africans and Euro 
peans for the discharge of such functions. In the Baptist, Meth 
odist, and Presbyterian services, the success of the minister depends 
much more on his individual ability. I was glad, however, to 
see a negro officiating in a church which confers so much social 
rank on its clergyman, and in no city more than Philadelphia 



CHAP. XXXVIII.] WASHINGTON FREE TRADE. 243 

does the colored race stand in need of some such make- weights to 
neutralize the prejudices which retard their natural progress. 
We were told of an ineffectual attempt, recently made by a lady 
here, to obtain leave to bury a favorite free negro woman in St. 
James s graveyard, although she had died a member of the Epis 
copal church ; nor are any colored people allowed to be buried at 
the Laurel Hill Cemetery. That burial-ground commands a 
beautiful view up and down the Schuylkill, and the ground there 
is laid out with much taste, being covered with evergreens and 
trees, and having many of the graves adorned, at this season, 
with violets and lilies of the valley. 

April 27. Leaving my wife with some friends at Philadel 
phia, I set out on a geological tour to Richmond, Virginia, to Re 
sume my examination of the Oolitic coal-field, left half-finished in 
December last. At Washington I found they were holding a 
national fair, or grand exhibition of manufactured articles, intend 
ed to convince Congress of the advantage of a high tariff. The 
protectionists maintain that every article which, for seven years, 
has been shielded from foreign competition, has been reduced in 
price to the consumer below the foreign cost at the time when 
the duty was imposed. The free-traders, on the other hand, 
argue, that their antagonists keep out of sight the fact that in 
those same seven years the price of the foreign articles might, 
and probably would, have fallen as much. One party points to 
the former policy of Great Britain toward her American colonies ; 
how she interdicted them from manufacturing for themselves, and 
even from selling the productions of their own soil and industry 
to any but the mother country ; how she grew rich by monop 
oly and restrictions, nursing her infant agriculture, commerce, and 
factories, by prohibitive duties ; and they ask whether, if the 
English cabinet really believed in the theory of free-trade, they 
would not long ere this have repealed the navigation laws ? The 
advocates of the opposite policy appeal to the recent law for ad 
mitting American corn duty-free into England, as demonstrating 
the sincerity of the British government. But in this controversy 
it happens, as usual, that class-interests are espoused with all the 
personal zeal and energy with which men pursue a private object, 



244 TREES AND FLOWERS. [CHAP. XXXVIII. 

while the cause of science, and the general good of the public, 
being every body s business, are treated with comparative apathy. 

When I arrived in Virginia, April 29th, I found the woods 
every where enlivened by the dazzling white flowers, or bracteae, 
of the dog- wood (Cornus florida), the average height of wliich 
somewhat exceeds that of our white thorn ; and when, as often 
happens, there is a back-ground of cedar or pine, the mass of 
flower is almost as conspicuous as if a shower of snow had fallen 
upon the boughs. As we sometimes see a pink variety of the 
wild thorn in England, so there occurs here, now and then, though 
rarely, a pink dog- wood. Having never remarked this splendid 
tree in any English shrubbery or park, I had some fine young 
plants sent home from a nursery to several English friends, and, 
among others, to Sir William Hooker, at Kew, who was not a 
little diverted at my zeal for the introduction ef a tree which had 
been well-established for many years in the British arboretum. 
But now that I have since seen the dwarfed and shabby repre 
sentatives of this species in our British shrubberies, I am ready to 
maintain that it is still unknown in our island. No Virginian, 
who was not a botanist, could ever recognize it in England as the 
same plant as the dog- wood of his native land. Yet it is capable 
of enduring frosts as severe and protracted as are ever experienced 
in the south of England, and the cause of its flowers not attain 
ing their full size in our climate, is probably a want of sufficient 
intensity of light and heat. 

A great variety of oaks were now in leaf in the Virginian 
forests, among which I observed the white oak, with its leaves 
in the shape of a violin, and the willow oak, with long and nar 
row leaves. The ground underneath these trees was adorned 
with the pink azalea and many other flowers, among the rest the 
white violet, a species of phlox, and an everlasting Gnaplialium. 

The cedar (Juniperus virginiana) is often covered at this 
season with what is termed here the cedar apple (Podisoma 
macropus), supposed by many of the inhabitants to be the flower 
or fruit of the tree itself. It is a beautiful orange-colored fungus, 
ornamented with tassels, a very conspicuous object after a shower, 
but shrinking up if exposed to a day s sunshine. 



CHAP. XXXVIII.] NATURAL HISTORY. 245 

I made excursions in various directions with my friend Mr. 
GifFord, to examine the coal mines north and south of Black- 
heath, near Richmond, and have already given the results of our 
observations in the first volume.^ I afterward made an expedi 
tion with Dr. Wyman, now Professor of Comparative Anatomy 
at Cambridge, Massachussetts, to examine the geology of the 
tertiary strata round Richmond, and those (of the Eocene period) 
displayed in the cliffs bordering the Potomac River, near Acquia. 
Creek. In one of our walks we saw some dogs feeding on part 
of the carcass of a horse, and a group of turkey-buzzards eagerly 
looking on close at hand, but not daring to share in the repast. 
Near the same spot were the skulls of two dogs lying bleached 
in the sun, and in the hollow of each we found the nest of a 
large species of wasp, somewhat resembling our hornet, contain 
ing a good store of honey. On the surface of some pools of 
water I saw floating the singular seed-vessel of the nuphar, or 
yellow pond lily (Nelumbiuni). These seeds have been known 
to vegetate after they have been kept for a hundred years. 

In passing through a wood near Acquia Creek, on a hot day, 
we came upon a large snake, about four feet long, resembling 
that called the mocassin, which lifted itself up, folding its body 
into several graceful coils, and then darted its head and neck 
forward at a dog which had followed us from the inn. The dog 
dexterously retreated as often -as a blow was aimed at him, bark 
ing loudly, and enjoying the rnock fight. The extremity of the 
snake s tail, although not armed with a rattle, was in a state of 
constant vibration. 

On a soft sandy road we saw a great many of the ball-rolling 
beetles (Ateuchus volvens), which resemble in form the Scarabceus 
sacer of Egypt. They were all busily engaged in pushing along 
round balls of dung, in the center of some of which we found an 
egg, and in others a maggot. A pair of beetles was occupied 
with each globular mass, which considerably exceeded themselves 
in size. One of them went before, and usually climbed up the 
side of the ball till the weight of its body made the mass fall 
over, the other pushing behind, so as to urge it forward, or at 
* Vol. i. p. 211. 



246 MUSK-RATS. [CHAP. XXXVIII 

least prevent it from rolling back again. We saw two of them 
in half a minute force a ball for a distance of eighteen inches up 
a gentle slope, and when they reached a soft part of the road, 
one of them began to excavate a hole, and soon entirely disap 
peared under ground, heaving up the earth till it cracked and 
opened wide enough to allow his companion to push the ball of 
dung into it. The round mass immediately began to sink, and 
in a few minutes was out of sight. We saw another pair try in 
vain to bury their treasure, for they had selected a spot where 
the soil was too hard ; at last they gave up the attempt, and, 
rolling it away, set out in search of a more favorable spot. 

We crossed several plowed fields on the slope of the hills which 
descend toward the Potomac, where a singular kind of manure is 
used, consisting of dead fish, and almost exclusively of the bony 
pike, or gar-fish (Lepidosteus oxyurus). The hard stony scales 
resist decomposition for several years. The fishermen told us 
that they are greatly annoyed by constantly taking these pikes 
in their nets with the herrings. There is so enormous an abund 
ance of herrings in some spots in this estuary, that 50,000 have 
sometimes been taken this season in a few hours. 

In a marsh near the inn, we observed numerous habitations 
of the musk-rat, standing up like hay-cocks. When the small 
size of the animal is considered, the quantity of dried grass, reeds, 
and rushes accumulated in one of these hummocks, at least a 
cart-load, is surprising. We waded through the water to one 
of them, and found that it was four feet high, and nine feet in 
diameter. When we pulled it to pieces, the smell of musk was 
very perceptible. At the depth of about sixteen inches from the 
top we found a cavity, or chamber, and a small gallery leading 
from it to another chamber below, from which a second gallery 
descended, and then went upward again to a third chamber, from 
all which there was a perpendicular passage, leading down to below 
the level of the water, so that the rats can dive, and, without being 
seen again, enter their apartments, in which they breathe air. 

The unio, or fresh-water mussel, is a favorite food of these 
rats, and they often leave the shells on the banks of the American 
rivers, with one valve entire and the other broken. In the even- 



CHAP. XXXVIII.] HUMMING-BIRDS. 247 

ing the note of the bull-frog, in these swamps, reminded me much 
of the twanging of a large Jew s harp. 

From Acquia Creek, I went, by steamer, to Washington, and 
thence by railway through Philadelphia to the town of Burling 
ton, in New Jersey, beautifully situated on the banks of the 
Delaware. Here I paid a short visit to my friend, Mr. William 
M llvaine, and crossed the Delaware with him to Bristol, to 
renew my acquaintance with Mr. Vanuxem, a geologist of no 
ordinary merit. His death, which happened soon afterward, 
was a loss to the public as well as to many personal friends. 

In Wilson s " Ornithology" it is stated, that the humming 
bird migrates from the south to Pennsylvania the latter part of 
April, and builds its nest there about the middle of May. For 
the last thirty years, Mr. M llvaine had never been disappointed 
in seeing it reach Burlington the first week of that month, gen 
erally about the middle of the week, its northward progress being 
apparently hastened or retarded by the mildness or inclemency 
of the season. They seem always to wait for the flowering of a 
species of horse-chestnut, called here the buck-eye, from a fancied 
likeness of its fruit to the eye of a deer. The bright-red blos 
soms of this tree supply the nourishment most attractive to these 
birds, whose arrival had been looked for the very day after I 
came. Strange to say, one of them, the avant-courier of the 
feathered host, actually appeared, and next morning, May 7th, 
hundreds were seen and heard flitting and humming over the 
trees. A lady sent us word that a straggler from the camp was 
imprisoned in her greenhouse, and, going there, I saw it poised 
in the air, sucking honey from the blossom of an orange-tree. 
The flower was evidently bent down slightly, as if the bird rested 
its bill upon it to aid its wings in supporting its body in the air, 
or to steady it. When it wished to go out, it went straight to 
the window at which it had entered, and, finding it closed, flew 
rapidly round the large conservatory, examining all parts of it, 
without once striking the glass or beating its wings against the 
wall, as the more timid of the feathered tribe are apt to do. No 
sooner, however, was a small casement opened, than it darted 
through it like an arrow. 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

New York, clear Atmosphere and gay Dresses. Omnibuses. Naming of 
Streets. Visit to Audubon. Croton Aqueduct. Harpers Printing 
Establishment. Large Sale of Works by English and American Authors. 
Cheapness of Books. International Copyright. Sale of Eugene Sue s 
"Wandering Jew." Tendency of the Work. Mr. Gallatin on Indian 
Corn. War with Mexico. Facility of raising Troops. Dr. Dewey 
preaching against War. Cause of Influence of Unitarians. Geological 
Excursion to Albany. Helderberg War. Voting Thanks to the Third 
House. Place-hunting. Spring Flowers Geology andTaconic System. 

May 7, 1846. ON our return to New York, we were struck 
with the brightness of the atmosphere in spring, arising not merely 
from the absence of smoke, but from the quantity of solar light 
as compared to England, this city being in the same latitude as 
Naples. The unsullied purity of the air makes gay and brilliant 
colors in dress and furniture appropriate. 

Every fortnight the " Journal des Modes" is received from 
France, and the ladies conform strictly to the Parisian costume. 
Except at balls and large parties, they wear high dresses, and, 
as usual in mercantile communities, spare no expense. Embroi 
dered muslin, of the finest and costliest kind, is much worn ; and 
my wife learnt that sixteen guineas were not unfrequently given for 
a single pocket handkerchief. Extravagantly expensive fans, with 
ruby or emerald pins, are also common. I had heard it said in 
France that no orders sent to Lyons for the furnishing of private 
mansions, are on so grand a scale as some of those received from 
New York ; and I can well believe it, for we saw many houses 
gorgeously fitted up with satin and velvet draperies, rich Axmin- 
ster carpets, marble and inlaid tables, and large looking-glasses, 
the style in general being Parisian rather than English. It was 
much more rare here than at Boston to see a library forming 
part of a suite of reception-rooms, or even a single book-case in a 
drawing-room, nor are pictures so common here. 



CHAP. XXXIX.] OMNIBUSES. 249 

In the five months since we were last in this metropolis, whole 
streets had been built, and several squares finished in the northern 
or fashionable end of the town, to which the merchants are now 
resorting, leaving the business end, near the Battery, where they 
formerly lived. Hence there is a constant increase of omnibuses 
passing through Broadway, and other streets running north and 
south . Groups of twelve of these vehicles may be seen at once, 
each with a single driver, for wages are too high to support a 
cad. Each omnibus has an opening in the roof, through which 
the money is paid to the coachman. We observed, as one 
woman after another got out, any man sitting near the door, 
though a stranger, would jump down to hand her out, and, if it 
was raining, would hold an umbrella over her, frequently offering, 
in that case, to escort her to a shop, attentions which are com 
monly accepted and received by the women as matters of course. 

All the streets which cross Broadway, run east and west, and 
are numbered, so that they have now arrived at 146th-street 
a mode of designating the different parts of the metropolis worthy 
of imitation on both sides of the Atlantic, since experience has 
now proved that there is in the Anglo-Saxon mind an inherent 
poverty of invention in matters of nomenclature. For want of 
some municipal regulations like those of New York, the same 
names are indefinitely multiplied in every great city, and letters, 
after wandering over all the streets bearing the same appellation, 
to the infinite inconvenience and cost of the post-office, are at 
length received, if haply they ever reach their destination, long 
after they are due. 

The low island on which New York is built, is composed of 
granite and gneiss covered with " drift" and boulders. The 
original surface being very uneven, the municipality has fixed 
upon a certain grade or level to which all heights must be 
lowered by blasting the rocks or by carting away the gravel, 
and up to which all the cavities must be raised. Besides other 
advantages of this leveling process, the ground is said to become 
more healthy and free from malaria, there being no longer any 
stagnant pools of water standing in the hollows. 

May 10. Paid a visit to Mr. Audubon, the celebrated orni- 

!<* 



250 CROTON AQUEDUCT. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

thologist, at his delightful residence on the banks of the Hudson, 
north of Bloomingdale. His son had just returned from Texas, 
where he had been studying the natural history of that country, 
especially the mammalia, and was disappointed at the few oppor 
tunities he had enjoyed of seeing the wild land quadrupeds in a state 
of activity, so as to observe their habits. I told him I had been 
equally surprised at the apparent scarcity of this tribe in the 
native forests of the United States. This whole class of animals, 
he said, ought to be regarded as properly nocturnal ; for not 
merely the feline tribe and the foxes, the weasels and bats, shun 
the daylight, but many others feed partly by night, most of the 
squirrels and bears, for example. The ruminants no doubt are 
an exception, yet even the deer and the buffalo, like the wild 
horse, travel chiefly in the night. 

From Mr. Audubon s I went to Highbridge, where the Croton 
water is made to play for the amusement of visitors, and is thrown 
up in a column to the height of 120 feet. 

I went also to see the reservoir, inclosing an area of no less 
than thirty-six acres, from which the water is distributed to all 
parts of New York. In this artificial lake all the river sediment 
is deposited, the basin being divided into two parts, so that one 
may be cleaned out while the other is in use. The tunnel or pipe 
conveying the water for a distance of more than thirty miles, from 
the source to the Harlem Hiver, is so large, that the chief engineer 
and commissioners of the works were able to float down it in a 
flat-bottomed boat when it was first opened, in July, 1842. 

While at New York, we were taken by our literary friend, 
Mr. Cogswell, over the printing and publishing establishment of 
the Harpers, the largest in America, and only surpassed, in the 
scale of its operations, by two or three in Great Britain. They 
give employment to three hundred men, manufacture their own 
types and paper, and have a " bookbindery" under the same roof; 
for, in order to get out, with the utmost dispatch, the reprints of 
foreign works not entitled to copyright, they require to be inde 
pendent of all aid from other traders. We were shown a fire 
proof vault, in which stereotype plates, valued at 300,000 dollars, 
are deposited. In one of the upper stories a long line of steam- 



CHAP. XXXIX.] HARPERS PRINTING-OFFICE. 251 

presses was throwing off sheets of various works, and the greater 
number were occupied with the printing of a large illustrated 
Bible, and Morse s Geography for the use of schools. In 1845, 
the Harpers sold two millions of volumes, some of them, it is true, 
being only styled numbers, but these often contain a reprint of an 
entire English novel, originally published in two or three volumes, 
at the cost of a guinea and a half, the same being sold here for 
one or two shillings. Several of Bulwer s tales are among these, 
40,000 copies of his "Last of the Barons" having just issued 
from this house. It may, indeed, be strictly said of English 
writers in general, that they are better known in America than 
in Europe. 

Of the best English works of fiction, published at thirty-one 
shillings in England, and for about sixpence here, it is estimated 
that about ten times as many copies are sold in the United States 
as in Great Britain ; nor need we wonder at this, when we con 
sider that day laborers in an American village often purchase a 
novel by Scott, Bulwer, or Dickens, or a popular history, such 
as Alison s Europe (published at thirteen pounds in England and 
sixteen shillings in America), and read it at spare moments, while 
persons in a much higher station in England are debarred from 
a similar intellectual treat by considerations of economy. 

It might have been apprehended that, where a daily newspaper 
can be bought for a halfpenny, and a novel for sixpence, the public 
mind would be so taken up with politics and light reading, that 
no time would be left for the study of history, divinity, and the 
graver periodical literature. But, on the contrary, experience 
has proved that, when the habit and facility of reading has been 
acquired by the perusal even of trashy writings, there is a steady 
increase in the number of those who enter on deeper subjects. 
I was glad to hear that, in proportion as the reading public 
augments annually, the quality of the books read is decidedly 
improving. About four years ago, 40,000 copies were printed 
of the ordinary common-place novels published in England, of 
which sort they now only sell about 8000. 

It might also have been feared that the cheapness of foreign 
works unprotected by copyright, would have made it impossible 



252 CHEAPNESS OF BOOKS. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

for native authors to obtain a price capable of remunerating them 
highly, as well as their publishers. But such is not the case. 
Very large editions of Prescott s " Ferdinand and Isabella," and 
of his " Mexico," and " Peru," have been sold at a high price ; 
and when Mr. Harper stated to me his estimate of the original 
value of the copyright of these popular works, it appeared to me 
that an English author could hardly have obtained as much in 
his own country.* The comparative cheapness of American 
books, the best editions of which are by no means in small 
print, seems at first unintelligible, when we consider the dearness 
of labor, which enters so largely into the price of printing, paper, 
and binding. But, first, the number of readers, thanks to the 
free-schools, is prodigiously great, and always augmenting in a 
higher ratio even than the population ; and, secondly, there is a 
fixed determination on the part of the people at large to endure 
any taxation, rather than that which would place books and 
newspapers beyond their reach. Several politicians declared to 
me that not only an income tax, but a window tax, would be 
preferred ; and " this last," said they, " w r ould scarcely shut out 
the light from a greater number of individuals." The duty on 
paper, in the United States, is trifling, when compared to that 
paid in Great Britain. Mr. Chambers informs us, that the 
Government duty of 5000Z., paid by him for his Miscellany, in 
twenty volumes, was equal in amount to the whole profits of that 
publication. The cost of advertisements, in America, is also 
small. One of my American friends sent over to a London 
publisher 250 copies of his work, charging him 4s. 6d. each. 

* A letter dated April 15, 1849, was lately shown me from the Harpers, 
with permission to make known its contents, in which they mentioned, that 
having been authorized by Mr. Macaulay to publish in America his " His 
tory of England," they had printed six editions at various prices varying 
from four dollars to fifty cents (sixteen shillings and sixpence to two shillings) . 
At the expiration of the first three months, they had sold 40,000 copies, and 
other booksellers who had issued independent editions had sold about 20,000 ; 
so that 60,000 copies had been purchased in the United States at a time 
when about 13,000 had been disposed of by Longman and Co., in London, 
at the price of 11. 12s. each. As the cheap American editions were only 
just brought into the market at the date of this letter, the principal sale of 
the book was but commencing. 



CHAP. XXXIX.] INTERNATIONAL COPYRIGHT. 253 

After paying entrance duties, and necessary outlay for advertise 
ments in London, and the agency, it was found that the price 
must be as high as 1 6s. 

The party who are in favor of an international copyright be 
tween England and the United States, seems to be steadily 
gaining strength among the booksellers, publishers, and authors, 
although the editors of newspapers and their readers may per 
haps oppose the measure for some time. The number of reprisals 
now made by English speculators are very numerous. According 
to a statement lately presented to Congress by Mr. Jay, of New 
York, there are about 600 original American works "pirated" 
in Great Britain ; or, to speak more correctly, while the law 
remains in its present state, reprinted without leave of their 
American authors, or any pecuniary acknowledgment to them. 

Many are of opinion that the small print of cheap editions in 
the United States, will seriously injure the eyesight of the rising 
generation, especially as they often read in railway cars, devouring 
whole novels, printed in newspapers, in very inferior type. Mr. 
Everett, speaking of this literature, in an address to the students 
of Harvard College, said, "If cheap it can be called, which begins 
by costing a man his eyes, and ends by perverting his taste and 
morals." 

As an illustration of the mischievous tendency of the indiscrim 
inate reading of popular works by the multitude, when the higher 
classes and clergy can exert little or no control in the selection 
of the books read, the wonderful success of Eugene Sue s " Wan 
dering Jew" was pointed out to me by many, with no small 
concern. This led me to ask Mr. Harper how many copies he 
had disposed of, and he answered, "80,000, issued in different 
shapes, and at various prices." It had so often been thrust into 
my hands in railway cars, and so much talked of, that, in the 
course of my journey, I began to read it in self-defense ; and, 
having begun, could not stop till I had finished the whole, 
although the style of the original loses half its charms in an 
imperfect translation. " Le vieux dragon," for example, is 
always rendered the " old dragon," instead of " dragoon," and 
the poetry of a brilliant passage is nearly destroyed by "defense" 



254 THE WANDERING JEW." [CHAP. XXXIX. 

being translated " defense," instead of " barrier," with other 
blunders equally unpardonable. Yet the fascination of the orig 
inal, and its power to fix the attention, triumph over these dis 
advantages, and over the violence done to probability in the 
general plot, and over the extravagance of many of its details. 
The gross, sensual, and often licentious descriptions in which the 
author indulges, in some scenes, and still more, such sentimental 
immorality as is involved in the sympathy demanded for Hardy s 
love and intrigue with a married woman (he being represented as 
the model of a high-minded philanthropist), make one feel the con 
trast of such a work with the chaste and pure effusions of Scott s 
genius. Yet there is much pure feeling, many touches of tenderness 
in the tale, and many passages fitted to awaken our best affec 
tions. Even the false political economy bordering on communism, is 
redeemed by the tendency of the book to excite sympathy for the 
sufferings, destitution, and mental degradation of the poor. The 
dramatic power displayed in many scenes, is of a high order ; as 
when the Jesuit Rodin, receiving his credentials from Rome, is 
suddenly converted into the superior of the haughty chief to whom 
he had been previously the humble secretary, and where Dago- 
bert s wife, under the direction of her confessor, refuses, in opposi 
tion to a husband whom she loves and respects, to betray the 
place of concealment of two young orphans, the victims of a vile 
conspiracy. In this part of the narrative, moreover, the beauty 
of the devotional character of the female mind is done full justice 
to, while the evils of priestly domination are exhibited in their 
true colors. The imprisonment of a young girl, of strong mind 
and superior understanding, in a madhouse, until she is worked 
upon almost to doubt her own sanity, are described with much 
delicacy of feeling and pathos, and make the reader shudder at 
the facility with which such institutions, if not subject to public 
inspection, may be, and have been abused. 

The great moral and object of the whole piece, is to expose the 
worldly ambition of the Romanist clergy, especially of the Jesuits, 
and the injury done, not only to the intellectual progress of society 
at large, but to the peace and happiness of private families, by 
their perpetual meddling with domestic concerns. That the shafts 



CHAP. XXXIX.] MR. GALLATIN ON INDIAN CORN. 255 

of this satire have not missed their aim, has been proved, among 
other evidences, by its having been thought politic, even in En 
gland, to circulate, chiefly, it is said, among the Irish Catholics, an 
" Adaptation of the Wandering Jew, from the original of Eugene 
Sue." In this singular re-cast of the French romance, which I 
have perused, the Russian police is every where substituted for 
the Jesuits, and Rodin becomes the tool of the Czar, intriguing 
in French politics, instead of the servant of the successor of Ig 
natius Loyola. On the whole, I am inclined to believe that the 
good preponderates over the evil, in the influence exerted on the 
million, even by such a romance. It has a refining rather than 
a corrupting effect, and may lead on to the study of works of a 
more exalting character. The great step is gained, when the 
powers of the imagination have been stimulated and the dormant 
and apathetic mind awakened and lifted above the prosaic mono 
tony of every-day life. 

May 9. Called with a letter of introduction on Mr. Gallatin, 
well known by a long and distinguished career in political life. 
As a diplomatist in London, he negotiated the original Oregon 
treaty with Great Britain, and has now, at the age of eighty- 
two, come out with several able and spirited pamphlets, to de 
monstrate to his countrymen that their national honor would not 
be compromised by accepting the terms offered by the British 
Cabinet. Being at the same time an experienced financier, he 
has told them plainly, if they will go to war, how much it will 
cost them annually, and what taxes they should make up their 
minds to submit to cheerfully, if they would carry on a campaign 
with honor and spirit against such an enemy. 

In the course of conversation I found that Mr. Gallatin was 
of opinion that the indigenous civilization of several Indian tribes, 
and of the Mexicans and Peruvians among others, was mainly due 
to the possession of a grain so productive, and, when dried in the sun, 
so easily kept for many years, as the maize or Indian corn. The 
potato, which, when healthy, can rarely be stored up and pre 
served till the next harvest, may be said, on the contrary, to be a 
food on which none but an improvident race would lean for sup 
port. " I have long been convinced," said Mr. Gallatin, " that 



256 WAR WITH MEXICO. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

the Indian corn has also given a powerful impulse to the rapid 
settlement of the whites in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and other 
western states. In one of my first excursions to the west, I saw 
a rnan felling trees in March, who, when I returned in October, 
had harvested a crop of Indian corn, grown on the very spot. 
He had also the leaves and stems of the plant to serve for winter 
fodder for his cattle. He was an emigrant, newly arrived, and 
entirely without the capital indispensable to enable him to culti 
vate wheat, which must have been twelve or thirteen months in 
the ground before it could be reaped." 

Next day the stirring news of the invasion of the Mexican 
territory by the American army, reached New York, and I met 
the news-boys, in every street, crying out, "War with Mexico!" 
Soon afterward I saw the walls covered with placards, headed 
with the words, " Ho, for the halls of the Montezumas !" 

The mayor had called a public meeting to express sympathy 
with the President and the war-party at Washington. This 
meeting was held in the Park, and although it may have served 
the purpose of the democratic party, it was certainly a signal 
failure, if any strong expression of popular feeling in favor of such 
a war was looked for. In the crowd I heard nothing but Irish, 
Scotch, and German accents, and the only hearty cheer which 
any one orator could draw, even from this mob of foreigners, 
was obtained by representing the Mexicans as acting under the 
influence of British gold. 

I met with no one person in society who defended the aggres 
sion on the Mexican territory ; but, as they can not prevent it, 
they endeavor, each in his way, to comfort themselves that the 
mischief is no worse, some saying, it will be a less evil than 
fighting with Great Britain ; others that it will furnish employ 
ment for a host of turbulent spirits ; while some merchants hint 
that the democratic party, had they been economical, might 
have lowered the tariff, and carried out their dangerous theory 
of free trade, whereas now they will plunge the nation into debt, 
and be compelled to resort to high duties, which will " protect 
native industry." The dissatisfaction of others is unbounded ; 
they dread the annexation of a region containing five millions of 



CHAP. XXXIX.] RAISING TROOPS. 257 

Indians, which, say they, will deteriorate the general standard of 
the white population ; they deplore the development of a love 
for military glory, a passion inconsistent with all true republican 
principles ; and one friend observed to me, " You will soon see 
a successful soldier, wholly unknown to all of us at this moment, 
a man unversed in civil affairs, raised to the Presidentship." I 
asked whether, in a country where nearly all are industriously 
employed, it will be possible to find recruits for foreign service. 
Nothing, they reply, is more easy. " Our broad Indian frontier 
has nurtured a daring and restless population, which loves ex 
citement and adventure, and in the southern states there are 
numbers of whites to whom military service would be a boon, 
because slavery has degraded labor." A week later I received a 
letter from a correspondent in the south, who said, " Such is the 
military fever in Arkansas, Louisiana, Alabama, and Mississippi, 
that these states alone would furnish 50,000 men, if required ; 
and in many districts we are in fear of such an enlistment of the 
white population, that there will be too few left at home to serve 
as a police for the negroes. Married men are going, as well as 
bachelors, lawyers, medical men, and schoolmasters, many of 
whom have no taste whatever for fighting or foreign service, but 
they know that to have served a year in a campaign, to have 
been in a battle, or have been wounded, would advance them 
more in an election, or even in their several professions, than any 
amount of study or acquired knowledge." 

The Sunday following we heard a sermon by the Rev. Orville 
Dewey, in which this spirit of territorial aggrandizement, this 
passion for war, these false notions of national honor and glory, 
were characterized as unchristian, and indicating a low standard 
of private as well as public morality. I remarked to a New 
England acquaintance, who was one of the large congregation, 
that whatever might be said against the voluntary system, the 
pulpit in America seemed to me more independent than the press. 
" Because every newspaper," he replied, " is supported by half 
yearly or annual subscribers, and no editor dares write against 
the popular sentiment. He knows that a dagger is always sus 
pended over him by a thread, and if he presumed to run counter 



258 DR. DEWEY UNITARIANISM. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

to the current, his table would be covered next morning- with 
letters each beginning with the dreaded words, Stop my paper. 
He has made a bargain, like that of Dr. Faustus, with the devil, 
bartering away his immortal soul for a few thousand dollars." 
When I afterward reflected on this alleged tyranny of regular 
subscribers, it occurred to me that the evil must be in a great 
degree mitigated by the cheapness and variety of daily prints, 
each the organ of some distinct party or shade of opinion, and 
great numbers of them freely taken in at every reading-room and 
every hotel. 

I might say of Dr. Dewey s discourse, as I have already said 
of the preaching of the Unitarians generally, that, without want 
ing spirituality, it was more practical and less doctrinal than the 
majority of sermons to which I have been accustomed to listen. 
But I should mislead my readers, if I gave them to understand 
that they could frequent churches of this denomination without 
risk of sometimes having their feelings offended by hearing doc 
trines they have been taught to reverence treated slightingly, or 
even with contempt. On one occasion (and it was the only one 
in my experience), I was taken, when at Boston, to hear an emi 
nent Unitarian preacher, who was prevented by illness from offi 
ciating, and his place was supplied by a self-satisfied young man, 
who, having talked dogmatically on points contested by many a 
rationalist, made it clear that he commiserated the weak minds 
of those who adhered to articles of faith rejected by his church. 
If this too common method of treating theological subjects be ill 
calculated to convince or conciliate dissentients, it is equally 
reprehensible from its tendency to engender, in the minds of those 
who assent, a Pharisaical feeling of self-gratulation that they are 
not as other sectarians are. 

T can only account for the power which the Unitarians have 
exerted, and are now exerting, in forwarding the great education 
al movement in America, in the face of that almost superstitious 
prejudice with which their theology is regarded by nineteen- 
twentieths of the population, by attributing it to the love of 
intellectual progress which animates both their clergy and laity, 
and the deep conviction they are known to feel that public moral- 



CHAP. XXXIX.] EXCURSION TO ALBANY. 259 

ity and happiness can only be insured by spreading an elevated 
standard of popular education throughout the masses. In their 
enthusiastic pursuit of this great end, they are acknowledged to 
have no thought of making proselytes to any system of religious 
doctrines, and are therefore trusted in the management of schools 
by the parents of children of the most opposite persuasions. In 
regard to their own faith, some misapprehension has arisen, in 
consequence of the name they bear, which was not chosen by 
themselves, but to which, on the contrary, they have objections, 
such as members of the Anglican Church might feel if some such 
name as Anti-transubstantiationists, or any term which simply 
expressed their opposition to some one article of the Romanist 
creed, had been fixed upon them. When the rigid Calvinism of 
the old Puritans caused a schism in New England, the seceders 
wished to free themselves from the fetters of a creed, and to take 
the Gospel alone as their standard of faith. They were naturally, 
therefore, averse to accept a name which might be generally 
supposed to imply that they attached a prominent importance to 
the negation of any one doctrine professed by other Christians. 
"I desire," said Charming, " to wear the livery of no party; 
but we accept the appellation which others have imposed upon 
us, because it expresses what we believe to be a truth, and 
therefore we ought not to shrink from the reproaches cast upon 
it. But, had the name been more honored, had no popular cry 
been raised against it, I would gladly have thrown it off."* 

May 11. Sailed from New York to Albany in a steamer, 
which carried me at the rate of eighteen miles an hour through 
the beautiful scenery of the Hudson Hiver. I had been invited 
by two of the state surveyors of New York to make an excursion 
with them to the north of Albany, and to discuss in the field 
some controverted points respecting the geology of the oldest fos- 
siliferous strata. There was a physician on board, who, having 
been settled for twenty-six years in Virginia, had now come back, 
after that long absence, to see his native state. His admiration 
and wonder at the progress made by New York in a quarter of 
a century were unbounded. Speaking of his adopted country, 
* Channing s Works, vol. iii. p. 210. 



260 HELDERBERG WAR. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

he exclaimed, " We have been left far behind in the race." I 
suggested, that if, twenty-six years ago, a period had been fixed 
upon by law for the emancipation of their slaves, Virginia might, 
ere this, have been relieved of nearly all her negro population, 
so great has been the migration of negroes to the south. " It is 
useless," he said, "to discuss the practicability of such a measure, 
while the majority of our legislators, having been born slave 
holders, are not convinced of its desirability." While my com 
panion was absorbed in admiration at the improvement of " the 
Empire State," my thoughts and feelings took a very different turn, 
when I learned that "the Helderberg war," which I have alluded 
to in my former " Travels,"^ is still going on, and seems as far 
from a termination as ever. The agricultural population through 
out many populous counties have now been in arms for eight 
years, to resist payment of rents due to their landlords, in spite 
of the decisions of the courts of law against them. Large con 
tributions have been made toward an insurrectionary fund one 
of its objects being to support a newspaper, edited Ijy a Chartist 
refugee from England, in which the most dangerous anti-social 
doctrines are promulgated. The " anti-renters" have not only 
set the whole militia of the state at defiance, in more than one 
campaign, but have actually killed a sheriff s officer, who was 
distraining for rent ! If any thing could add to the disgrace 
which such proceedings reflect on the political administration of 
affairs in New York, it is the fact that the insurgents would 
probably have succumbed ere this, had they not been buoyed up 
by hopes of legislative interference in their favor, held out to them 
by popularity-hunting candidates for the governorship, and other 
official places. 

In the newspapers of the day, a scene described as having 
occurred at the close of the legislative session in Albany excited 
my curiosity. One of the members of the House of Representa 
tives moved a vote of thanks " to the gentlemen of the third 
house for the regularity of their attendance and the courtesy 
with which they had conducted themselves." The motion was 
seconded, read from the chair amidst great laughter, and then 
* Vol. i. p. 68. 



CHAP. XXXIX.] "THE THIRD HOUSE." 261 

allowed to drop. I inquired what might be the meaning of this 
joke, and was asked in reply whether I had read the letters of 
Jesse Hoyt and others, edited by Mackenzie ? I had, indeed, 
purchased the pamphlet alluded to, containing a selection from 
an immense mass (said to amount to twenty-five volumes) of the 
private and confidential correspondence of official men, left acci 
dentally by them, on a change of administration, in the custom 
house of New York. All these had been printed for the benefit 
of the public by their successors. The authenticity of the docu 
ments made known by this gentlemanlike stroke of party tactics, 
purporting to be penned by men who had filled high places in 
the State and Federal Governments, had been placed beyond a 
doubt ; for the writers had attempted to obtain an injunction in 
the law courts to stop the publication, claiming the copyright of 
letters which they had written. Some time before this conver 
sation, a merchant of Boston, who wished me to look only on the 
bright side of their institutions, and who was himself an optimist, 
had said to me, " Our politicians work in a glass hive, so that 
you always see the worst of them ; whereas your public men can 
throw a decent vail of secrecy over much that may be selfish and 
sordid in the motives of their conduct. Hence the scandal of 
your court and cabinets is only divulged to posterity, a hundred 
years after the events, in private memoirs." Unfortunately for 
this theory, a glance at the Mackenzie letters was enough to 
teach me, that, if the American bees work in a glass hive, the 
glass is not quite so transparent as my friend would have led me 
to believe. The explanation of the satirical motion made in the 
House at Albany, then proceeded thus : " The patronage of the 
State of New York is enormous ; the Governor alone has the 
appointment of two hundred and sixty civil officers, and the 
nomination of more than two thousand places is vested jointly in 
him and the senate. Some of these are for two, others for five 
years, and they are worth from two hundred to five thousand 
dollars a year. Among the posts most coveted, because the 
gains are sometimes very high, though fluctuating, are those of 
the inspectors, who set their mark or brand on barrels of exported 
goods, such as flour, tobacco, preserved pork, mackerel and other 



262 PLACE-HUNTING. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

fish, to guarantee their good quality, arid guard the public against 
imposition, in cases where the articles would be injured if opened 
and examined by the purchaser. It is scarcely necessary to state, 
that where the prey is so abundant, there will the eagles be gath 
ered together ; and besides the aspirants to vacant offices, there 
is a crowd of lawyers and paid agents of private individuals and 
companies, who have to watch the passage of private and public 
bills through the legislature. During the whole session, they fill 
the Governor s ante-room, and the lobby of each house ; and, as 
they are equal in respectability, number, station, and influence, 
to the two other houses put together, besides that they spend, 
perhaps, more money in Albany, we dignify them with the name 
of < the third house. " 

" Are they," said I, " suspected of giving money-bribes to 
legislators ?" " No ; but they may convey a party of repre 
sentatives on a railway trip, to make them acquainted with the 
merits of some case relating to a canal or railroad, and then 
entertain them with a dinner before they return." " In Massa 
chusetts," said I, " people speak with more respect of their 
assembly." No doubt, for in that state there is much less to 
give away, and therefore less corruption and intrigue. Besides, 
we have only 160 senators and representatives, whereas the 
assembly at Boston is far more numerous, so that it is not so 
easy to bring the influence of the third house to bear upon it." 

In the public museum at Albany, Dr. Emmons showed me a 
fine collection of simple minerals, rocks, and fossils, made by 
himself and other geologists to whom the state survey was 
intrusted. He then accompanied me across the Hudson River, 
to examine the slate and limestone eastward of Albany. Here, 
from the summit of Greenbush Hill, we enjoyed a magnificent 
view of the Catskill Mountains, and the Helderberg range in the 
distance. In the foreground was the river, and Albany itself, 
now containing a population of 40,000 inhabitants, with its domes 
and spires clustered together, in the higher parts of the city, and 
lighted up by a bright sunshine. 

The day following, Dr. Emmon.s and Mr. James Hall went 
with me to explore the chain of the Bald Mountains, north of 



CHAP. XXXIX.] SPRLNG FLOWERS GEOLOGY. 263 

Galeville. We passed through the gay town of Saratoga Springs, 
where the mineral waters burst out from "the Lower Silurian," 
or most ancient fossiliferous rocks. We saw many picturesque 
spots, especially the waterfall called Baaten Kill, near Galeville, 
but no grand or striking scenery. Among the plants in blossom, 
we gathered Anemone nemorosa, Trientalis americana (less 
beautiful than our British Trientalis europcea), Cypripedium 
pubescens, Geranium sylvaticum, three species of violet (all 
without scent), Homtonia ccerulea, Gnaplialium perenne, and 
in several copses, the beautiful Polygala paucijlora, which might 
be truly said 

" To purple all the ground with vernal flowers." 

Whether, in this part of the United States, there are any fos 
siliferous rocks older than the Lower Silurian, was the geological 
point at issue ; and the question resembled one on which an 
animated controversy had lately been carried on in Great Britain, 
in regard to the relative ages of the " Cambrian" and " Silu 
rian" groups. As those strata, called Cambrian, which contained 
organic remains, were found to be nothing more than highly 
disturbed and semi-crystalline Silurian rocks, so I believe the 
formations called Taconic in the United States, to have claim to 
no higher antiquity, and to be simply Silurian strata much altered, 
and often quite metamorphic. 



CHAPTER XL. 

Construction and Management of Railways in America. Journey by Long 
Island from New York to Boston. Whale Fishery in the Pacific. 
Chewing Tobacco. Visit to Wenham Lake. Cause of the superior 
Permanence of Wenham Lake Ice. Return to Boston. Skeletons of 
Fossil Mastodons. Food of those extinct Quadrupeds. Anti-war De 
monstration. Voyage to Halifax. Dense Fog. Large Group of Ice 
bergs seen on the Ocean. Transportation of Rocks by Icebergs. Danger 
of fast Sailing among Bergs. Aurora Borealis. Connection of this 
Phenomenon with drift Ice. Pilot with English Newspapers. Return 
to Liverpool. 

May 21, 1846. IN the construction and management of 
railways, the Americans have in general displayed more prudence 
and economy than could have been expected, where a people of 
such sanguine temperament were entering on so novel a career 
of enterprise. Annual dividends of seven or eight per cent, have 
been returned for a large part of the capital laid out on the New 
England railways, and on many others in the northern states. 
The cost of passing the original bills through the state parliaments 
has usually been very moderate, and never exorbitant ; the lines 
have been carried as much as possible through districts where 
land was cheap ; a single line only laid down where the traffic 
did not justify two ; high gradients resorted to, rather than incur 
the expense of deep cuttings ; tunnels entirely avoided ; very little 
money spent in building station-houses ; and, except where the 
population was large, they have been content with the speed of 
fourteen or sixteen miles an hour. It has, moreover, been an 
invariable maxim " to go for numbers," by lowering the fares so 
as to bring them within the reach of all classes. Occasionally, 
when the intercourse between two rich and populous cities, like 
New York and Boston, has excited the eager competition of rival 
companies, they have accelerated the speed far beyond the usual 
average ; and we were carried from one metropolis to the other, 



CHAP. XL.J WHALE FISHERY. -2G5 

a distance of 239 miles, at the rate of thirty miles an hour, in a 
commodious, lofty, and well- ventilated car, the charge being only 
three dollars, or thirteen shillings. We went by a route newly 
opened, first through Long Island, ninety-five miles in length, 
over a low, level tract, chiefly composed of fine sand ; and wo 
then found a steamer ready to take us across the Sound to New 
London in Connecticut, where we were met by the cars at Point 
Allen ; after which we enjoyed much delightful scenery, the rail 
way following the margin of a river, where there were cascades 
and rapids foaming over granite rocks, and overhung with trees, 
whose foliage, just unfolded, was illumined by a brilliant sun 
shine. 

In the estuary of New London we saw many large whalers, 
arid a merchant talked to me with satisfaction of the success of 
the United States whale-fishery in the Pacific, saying it amounted 
to 200,000 tons, while that of Great Britain did not exceed 
60,000. "Five fish," said he, "is the usual cargo of an English 
whaler, as they boil the blubber at home, whereas the Americans 
boil it in a huge cauldron on deck, and after staying out three years, 
return with the oil of ninety whales in one ship. Our fishery 
in the Pacific is becoming a most important nursery for seamen, 
giving occupation to about 20,000 men, which would enable us 
at any moment to man a powerful fleet. The possession of 
California is therefore much coveted by us, because the port of 
San Francisco is the only one in the northern Pacific not exposed 
to the west wind, or blocked up by a bar of sand, such as that 
which renders the mouth of the Columbia River impassable to 
large ships. It is not territory but a sea-port we need, and this 
advantage a war with Mexico may give us." 

There was besides much characteristic conversation in the cars, 
about constructing a railway 4000 miles long from Washington 
to the Columbia River ; and some of the passengers were specu 
lating on the hope of seeing in their lifetime a population of 15,000 
souls settled in Oregon and California. A variety of plans was 
also freely discussed for crossing the isthmus from the Gulf of 
Mexico into the Pacific, so as to avoid the long and dangerous 
voyage round Cape Horn. A ship-canal across the isthmus of 

VOL. II. M 



2G6 CHEWING TOBACCO. [CHAP. XL. 



Tehuantepec, 135 miles in length, was alluded to as the favorite 
scheme ; and the expediency of forcing Mexico to cede a right of 
way was spoken of as if the success of their campaign was certain. 

It is the fashion for travelers in the New World to dwell so 
much on the chewing of tobacco, that I may naturally be ex 
pected to say something of this practice. There is enough of it 
1<> bo very annoying in steamboats and railway-cars, but far less 
so as we journey northward ; and T never saw, even in the south, 
:uiy chewing of the weed in drawing-rooms, although we were 
told in South Carolina that some old gentlemen still indulged in 
I his habit. That it is comparatively rare in the New England 
stales, was attested by an anecdote related to me of a captain 
\\lio commands one of the steamers on Lake Champlain, who 
prided himself on the whiteness of his deck, intended to be kept 
as a promenade. Observing a southerner occasionally polluting 
its clean iloor, he ordered a boy to follow him up and down with 
a s\v;ib, to the infinite diversion of the passengers, and the no 
small indignation of the southerner, when at length he discovered 
how his footsteps had been dodged. The governor of a peniten 
tiary told me, that to deprive prisoners of tobacco was found to 
be a very efficient punishment, and that its use was prohibited 
in the New England madhouses, as being too exciting. 

From Boston we went to Ipswich, in Massachusetts, to visit 
Mr. Oakes, the botanist, with whom we had spent many pleasant 
days in the White Mountains.* lie set out with us on an ex 
cursion to Wenham Lake, from which so much ice is annually 
exported 1o England and other parts of the world. 

This lake lies about twenty miles to the northeast of Boston. 
It has a small island in the middle of it, is about a mile long and 
lorl y feet deep, arid is surrounded by hills of sand and gravel, from 
forty to a hundred feel high. The water is always clear and pure, 
and the bottom covered with white quartzose sand. It is fed by 
springs, and receives no mud from any stream flowing into it ; 
but at the lower extremity a small brook of transparent water 
Hows out. In some parts, however, there must, I presume, be a 
soft and muddy bottom, as it is inhabited by eels, as well as by 
* See vol. i. p. 64. 



CHAP. XL.] WENHAM LAKE ICE. 267 

pickerel and perch. Mr. Oakes had recently received a present 
of a snapping turtle, weighing 25 Ibs., taken from the lake. The 
ice is conveyed by railway to Boston to be shipped, and the in 
crease of business has of late been such as to cause the erection 
of new buildings, measuring 127 feet by 120, and 24 feet high. 
They stand on the water s edge, by the side of the old store 
houses, which are very extensive, built of wood, with double 
walls two feet apart, the space between being filled with saw 
dust, which excludes the external air ; while tan is heaped up, 
for the same purpose, on the outside. The work of cutting and 
storing the ice is carried on in winter, and is not commenced till 
the ice is at least a foot thick. The surface is always carefully 
swept and kept free from snow ; and as none but the most com 
pact and solid ice is fit for the market, it is necessary to shave 
off three inches or more of the superficial ice, by means of a 
machine called an ice-plane, drawn by a horse. This operation 
is especially required after a thaw or a fall of rain, succeeded by a 
frost, which causes the lake to be covered with opaque, porous ice. 
Sir Francis Head, in his "Emigrant," 1846, has attributed 
the durability of the Wenham Lake ice, or its power of resisting 
liquefaction, to the intense cold of a North American winter. It 
is perfectly true that this ice does not melt so fast as English ice ; 
but the cause of this phenomenon is, I believe, very different from 
that assigned for it by the late governor of Upper Canada. 
" People in England/ he says, " are prone to think that ice is 
ice; but the truth is, that the temperature of 32 Fahrenheit, 
that at which water freezes, is only the commencement of an 
operation that is almost infinite ; for after its congelation, water 
is as competent to continue to receive cold, as it was when it was 
fluid. The application of cold to a block of ice does not, as in 
the case of heat applied beneath boiling water, cause what is added 
at one end to fly out at the other : but, on the contrary, the cen* 
ter cold is added to and retained by the mass, and thus the tem 
perature of the ice falls with the temperature of the air, until in 
Lower Canada it occasionally sinks to 40 below zero, or 72 
below the temperature of ice just congealed. It is evident, there 
fore, that if two ice-houses were to be filled, the one with Canada 



268 WENHAM LAKE IOE. [CHAP. XL. 

ice, and the other with English ice, the difference between the 
quantity of cold stored up in each would be as appreciable as the 
difference between a cellar full of gold and a cellar full of copper ; 
that is to say, a cubic foot of Lower Canada ice is infinitely more 
valuable, or, in other words, it contains infinitely more cold, than. 
a cubic foot of Upper Canada ice, which again contains more 
cold than a cubic foot of Wenham ice, which contains infinitely 
more cold than a cubic foot of English ice ; and thus, although 
each of these four cubic feet of ice has precisely the same shape, 
they each, as summer approaches, diminish in value ; that is to 
say, they each gradually lose a portion of their cold, until, long 
before the Lower Canada ice has melted, the English ice has 
been converted into lukewarm water." 

There can be no doubt that where an intense frost gives rise 
to a great thickness of ice, permitting large cubic masses to be 
obtained after the superficial and porous ice has been planed off, 
a great advantage is afforded to the American ice merchant, and 
the low temperature acquired by the mass must prevent it from 
melting so readily when the hot season comes on, since it has first 
to be warmed up to 32 Fahrenheit, before it can begin to melt. 
Nevertheless, each fragment of ice, when removed from the store 
house, very soon acquires the temperature of 32 Fahrenheit, 
and yet when a lump of Wenham ice has been brought to En 
gland, it does not melt by any means so readily as a similar lump 
of common English ice. Mr. Faraday tells me that Wenham 
Lake ice is exceedingly pure, being both free from air-bubbles and 
from salts. The presence of the first makes it extremely difficult 
to succeed in making a lens of English ice which will concentrate 
the solar rays and readily fire gunpowder, whereas nothing is 
easier than to perform this singular feat of igniting a combustible 
body by the aid of a frozen mass, if Wenham ice be employed. 

The absence of salts conduces greatly to the permanence of 
the ice, for where water is so frozen that the salts expelled are 
still contained in air-cavities and cracks, or form thin films be 
tween the layers of the ice, these entangled salts cause the ice to 
melt at a lower temperature than 32, and the liquefied portions 
give rise to streams and currents within the body of the ice, which 



CHAP. XL.] RETURN TO BOSTON. 269 

rapidly carry heat to the interior. The mass then goes on thaw 
ing within as well as without, and at temperatures below 32 ; 
whereas pure and compact Wenham ice can only thaw at 32, 
and only on the outside of the mass. 

Boston, May, 23. Sir Humphrey Davy, in his " Consola 
tions in Travel,"* 1 has said, that he never entered London, after 
having been absent for some time, without feelings of pleasure 
and hope ; for there he could enjoy the most refined society in 
the grand theater of intellectual activity, the metropolis of the 
world of business, thought, and action, in politics, literature, and 
science. 

I have more than once experienced the same feelings of hope 
and pleasure after having wandered over the less populous and 
civilized parts of the United States, when I returned to Boston, 
and never more so than on this occasion, when, after traveling 
over so large a space in the southern and western states, we 
spent ten days in the society of our literary and scientific friends 
in the metropolis of Massachusetts, and in the flourishing univer 
sity in its suburbs. They who wish to give a true picture of the 
national character of America, what it now is, and is destined to 
become, must study chiefly those towns which contain the great 
est number of native-born Citizens. They must sojourn in the 
east, rather than in the west or south, not among the six millions 
who are one half African and the other half the owners of negroes, 
nor among the settlers in the back-woods, who are half Irish, 
German, or Norwegians, nor among the people of French origin 
in Louisiana ; for, however faithfully they may portray the pecu 
liarities of such districts, they will give no better a representation 
of America, than an accurate description of Tipperary, Conne- 
mara, the West Indies, French Canada, Australia, and the vari 
ous lands into which Great Britain is pouring her surplus popu 
lation, would convey of England. 

Among other scientific novelties at Boston, I was taken to see 
two magnificent skeletons, recently obtained, of the huge masto 
don, one of them found in Warren County, New Jersey, which a 
farmer had met with six feet below the surface, when digging 

* P. 168. 



270 FOSSIL MASTODON. [CHAP. XL. 

out the rich mud from a small pond newly drained. There were 
no less than six skeletons, five of them lying together, and the 
sixth and largest about ten feet apart from the rest. A large 
portion of the bones crumbled to pieces as soon as they were 
exposed to the air, but nearly the whole of the separate specimen 
was preserved. Dr. John Jackson called my attention to the in 
teresting fact that this perfect skeleton proved the correctness of 
Cuvier s conjecture respecting this extinct animal, namely, that 
it had twenty ribs, like the elephant, although no more than nine 
teen had ever been previously found. From the clay in the in 
terior within the ribs, just where the contents of the stomach 
might naturally have been looked for, seven bushels of vegetable 
matter had been extracted ; and Professor Webster, of Harvard 
College, had the kindness to present me with some of it, which 
has since been microscopically examined for me in London by 
Mr. A. Henfrey, of the Geological Survey. He informs me that 
it consists of pieces of the small twigs of a coniferous tree of the 
cypress family ; and they resemble in structure the young shoots 
of the white cedar ( Thuja occidentalis), still a native of North 
America, on which, therefore, we may conclude that the masto 
don fed. 

But a still nobler specimen of this great proboscidian quadru 
ped was exhumed in August, 1845, in the town of Newburg, 
New York, and purchased by Dr. John C. Warren, Professor of 
Anatomy in Harvard University. It is the most complete, and, 
perhaps, the largest ever met with. The bones contain a consid 
erable proportion of their original gelatine, and are firm in text 
ure. The tusks, when discovered, were ten feet long ; but the 
larger part of them had decomposed, and could not be preserved. 
The length of the skeleton was twenty-five feet, and its height 
twelve feet, the anchylosing of the two last ribs on the right side 
affording the comparative anatomist a true guage for the space 
occupied by the intervertebrate substance, so as to enable him to 
form a correct estimate of the entire length. Dr. Warren gave 
me an excellent Daguerreotype of this skeleton for Mr. Clift, of 
the College of Surgeons in London. 

Nothing is more remarkable than the large proportion of ani- 



CHAP. XL.] ANTI-WAR DEMONSTRATION. 271 

mal matter in the tusks, teeth, and bones of many of these extinct 
mammalia, amounting in some cases, as Dr. C. T. Jackson has 
ascertained by analysis, to 27 per cent., so that when all the 
earthy ingredients are removed by acids, the form of the bone 
remains as perfect, and the mass of animal matter is almost as 
firm, as in a recent bone subjected to similar treatment. It 
would be rash, however, to infer confidently from such data that 
these quadrupeds were mired at periods more modern than the 
fossil elephants found imbedded in similar clayey deposits in 
Europe, for the climate prevailing in this part of America may 
possibly have been colder than it was on the eastern side of the 
Atlantic. At the same time, I have stated in my former "Trav 
els,"* that all the mastodons whose geological position I was 
able to examine into, in Canada and the United States, lived 
subsequently to the period of erratic blocks, and the formations 
commonly called glacial. I have also shown that the contempo 
rary fresh- water and land shells were of such species as now live 
in the same region, so that the climate could scarcely have differed 
very materially from that now prevailing in the same latitudes. 

During my stay at Boston, as I was returning one evening 
through Washington-street, I fell in with a noisy rabble of young 
men and boys, some of whom were dressed up for the occasion in 
rags, and provided with drums, sticks, whistles, tin-kettles, and 
pans, with other musical instruments, most of them on foot, but 
some mounted arid sitting with their faces toward the horse s Gl 
ass s tail, others with banners, calling out, " Hurrah for Texas," 
for they styled themselves "the Texas volunteers." This I found 
was an anti-war demonstration, and shows that there is a portion 
even of the humblest class here, who are inclined to turn the 
agressive spirit and thirst for conquest of the Washington Cabinet 
into ridicule. 

June 1. Sailed for England in the Britannia, one of the 
Cunard line of steamers, the same in which we had made our 
outward voyage. For several days a white fog had been setting 
in from the sea at Boston, and we were therefore not surprised 
to find the mist so dense off the harbor of Halifax that the light- 
* Vol. i. pp. 51, 55. Vol. ii. p. 65. 



VOYAGE TO HALIFAX. [CHAP. XL. 

house was invisible. By a continual discharge of guns, which 
were answered by the firing of cannon at the light-house, our 
captain was able safely to steer his ship into the harbor. In the 
post office we found letters from England, left by a steamer 
which had touched there two days before, and had come from 
Liverpool in nine days. 

June 7. When wo had quitted Halifax five days, and were 
on the wide ocean, the monotony of the scene was suddenly 
broken by the approach of a group of icebergs, several hundred 
in number, varying in height from 100 to 250 feet, all of the 
purest white, except such portions as, being in shade, assumed a 
greenish hue, or such as acquired a delicate rose-color tint from 
the rays of the evening sun. These splendid bergs were supposed 
to have floated from Placentia Bay, in Newfoundland, where a 
great many merchantmen had been imprisoned for several months 
by a huge barrier of ice. They were almost all of picturesque 
shapes, and some of them of most fantastic form ; three in par 
ticular, which came within a mile of us. One presented a huge 
dome, rising from the center of a flat tabular mass ; another, 
more than 100 feet high, was precisely in the form of a pyramid, 
quite sharp at the top, and the angle formed by the meeting of 
two sides, very well defined ; at the base of it rose a hummock, 
which we called the Egyptian Sphinx. The third was covered 
Avith pinnacles, and seemed like a portion of the Glacier des 
Bossons, in the valley of Chamouni, detached and afloat Kreet 
on one side of it stood an isolated obelisk of ice, 100 feet high, 
which increased A^ery slightly in size toward the base. Some of 
these bodies appeared to the north, others far to the south of us, 
the loftiest of the whole rising out of the water to the height of 
!00 feet, according to the conjecture of the seamen, Avho thought 
they could not be far out in their estimate, as there Avas a schooner 
alongside of it, and they could tell the height of her mast Avithin 
a few feet. We sailed within half a mile of several bergs, Avhich 
were :2T)0 feet, and within a quarter of a mile of one 150 feet in 
height, on which, by aid of the telescope, AVC distinctly observed 
a great number of sea-birds, which looked like minute black specks 
on a white ground. I Avas most anxious to ascertain whether 



CHAP. XL.] ICEBERGS. 273 

there was any mud, stones, or fragments of rock on any one of 
these floating masses, but after examining about forty of them 
without perceiving any signs of foreign matter, I left the deck 
when it was growing dusk. My questions had excited the 
curiosity of the captain and officers of the ship, who assured me 
they had never seen any stones on a berg, observing, at the same 
time, that they had always been so eager to get out of their 
way, and in such a state of anxiety when near them, that such 
objects might easily have been overlooked. I had scarcely gone 
below ten minutes, when one of the passengers came to tell me 
that the captain had seen a black mass as large as a boat on an 
iceberg, about 150 feet high, which was very near. By aid of a 
glass, it was made out distinctly to be a space about nine feet 
square covered with black stones. The base of the berg on the 
side toward the steamer was GOO feet long, and from the dark 
spot to the water s edge, there was a stripe of soiled ice, as if the 
water streaming down a slope, as the ice melted, had carried 
mud suspended in it. In the soiled channel were seen two 
blocks, each about the size of a man s head. Although I re 
turned instantly to the deck when the berg was still in sight, 
such was then the haziness of the air, and the rapidity of our 
motion, that the dark spot was no longer discernible. Such in 
stances of the transportation of rocks by ice, occurrences most 
interesting to geologists, were first recorded by Scoresby, in the 
northern hemisphere ; but from the accounts given me by Sir 
James Ross and Dr. Joseph Hooker, they are evidently much 
more common in the icebergs drifted from the antarctic than 
from those of the arctic regions. 

When we were among the ice, the temperature of the water 
was 45 Fahrenheit. On the day before we came up with it, 
the passengers had already begun to look out warmer clothing, 
and shawls and great coats were in requisition. Occasionally we 
were steering among small pieces of ice, and the wheel at the 
helm was turned iirst one way and then another, reminding me 
of the dangers of the Mississippi, when we were avoiding the 
bumping against logs. In the fore part of the vessel the watch 
was trebled, some aloft and others below, and we went on at the 

M* 



274 AURORA BOREALIS. [CHAP. XL. 

rate of nine miles an hour, and once in the night came within 
less than a ship s length of a large berg. A naval officer on 
board declared to me next morning that the peril had been im 
minent ; that he had weathered a typhoon in the Chinese seas, 
and would rather brave another than sail so fast in the night 
through a pack of icebergs. He now thought it most probable 
that the President steam-ship had been lost by striking a berg. 
He reminded me that we had seen a pinnacle of ice, distant 100 
yards or more from the main body of a berg, of which it was 
evidently a part, the intervening submerged ice being concealed 
under water. How easily, therefore, might we have struck 
against similar hidden masses, where no such projecting pinnacle 
remained to warn us of our danger. 

At half-past nine o clock on the evening of the 8th June, it 
being bright moonlight, some hours after we had lost sight of the 
ice, when we were in a latitude corresponding to the south of 
France, we saw in the north a most brilliant exhibition of the 
Aurora Borealis ; the sky seemed to open and close, emitting, 
for a short period, silvery streams of light like comets tails, and 
then a large space became overspread with a most delicate 
roseate hue. The occurrence of this phenomenon in the summer 
season, and in so southern a latitude, seemed to point to its con 
nection with the ice which was drifting over the sea between us 
and Newfoundland, now to the N. W. of us. We learn from 
Sir James Ross s narrative of the late antarctic expedition, the 
highly interesting fact, that when the Aurora Borealis was playing 
over the great barrier of coast ice on the shores of the antarctic 
land, it partook distinctly of the irregular and broken shape of 
the icy cliffs over which it hovered.* 

June 12. A pilot came on board from Ireland, with English 
newspapers, filled with debates on the repeal of the corn-laws. 
Among the foreign news, a considerable space was occupied with 
the affairs of France, Germany, Italy, India, China, and there 
was only a short paragraph or two about America, North and 
South. I had been traveling long enough in the New World to 
sympathize fully with the feelings of some of my American fellow- 
* Vol. ii. p. 221. 1842. 



CHAP. XL.] RETURN TO LIVERPOOL. 275 

passengers, who were coming abroad for the first time, when they 
expressed their surprise at the small space which the affairs of 
the United States occupied even in English journals. It is a 
lesson which every traveler has to learn when he is far from home, 
and seeks in a foreign newspaper to gain some intelligence of his 
native land. He is soon accustomed to find that day after day 
even the name of his country is not mentioned. 

The speed of our steamer had been constantly increasing as the 
weight of coal diminished. The length of the voyage, therefore, 
to America might be considerably abridged if the quantity of coal 
were lessened by a day and a half s consumption, the steamer 
starting from the west of Ireland, to which passengers might be 
conveyed in a few hours, by steamboat and railway, from Liv 
erpool. 

June 13, Saturday. Anchored off Liverpool at half-past ten 
o clock in the evening, having made the passage from Boston in 
twelve days and a half, it being nine months and nine days since 
we left that port. 



INDEX. 



INDEX. 



ABOLITIONIST " wrecker," ii 39. 
Abolitionists, i. 239, 240 ; ii. 127. 

, colored, i. 103, 104. 

Absenteeism in Southern States, ii. 70. 
Acquia Creek, ii. 247. 
Actors in steamer, ii. 165. 
Advocates and attorneys, i. 46. 
African Tom, i. 266. 
Age of delta of Mississippi, ii. 189. 
Agelaius phaeniceus, i. 245. 
Alabama geology, ii. 75. 

, traveling bad, ii. 70. 

, coal-field, ii. 69. 

Altamaha River, i. 243., 256. 

Albany, excursion to, ii. 259. 

Alcaeus, ii. 103. 

Alleghany Mountains, ii. 240. 

Alligators, i. 237, 250 ; ii. 156. 

Alligator s nest, i. 251. 

Alluvium of Missippi, ii. 183. 

Alpine plants, i. 69. 

American oratory, i. 142. 

Antarctic ice, i. 37. 

Anthracite coal, i. 188. 

Anti-British antipathies, ii. 217. 

Anti-Corn-Law-League, ii. 170. 

Anti-English feeling, i. 225. 

Anti-negro feeling, ii. 125. 

Anti-renters, N. Y., ii. 260. 

Arbitration, i. 198. 

Arctic Flora on Mount Washington, i, 

69. 

Arisaig, i. 108. 
Artesian wells, ii. 76. 

, near Montgomery, ii. 41. 

Arundo phragmitis, ii. 118. 
Ateuchus volvens, ii. 245. 
Attakapas, ii. 136. 
Audubon, Mr., visit to, ii. 249. 
Augusta, in Maine, i. 44. 
Aurora Borealis, ii. 274. 



B. 



B achraan, Dr., i. 227. 

Backwoods, inconveniences of, ii. 62. 



Bald region of Mount Washington, i. 
Balize, ii. 113, 116, 

, houses on piles, ii. 117. 

look-out, ii. 117. 

Bankruptcies, i. 127. 
Baptist and Atheist, i. 140. 

and Methodists, i. 269. 

Barn moved, i. 100. 
Bartram, i. 250, 261 ; ii. 137. 
Basking shark, i. 118. 
Baton Rouge, ii. 99, 137. 
Battle-ground, New Orleans, ii. 122. 
Bayou Liere, ii. 114. 

la Fourche, ii. 136. 

Plaquemine, ii. 136. 

Sara, ii. 147. 

St. John, ii. 177. 

Bear in New England, i. 60. 
Beaufort, i. 230. 
Beetle, ball-rolling, ii. 245. 
Beetles called bugs, ii. 158. 
Bequests, i. 155. 
Berkeley, Sir William, i. 161. 
Bibles distributed, i. 271. 
Big Black River, ii. 160. 

Bone Lick, ii. 194. 

Birds, i. 236. 

on Mount Washington, i. 67. 

of Indiana, ii. 202. 

Bishop of St. Asaph, i. 28. 
Black Baptist church, ii. 14. 

mechanics, i. 267. 

Methodist church, ii. 213. 

Blanco White, i. 184. 

Blind asylum, i. 133. 

Blocks of granite and gneiss, ii. 27. 

Bluff of St. Stephen s, ii. 77. 

Bluffs, fossils of, ii. 4d. 

, shipping cotton at, ii. 47. 

Bonaventure, i. 238. 

Bony pike used for manure, ii. 246. 

Boot factory, i. 91. 

Boston, i. 24, 122. 

, public buildings, i. 27. 

, militia, i. 28. 

, environs of, i. 30. 

, suburbs of, i. 93. 

, lodgings in, i. 122. 

. mode of living, i. 124. 



278 



INDEX. 



Boulders, i. 87. 

Bowie knives, ii. 206. 

Brazilian caves, i. 259. 

Bridgeport, repudiation, ii. 242. 

Bringier, Mr., ii. 109, 175. 

British aggrandizement, i. 194. 

Brown, Mr. A., ii. 191. 

Brumby, Mr., professor of chemistry, ii. 

69. 

Brunswick Canal, i. 258. 
Buffalo Island, ii. 179. 
Bunker Hill monument, i. 24. 
Buried trees, ii. 109, 137, 140, 147. 
Butler s Island, i. 248. 



Cabbage-palm, i. 235 
Cairo on the Ohio, ii. 



201. 



Campbell, life of, i. 116. 

, Gertrude of Wyoming, ii. 240. 

Canadian legislature, i. 198. 

Canadians, ii. 124. 

Canal cut through the ice, i. 25. 

Canes on bank of river, ii. 68. 

Cannon s Point, i. 252. 

Cape Cod, i. 94. 

Capitol, i. 200. 

Captains of steamers, ii. 170. 

Caravel of Columbus, i. 13. 

Carlyle, Mr., ii. 236. 

Carnival, ii. 91. 

at New Orleans, ii. 91. 

Carolina, North, i. 218. 

Carpenter, Dr., ii. 106, 111, 138, 188. 

Carriages, i. 125. 

Carthage Crevasse, ii. 132. 

Carver Governor, i. 99. 

Carya aquatica, ii. 114. 

Cass, General, i. 197. 

Cathedral, Catholic, New Orleans, ii. 93. 

Cattle, Miring of, ii. 86. 

Cercis canadensis, ii. 153. 

Chamaerops adansonia, ii. 107. 

palmetto, i. 235. 
Chambersburg, ii. 241. 
Channing, Dr., i. 135, 152. 

on Milton, i. 157. 

on Slavery, i. 241. 

Channing s Works, i. 138. 
Charleston, i. 221. 

, gardens, i. 229. 

, society in, i. 223. 

Charlevoix, ii. 119. 
Charlottesville, ii. 135. 
Chatahoochie, Fall of, ii. 35. 
Cheapness of books in the U. S-, ii. 252. 



Cheirotherium of Saxony, ii. 232. 

in coal of Pennsylvania, ii. 230. 

Cherokee rose, ii. 153. 

Chicken-thieves, ii. 131. 

Children, spoilt, ii. 168. 

Christians, sect so called, i. 136. 

Christinas Day, i. 220. 

Christians, i. 136. 

Churches in Maine,!. 54. 

in New York, i. 181. 

, none in New Harmony, ii. 204. 

Cincinnati, progress of, ii. 218. 

Civilization among negroes, i. 268. 

Claiborne, fossil remains at, ii. 53. 

, landing at, ii. 53. 

Clapp, Dr., ii. 208. 

Clay, Mr., ii. 103. 

Clergy, pay of, i. 174. 

Climate of Boston i. ] 23. 

, change of, affecting plants, i. 72. 

of New England, i. 123. 

Clipper Steamer, ii. 223. 

Coal-fields, i. 215. 

of Alabama, ii. 69. 

seams, i. 213. 

strata, foot-prints of reptiles in. ii. 

231. 

, vegetable structure,!. 214. 

measures, origin of, ii. 185. 

Cobblers, i. 100. 

Cockburn, Admiral, i. 266. 

Cocoa-grass, ii. 122. 

Cogswell, Mr., ii. 250. 

Cold, indifference to, ii. 21. 

Colored race, exclusiveness of whites 
toward, ii. 52. 

Colored servants, i. 201. 

domestics, ii. 72. 

Coluber constrictor, i. 112. 

Columbus, ii. 35. 

Competition of negro and white me 
chanics, ii. 36. 

Complaint of the Captive, ii. 103. 

Concord, town of, i. 90. 

Congregationalists, i. 164. 

Consumption, common in Maine, i. 57. 

Converts to Rome, i. 183. 

Coolies in W. Indies, i. 21. 

Copyright, international, ii. 253. 

Coral reef, fossil, ii. 208. 

Cottagers of Glenburme, ii. 168. 

Cotting, Dr. J. Jd., ii. 27. 

Cotton, ii. 130. 

Cotton-wood, ii. 149, 176. 

Cotton Mather on Day of Doom, i. 49. 

Couper, Mr. Hamilton, i. 244. 

Couthoy, Captain, i. 17. 

Cowley, i. 157. 



INDEX. 



279 



Crackers, i. 244. 

Creeds, variations in, i. 166. 

Creek Indians, departure of, ii. 35. 

Creole ladies, ii. 93. 

Crescent city, ii. 106. 

Cretaceous strata near Montgomery, ii. 

41. 

Crevasses, ii. 106. 
Crimes among negroes, i. 266. 
Croton water, ii. 250. 

water- works, i. 180. 

Cupressus disticha, i. 327; ii. 191. 
Curfew at Montgomery, ii. 42. 
Currents, oceanic, i. 17. 
Custom-house officers, i. 26. 
Cyperus hydra, ii. 122. 
Cypress trees, i. 244. 

roots, ii. 185. 

knees, ii. 139. 

deciduous, age of, ii. 191. 



I). 



Dana, i. 153. 

Darby on mud of Red River, ii. 192. 

Darien, i. 243; ii. 13. 

Darwin, Mr , i. 38, 258, 260. 

, Pampean formation, i. 258. 

Date palms, i. 253; ii. 109. 
Davy, Sir Humphrey, ii. 269. 
Dawson, J. W., i. 108. 
Day of Doom, poem, i. 48. 
De Candolle, i. 247. 
Declaration of Independence, i. 29. 
Decomposition of gneiss, ii. 28. 
Decoy pond, i. 100. 
Delta advance of, ii. 119. - 

, subsidence of, ii. 142. 

Democracy and Romanism, ii. 218. 
Democrats, coalition of, with slave 
owners, i. 82. 
Devil s Punch Bowl, ii. 153. 

Swamp, ii. 145. 

Dewey, Dr., sermon against war, ii. 257, 

Dickeson, Dr., ii. 151, 191. 

Diplomatists i. 203. 

Diron, Sieur, ii. 120. 

Dirt-eating, ii. 17. 

Dissenters Chapels Bill, i. 167. 

Division of property, i. 58. 

Divorced man, ii. 167. 

Dog-wood in Virginia, ii. 244. 

Domestic tea, ii. 160. 

Donaldsonville, ii. 99, 136. 

Dreissena, ii. 107. 

Dressmakers, i. 131. 

at Boston, i. 132. 



Drift, Northern, relative age of, ii. 199. 
Drift-wood, ii. 133. 
Driver, black, i. 265. 
Drunkenness in Alabama, ii. 60, 77. 
Duelling, new law against, ii. 60. 
Dunbar, Mr., ii. 120. 
Dwarf firs, i. 67. 



E. 



Eagle, i. 233. 

Earthquake at New Madrid, ii. 174. 
Echo, mountain, i. 64. 
Education of ladies, 126. 
, popular, ii. 237, 238. 

, secular, i. 148. 

Educational movement, i. 151. 
Eldon, Lord, i. 90. 
Election, i. 143. 

at Boston, i. 143. 
Electoral franchise, i. 195. 
Electric telegraph, i. 184, 185, 186. 
Elliot, Dr.. i. 269. 

Ellis s Cliffs, ii. 149. 
Eloquence, inflated, i. 199. 
Emancipation, effects of, ii. 83. 
Emigrants, ii. 169. 

to the West, ii. 63. 
Eminent preachers, i. 137. 
Emmons, Dr., ii. 262. 
Engine room, i. 19. 
Engine, revolutions of, i. 20 
Engines, high pressure, ii. 45. 
English newspapers, ii. 170. 

pronunciation, ii. 95. 
- Turn, ii. 122. 

Envy in a democracy, i. 84. 
Episcopal churches, i. 136. 

clergyman in steamer, ii. 73. 

Episcopalian asceticism, i. 139. 
Equality, ii. 169, 181. 

, social, i. 78. 

in society, ii. 64. 

Eulalie, lake, ii. 176. 
Evansville, Indiana, ii. 207. 
Everett, Mr., i. 27. 

on cheap literature, ii. 253. 

Eye-glass, ii. 166. 



F. 

Factories, Lowell, i. 91. 

Fanaticism of New England, i. 78. 

Faneuil Hall, i. 27. 

Faraday, Mr., ii. 268. 

Fashion in the back woods, ii. 181. 



280 



INDEX. 



Fashionists, ii. 22. 
Faulkner, Mr., ii. 143. 
Fausse Riviere, ii. 143. 
Ferry boat, i. 31. 
Fire, alarms of, i. 132. 
Fire-clays of coal, ii. 185. 
Fires, i. 219. 

at New York, i. 180. 

Firs, Dwarf, i. 67. 

First juvenile, ii. 165. 

Fish, fossil, i. 33. 

Fissures during earthquake, ii. 177. 

Flat boats, ii. 130, 131. 

Fleming, Dr., i. 118. 

Fletcher, Mr., ii. 180. 

Flint, the geographer, ii. 175. 

Fog off Halifax, ii. 271. 

Fogs, ii. 135. 

on river Piscataqua, i. 36. 

Fontania ii. 143. 

Food for negroes, i. 264. 

Forefather s Day, i. 95. 

Forest scenery, ii. 180. 

Forshey, Mr., ii. 121, 137, 156, 184. 

Fort Adams, ii. 149. 

Jackson, ii. 114. 

" Forty-five or fight," ii. 227. 
Foot-prints, fossil, of Greensburg, ii. 228. 
Fossil-trees, i. 212. 

human bone, ii. 151. 

remains, i. 258. 

Fossils in drift, i. 33. 

at Gardiner, i. 43. 

Fox, Mr., i. 202. 
Franconia, i. 86. 
Free school, i. 147. 

visit to a, i. 147. 

schools, i. 158. 

Free trade and protectionism, ii. 243. 

French Creoles, ii. 122. 

" French settlements," ii. 179. 

Fresh-water loam, ii. 149. 

Frost, severe at Boston, i. 24. 

Funeral of Northern man, ii. 23. 



Gale off Great Bank, i. 14. 
Gallatin, Mr., on Indian corn, ii. 255. 

, on Oregon question, ii. 255. 

Gallows Hill, i. 102. 

Gardenia, ii. 153. 

Gardens at Mobile, ii. 87. 

Gar-fish, ii. 144. 

Gas, explosion of, i. 215. 

Gas-works, New Orleans, ii. 108. 

Geese, i. 100, 



Gelasimus, ii. 114. 
Gelsemium nitidum, ii. 145. 
General Jackson s log cabin, ii. 172. 
Geological epoch of White Mountains, 

i. 72. 
Geology, prejudices opposed to, ii. 236. 

of Georgia, ii. 18. 

round Portsmouth, i. 33. 

, Alabama, ii. 75. 

Georgia, Bishop of, i. 269. 
German baker, ii. 172. 

baker s wife, ii. 181. 

Germans in Cincinnati, ii. 218. 

Gertrude of Wyoming, ii. 240. 

Giant s Grave, i. 65. 

Grammer school for boys, i. 148. 

Gravel terraces, ii. 244. 

Gifford, Mr. A. F., i. 211, 217 ; ii. 245. 

Gist, Dr., ii. 160. 

Glacial grooves, i. 36. 

Glynn county, i. 271. 

Gnathodon, ii. 118. 

cuneatus, ii. 107. 

Gneiss, decomposition of, ii. 28. 
Goldfuss, Professor, on reptiles in coal, 

ii. 235. 

Goldsmith, Vicar of Wakefield, ii. 237. 
Gordonia pubescens, i. 261. 
Governesses, i. 223. 
Governor s lady, ii. 26. 
Grand Gulf, ii. 157. 
Greenland subsidence of, ii. 144, 
Greensburg, Pennsylvania, ii. 227. 
Gulf of Mexico shells, ii. 86. 
Gum tree, i. 247. 



II. 



Hale, Sir Mathew, i. 102. 
Half breeds, i. 106. 
Halifax, i. 22. 

, lighthouse, ii. 272. 

Hall, Captain Basil, ii. 103. 

, Mr. James, ii. 262. 

Halsydrus Pontoppidani, i. 116. 

Hand car on railway, ii. 18. 

Harlanus Americanus, i. 258. 

Harpers printing establishment, ii. 250. 

Harrisburg, ii. 241. 

Hawkes, Dr., ii. 103. 

Hay, vessels laden with, i. 42. 

Hayes, Mr. J. L., i. 32, 35. 

Head, Sir Francis, ii. 267. 

Health in New England, i. 124. 

inU. S., i. 124. 

Heavenly witnesses, i. 170. 
Helderberg war, ii. 260. 



INDEX. 



281 



Hitchcock, Professor, i. 18. 
Hockmar or shark, i. 117. 
Hogarth s Election Feast, 172. 
Home, Sir Everard, 116. 
Hooker, Dr. Joseph, i. 38 ; ii. 273. 
Horticultural show, i. 27. 
Hospitality in South, i. 245. 
Hotel, St. Louis, at New Orleans. 

91. 

Hotels, Boston, i. 122. 
House of Commons, i. 199. 
Howe, Dr.. i. 133. 
Hoyt, Jesse, letters of, ii. 261 
Huguenots, ii. 124. 
Humboldt, ii. 174. 

Humming-bird, migration of, ii. 247. 
Hunter, Mr., ii. 177. 
Hurst Castle, i. 94. 
Hydrarchos, ii. 65. 



Ice of Wenham Lake, ii. 268. 

, antarctic, inclosing whale, i. 38. 
Iceberg, i. 16. 
Icebergs, i. 39. 

, rocks transported by, ii. 273. 

, danger of collison with, ii. 274. 

, drifting of, i. 18. 

011 homeward voyage, ii. 273 

Iberville River, ii. 136. 
Illegitimate children, i. 271. 
Immersion in baptism, i. 269. 
Income tax, i. 193. 
Independence day, i. 144. 
Independents, i. 168. 
India tree, pi ide of. i. 219, 231. 
Indian blood, ii. 169. 

carvings of foot-prints, ii. 234. 

mound, Wheeling, ii. 224. 

mounds, ii. 15. 

mounds near Macon, ii. 22. 

corn, uncertain crop, ii. 64. 

shell mound, i. 252. 

Indiana, fossil erect trees in coal strata, 

ii. 205. 

Inflated oratory, ii. 99. 
Initial letters, i, 142. 
Inns of Southern States, ii. 57. 
Inquisitiveness, ii. 167. 
Inundations, ii. 132. 
Ipswich, i. 126. 
Irish repeal meeting, i. 146, 147. 

voters, i. 189. 

servants, ii. 98. 

emigrants, i. 145, 146. 

Island Eighty four, ii. 164. 



Jackson, ii. 159. 

, hotel at, ii. 160. 

, Dr. John, ii. 270. 

Jealousy of wealth, ii. 61. 

Jefferson College, ii. 134. 

Jeffrey, Lord, works reprinted in U. S. 

ii. 226. 

Johnson on Milton, i. 157. 
Judas-tree, ii. 153. 
Judges at Tuscaloosa, ii. 74. 

cashiered, ii. 101. 

elected, ii. 162. 

Julian calendar, i. 172. 
Juniata River, ii. 240. 



K. 



Kean, Mr. and Mrs., ii. 95. 

, Mrs., ii. 165. 

Kendall, Captain, i. 38. 

Kenebec river, i. 42. 

King, Dr., on fossil footprints in coal 

strata, ii. 229. 
Kingfisher, i. 247. 
Koch, i. 107. 



L. 



Ladies, educated, i. 126. 

ordinary, ii. 96. 

Laing, Malcolm, i. 115, 116. 
Lake Solitude, ii. 143, 144. 

Pontchartrain, ii. 90, 106, 107. 

Concordia, ii. 155. 

Eulalie, ii. 176. 

Lalaurie, Madame, ii. 127. 
Land tortoises, ii. 220. 

quadrupeds, chiefly nocturnal) ii. 
250. 

crabs, ii. 114. 

Landed proprietors, i. 58. 
Landslip, ii. 141. 
Language, i. 128 

, peculiarities of, i. 128, 129. 
Laura Bridgeman, i. 133. 
Law against black mechanics, ii. 81. 
Lay teachers, i. 173. 
Le Conte, Dr.. i. 237. 
Lectures, i. 153. 
Leg "bitten off," ii. 167. 
Legal profession, i. 45. 
Legislators, paid, i. 84. 
Legislature of Louisiana, ii. 99. 
Lending libraries, i. 154. 



282 



INDEX. 



Lepidosteus, ii. 144. 

Levee, New Orleans, ii. 105. 

Levees, artificial, ii. 133. 

Leveling up and down, ii. 169. 

Leyden Street, i. 96. 

Liberia, ii. 241. 

Liebig, i. 247. 

Lightning, i. 236. 

Lighthouse, Halifax, guns fired at, ii. 272. 

Lighthouse near Mobile, ii. 84. 

Lightwood, i. 220. 

Lignite, ii. 176. 

Linnaea borealis, i. 64. 

Literary clerk of Steamer, ii. 147. 

tastes, i. 130. 

Little Prairie, ii. 174. 
Live oaks, i. 238. 
Liverpool, landing at, ii. 275. 

, voyage from, i. 13. 

Living, cost of at Boston, i. 131. 
Loam, ii. 171. 

or loess, ii. 159. 

Loblolly pine, i. 236. 
Loess, ii. 150. 

Long Island Railway, ii. 265. 
Louisiana, ii. 123. 

, loess of, ii. 192. 

Louisville, Kentucky, ii, 210 
Love, Mr., ii. 178. 
Lowell Factories, i. 91. 
Loxia cardinalis, i. 247: 
Luxury of New Orleans, ii. 100. 
Luzenberger, Dr., i. 251. 
Lynch Law in Florida, ii. 31. 



M. 



Maoaulay sHistory.saleof, in U.S., ii.252. 
Maclarty, Mrs., ii. 168. 
Macon, Georgia, ii. 22. 

, Alabama, ii. 58. 
M Connell, i. 147. 
M Cormac, Dr., ii. 106. 
Madam, use of term, i. 129. 
M llvaine, Mr. William, i. 113. 
Mackenzie letters, ii. 261. 
Maclean, Rev. Donald, i. 117. 
M Quhae, Captain, i. 120. 
Magnolia steamer, ii. 129, 158. 
Mai, Cardinal, i. 171. 
Mallotus, i. 33. 
Mammoth ravine, ii. 151. 
Man shot in a brawl, ii. 31. 
Manchester, i. 91. 
Manners, familliar, ii. 166. 
Marriage between colored and white, ii. 

215. 



Marriages in Boston, i. 127. 

, early, i. 127. 

Marine shells, i. 94. 
Market at New Orleans, ii. 104. 
Marsh blackbird, i. 245. 
Martineau, Miss, ii. 127. 
Martins killed by storm, i. 36. 
Mastodon, skeletons of, ii. 269. 

, food of, ii. 270. 

Maximilian, Prince, ii. 203. 
Mayflower, i. 95. 

, table of, i. 98. 

Medical students, ii. 211. 
Megatherium, i. 258. 
Melville, Dr., i. 119. 
Memphis, ii. 171. 
Mendicity, i. 255. 
Merigomish, i. 108. 
Merrimack River, i. 91. 
Metairie ridge, ii. 108. 
Methodist church, black, ii. 213. 

prayer meetings, i. 270. 

church, Montgomery, ii. 213. 

sermon, i. 88. 

Mexico, war with, ii. 256. 

Michaud on the age of cypress, ii. 191. 

Migration of plants, i. 70. 

Mill Creek, geology of, ii. 219. 

Milledgeville, ii. 25. 

Millerite Movement, i. 75. 

Mississsipi, banks of, ii. 163. 

River, ii. 105. 

water, ii. 158. 

coast, ii. 129. 

bank caving in, ii. 173. 

delta of, ii. 183. 

sediment, ii. 121. 

age of delta, ii. 187. 
Missouri, slavery in, ii. 182. 
Mixture of races, i. 271. 
Mob of Gentlemen, i. 222. 
Mobile built on bed of shells, ii. 86. 

, gardens at, ii. 87. 

Mocking birds, ii. 181. 
Montgomery, journey to, ii. 37, 41. 
Mormons, i. 77. 

and Stephanists, ii. 51. 
Morals of Puritans, i. 127. 
Morlot on Subsidence in Adriatic, ii. 187. 
Morse, i. 186. 

Geography, ii. 251. 

Moss, Spanish, i. 220. 
Mount Auburn, i. 135. 

Vernon, ii. 200. 

Washington, i. 66. 

Mountains of New Hampshire, i. 59. 

Movers" to Texas, ii. 55, 88. 
Mud cracks, casts of, ii. 231. 



INDEX. 



283 



Mulattoes, i. 271. 
Museum, Salem, i. 99. 
Musk rats, ii. 179. 

, habitations of, ii. 240. 

Musquitoes, ii. 97, 136. 

N. 

Nahant, i. 113. 

Napoleon ii. 164. 

Natchez, country houses* ii. 153. 

, ii. 149. 

, tornado, ii. 152. 

National fair at Washington, ii. 242. 
Nativism, i. 190. 
Naval arsenal, ii. 171. 
Names of Negroes, i. 263. 
Negro Baptists, ii. 14. 

brain, i. 105. 

houses, i. 249, 263. 

episcopal clergyman, ii. 243. 

prayer, ii. 15. 

hospital, i. 264. 

slaves, ii. 34. 

children, ii. 24. 

maid servants, i. 255. 

names, i. 263. 

porters, i. 243, 

preacher, Louisville, ii. 214. 

intelligence, ii. 16. 

and white mechanics, ii. 36. 

shot by an overseer, ii. 78. 

instruction, i. 208. 

mistaken for white, ii. 165. 

Negroes, i. 224. 

, civilization of, ii. 80. 

, emancipation of, i. 21. 

, increase of, ii. 79. 

, in Louisana, ii. 126. 

, in mines, i. 216. 

, intelligence of, ii. 19. 

, kindness to, i. 210. 

, more progressive in upper country, 

ii. 19. 

on sale, ii. 125. 

, position of, in the South, ii. 82. 

, prejudice against, i. 221. 

, progress of, i. 268 ; ii. 71. 

, runaway, i. 221. 

, treatment of, ii. 78. 

Neill, Mr., i. 115. 
New Albany, ii. 208. 
New Harmony, ii. 202. 
New Jersey, i. 191. 
New London, ii. 265. 
New Madrid, ii. 172. 

, departure from, ii. 200. 

earthquake, ii. 174. 



New Orleans, French appearance of, ii. 

)0. 

-, Hotel St. Louis, ii. 91. 

-, Catholic cathedral, ii. 93. 

-, theaters, ii. 95. 

-, tombs at, ii. 96. 

, shops at, ii. 96. 

-, Ladies ordinary, ii. 96. 

, procession at, ii. 96. 

, Salubrity of, ii. 97. 

Newberne, i. 259. 
Newfoundland, i. 19. 
New Haven, i. 179. 
Newman, Mr., i. 183. 
Newsboys, ii. 40. 
Newspaper press, ii. 41. 
Newspapers, i. 55. 

, distribution of, i. 26. 

, from England, ii. 170. 

New York, gay dresses in, ii. 248. 

, omnibuses in, ii. 249. 

, naming of streets, ii. 249. 
Nicol, Mr. J., ii. 189. 
North and South split, i. 270. 
Northern prices, ii. 98. 
Norton, Mr., i. 137. 
Nothingarians, i. 139. 
Novels, sale of by Newsboys, ii. 41. 
Nuttall, i. 259. 



O. 

Oak,es,Mr. William, i. 64; ii. 266. 

Obion, ii. 180. 

Observatory, Cincinati, ii. 220. 

Ocmulgee River, i. 256 ; ii. 23. 

Oconee River, i. 256. 

Oglethorpe, i. 253. 

" Old Virginia," i. 268. 

Omnibuses in New York, ii. 249. 

Oolitic coal, i. 212. 

Opossum, ii. 17. 

Oregon ii. 170. 

, war about, i. 232. 

Organic remains in ice, i. 37. 
Oscillation of level, ii. 198. 
Ostracism of wealth, i. 82. 
Owen, Professor, i. 44. 

, Mr., i. 105. 

, Robert, of Lanark, ii. 203. 

Oxenstiern, i. 86. 
Oysters, i. 233. 

P. 

Pacific, whale fishery in, ii. 265. 
Palenque, i. 202. 



284 



INDEX. 



Palisades, i. 191. 

Palmetto, i. 235. 

Parker, Theodore, i. 184. 

Patent Office, i. 201. 

Pauperism, absence of, i. 145. 

Peace Association, i. 28. 

Pearl River fossils, ii. 160. 

Peltier, i. 227. 

Peltries, ii. 179. 

Pemigewasset River, i. 87, 88. 

Pendlefcon, Capt. Benj., i. 37. 

Pere Antoine, ii. 110. 

Perkins, Colonel, i. 97, 112. 

Peytona steamer, ii. 157. 

Philadelphia, ii. 241. 

Physical science, i. 169. 

Pilgrim relics, i. 96. 

Pilgrim fathers, names of, i. 95. 

Pilots, ii. 118, 173. 

Pine-trees, age of, ii. 37. 

Pine-barrens want of elbow-room in, ii. 

21. 

Pinus taeda, i. 237. 
Piscataqua River, i. 36. 
Pittsburg, fire at, ii. 225. 
Place-hunter, disappointed, ii. 31. 
Placentia Bay, ii. 272. 
Planters, i. 245, 261. 
Plants, i. 53. 

Alpine, i. 69. 

at New Orleans, ii. 107. 

in Virginia, ii. 244. 

migrations of, i. 70. 

near Saratoga, ii. 263. 

spring flowers of Indiana, ii. 203. 

wild, N. Hampshire, i. 34. 

Plassy, ii. 122. 

Pledges at elections, i. 85. 
Plymouth Beach, i. 94. 

, Massachusetts, i. 93. 

, New Hampshire, i. 86. 

Politics in Massachusetts, i. 143. 

Polk, i.202. 

Pontoppidan, i. 110. 

Popular education, i. 155; ii. 237. 

instruction, i. 175. 

Populus angulata, ii. 149, 176. 
Pork merchant, ii. 207. 
Porpoises, i. 15. 
Person, i. 170. 

Port Hudson, ii. 129, 137, 180. 
Portland in Maine, i. 41, 46. 
Portsmouth, N. Hampshire, i. 32. 
Post-office abuses, i. 90. 
Potter, Bishop, i. 91. 
Preachers, eminent, i. 137. 
Prejudices opposed to geology, ii. 236. 
Preston, Mr., ii. 135. 



Primogeniture, opinion of, i. 58. 

Proclamation of Thanksgiving Day, i. 
144. 

Procession at New Orleans, ii. 96. 

Protectionist doctrines, i. 127. 

Protracted meetings at Montgomery, ii. 

43. 

| Pond, Mr., ii. 35. 
i Powers the sculptoi , ii. 222. 
! Public meetings, want of, i. 143. 

Purgstall, Countess, ii. 103. 

Puritans, i. 47, 127. 



a. 

Quadroons, ii. 94, 165. 
Quadrupeds, extinction of, i. 259. 
Quicksand, Plymouth, i. 95. 
Q,uincy, i. 93. 

R, 

Races, mixture of, i. 271. 
Raccourci cut-off, ii. 148. 
Railway cars, i. 30; ii. 38. 

traveling, i. 31. 

Railways, i. 178. 

in U. S., ii. 264. 

i Rattle-snakes, i. 228. 
Ravine near Milledgeville, ii. 29. 
Ravines, modern, ii. 28. 
Recruiting in U. S., facility of, ii. 257. 
Red-bird, i. 247. 
Red maple, ii. 145. 
Red River, red mud of, ii. 149, 192. 
Redfield, Mr., i. 17. 
Reelfoot, ii. 180. 
Relics, authenticity of, i. 98. 
Religion and politics, i. 140. 

, progress in, i. 162. 

Religious toleration, i. 47. 

Rennie, Mr. G-., ii. 189. 

Repeal of English corn laws, ii. 32. 

meeting, i. 146. 

Reptile, fossil, air-breathing, in coal 

strata, ii. 234. 
Repudiation, i. 193. 
Revival at Bethlehem, i. 73 ; ii. 16. 
Rice plantations, i. 262. 
Richmond, i. 205. 

coal-field, i. 211. 

Riddell, Dr.. ii. 107. 

, on sediment of Mississipi, ii. 187. 
Rise of Sweden, ii. 194. 
River- fogs, ii. 113, 114. 
Robin drunk with berries, ii. 55. 
Robinson, Pastor, i. 162. 



INDEX. 



285 



Rogers, Prof. W. B., i. 206, 211. 
Roman law, ii. 98. 

Catholics, i. 177. 
Romanism and democracy, ii. 218. 
Ross, Sir James, i. 17, 39 ; ii. 273. 
Rotation of trees, i. 246. 
Ruggles, Mr. : ii. 188. 



S. 



Saco, valley of the, i. 63. 
Sailing, rate of, i. 20. 
Salem Museum, i. 100. 
Salt marshes, i. 249. 
Salubrity of New Orleans, ii. 97. 
San Francisco, ii. 265. 
Sand-bursts, ii. 176. 
Saratoga, plants near, ii. 263. 
Savage, Mr., i. 99. 
Savannah, i. 234 ; ii. 13. 
Schlegel, A. W., Prof., ii. 213. 
Schools, common, i. 54. 

iu New York, i. 187. 

Scoliophys atlanticus, i. 112. 
Sea-serpent, Norwegian, i. 107, 108, 113. 

, Cape Ann, i. 111. 
Section, geological, from Darien to 

Vicksburg, ii. 196. 
Sects, equality of, i. 47. 
Secular education, i. 188. 
Sellick, Captain, ii. 139. 
Sensitiveness, American, i. 131. 
Servants, i. 125, 263 ; ii. 167. 

, position of, i. 81. 

, scarcity of, ii. 227. 

Shark, basking, i. 118. 
Shells, i. 254. 

on shore of Gulf of Mexico, ii. 85. 

Shell-road, ii. 107. 
Shepard, Professor, i. 229. 
Shock of earthquake, ii. 178. 
Shops at New Orleans, ii. 96. 
Shrike, i. 247. 

Sidell on Mississippi, ii. 189. 
Silicified shells and corals, ii. 24. 
Silliman, Professor, i. 179. 
Sink-holes, ii. 175. 
Skiddaway, i. 234. 

Slave, marriage of, with white, Ken 
tucky, ii. 216. 
Slave labor, i. 207 ; ii. 72. 

States, i. 231. 

dealers, i. 209. 

whip, i. 265. 

, runaway, ii. 38. 

Slaves, sale of, Macon, ii. 59. 
Belling at Montgomery, ii. 42. 



Slave-trade, i. 232 ; ii. 241. 
Slave-dealer on steamer, ii. 90. 
Slavery, i. 241, 261. 

, in Southern States, ii. 79. 
, party against extension, i. 143. 
Smith Sydney, ii. 15. 
Smoke, absence of, i. 188. 
Snag-boats, ii. 133. 
Snake and dog, ii. 245. 
Snapping turtle, ii. 156. 
Soap, home made, ii. 26. 
Social equality, i. 80. 
Southern steamboat, ii. 44. 
planters superior political tact, i. 

81. 

Spanish moss, i. 243 ; ii. 104. 
Species, creation of, i. 228. 
Specific centers, theory of i. 71. 
Spiritual boulanger, i. 270. 
Split north and south, i. 270, 
Spoilt children, ii. 168. 
Squalus maximus, i. 116. 
Squirrels, i. 227. 
Stage-coach, ii. 239. 

from Macon to Columbus, ii. 35. 

Stage-traveling, ii. 24. 
j State debts, ii. 56. 

education, i. 148. 

Statehouse at Jackson, ii. 161. 
Steamboats, ii. 46. 
Steamboat passengers, ii. 49. 

collision with trees, ii. 48. 

accidents, ii. 111. 

Steamer in Maine, i. 41. 

Steamer to Tuscaloosa, ii. 67. 

Steamers safest in storms, i. 14. 

Steam ships, ii. 105. 

Stephanists, ii. 50. 

Stewardess, German, ii. 50. 

Storer, Dr., on fish, i. 156. 

Story, Judge, i. 22. 

Stoves, i. 178. 

Stronsa animal, i. 115. 

St. Charles Hotel, New Orleans, ii. 105. 

St. Francis River, ii. 174. 

St. Mary s Hall, i. 192. 

St. Rosalie, ii. 154. 

St. Simon s Island, i. 252, 253. 

Submarine forest, i. 34. 

Subsidence of Delta of Mississippi, ii. 

142. 

Subsidence of land, i. 33. 
Sumner, Mr. Charles, i. 28. 
Sunday schools for negroes, ii. 215. 
Supreme Court, i. 20. 

Courts, i. 46. 

Swallows at Portsmouth, i. 35. 
Swamp rabbit, i. 228. 



286 



INDEX. 



Swamps of Mississipi, ii. 184. 
Sweden, rise of, ii. 194. 



T. 



Tabernacle at Boston, i. 76. 

Taconic system of rocks, age of, ii. 263. 

Tapir, fossil, in Texas, ii. 197. 

Tariff; i. 192. 

Tasso, love and madness, ii. 102. 

Taxodium distichum, ii. 148. 

Teachers, pay of, i. 149. 

, position of, i. 150. 

, their social position, i. 150. 

Telescope, i. 156 
Temperance hotel, i. 54. 

hotels, i. 122. 

Ten Hour Bill, ii. 225. 

Tennessee, ii. 180. 

Terraces, succession of, i. 257. 

, of gravel, ii. 224. 

Texas, i. 196. 

Texas, fossil bones in, ii. 197. 

Volunteers, ii. 271. 

Thanksgiving day, i. 144. 
Theater at New Orleans, ii. 95. 

in Boston, i. 153. 

Theological discussion, i. 89. 

colleges, i. 174. 

Thermometer low at Tuscaloosa, ii. 84. 
Third House, thanks, voted to, at 

Albany, ii. 260. 

Three Heavenly Witnesses, i. 170. 
Tillandsia, i. 243 ; ii. 104. 

usneoides, i. 220. 

Timber trade, i. 42. 
Tobacco, chewing of, ii. 266. 
Tombeckbee River, ii. 68. 
Tombs at New Orleans, ii. 96. 
Tortoises, i. 229. 

, land, ii. 220. 

Tractarians, i. 183. 
Trapper, ii. 179. 
Traveling roads, bad, ii. 70. 

, rough, ii. 35. 

, New England, rate of, i. 41. 
Trees, rotation of, i. 246. 

on banks of Kennebec, i. 43. 

and plants, i. 63. 

on banks of river, ii. 41. 

.fossil, erect, of coal, Indiana, ii. 204. 

Trinity Church, i. 182. 
Turkey buzzards, i. 229. 
Tuscaloosa judges, ii. 75. 

, acquaintances at, ii. 73. 

, college of ii. 68. 

, churches at, ii. 73. 



V. 



Unio spinosus, i. 248. 
Unitarian Church, i. 47. 

congregations, i. 136. 

Unitarians, i. 136. 

, cause of their influence, ii. 258. 

Universal suffrage, i. 85. 
University at Louisville, ii. 211. 
Upotoy Creek, ii. 35. 



V. 



Vanessa atalanta, ii. 220. 
Vegetation near Tuscaloosa, ii.69. 

of Gulf of Mexico, ii. 84. 

of Mount Washington, i. 66. 

Vicksburg, ii. 159, 163. 

Vidalia, ii. 155. 

Vine, cultivation of, ii. 221. 

Virginia, i. 206. 

Vitreous tubes at Areola, ii. 76. 

Vote by ballot, ii. 162. 

Voters, bribery of, ii. 16. 

Voyage from Mobile to New Orleans, ii. 

88. 
Voyage to Mobile, ii. 66. 



W. 

Wailes, Colonel, ii. 151. 

Walhalla, i. 131. 

Wandering Jew, by Eugene Sue, ii. 

253. 
Wandering Jew, great sale of, ii. 253. 

, tendency of the work, ii. 254, 

War, demonstration against, ii. 271. 

panic, i. 224. 

, preaching against, ii. 257. 

spirit abating, ii. 32. 

with England, i. 81, 242 ; ii. 57. 

with Mexico, ii. 256. 

Warren, Dr., ii. 270. 
Washington, i. 196, 200 ; ii. 150. 

, Mount, i. 66. 

Museum, i. 201. 

, national fair at, ii. 243. 

Wealth, ostracism of, i. 82. 
Webster, Mr., i. 141, 199. 

, Daniel, i. 141. 

Wenham Lake ice, ii. 268. 
West Point, ii. 169. 
Weymouth, East, i. 99. 
Whale discovered in iceberg, i. 38. 

fishery in Pacific, ii. 265. 

Wheatland, Dr., i. 100. 



INDEX. 



287 



Wheatstone, i. 186. 
Wheeling Indian mound, ii. 224. 
"Whig Caucus, i. 141. 
White, Blanco, i. 184. 

Mountains, i. 30. 

, age of, i. 72. 

, Peregrine, i. 96. 

Water, ii. 179. 

Wilde, Mr., ii. 129. 

, Richard Henry, ii. 98. 

Wilde s poetry, ii. 103. 
Wilkes, Captain, i. 39. 
Willey Slide, i. 61. 
"Willows on Mississippi, ii. 115. 
Wilmington, i. 218. 
Winthrop, i. 185, 196, 197, 200. 
Witches, i. 102. 
, Salem, i. 101. 



"Wood, cords of, ii. 135. 
Woodpecker boring trees, ii. 202. 
Woolly hair, ii. 166. 
Wyman, Dr., excursion with, ii. 245. 



Y. 

Yandell, Dr.; ii. 211. 
Yellow fever, ii. 87, 102. 
jessamine, ii. 145. 



Z. 

Zeuglodon, bones of, ii. 18. 

in Alabama, ii. 65. 

Zoology, i. 288. 



THE END. 



