


A SECOND VISIT 



THE UNITED STATES 



OF 



NORTH AMERICA. 

VOL. II. 



LONDON : 

SPOTTISWOODES and SHA\V, 
New street- Square. 



A SECOND VISIT 



TO 



THE UNITED STATES 



OF 



NORTH AMERICA. 



BY 



SIR CHAKLES LYELL, F.E.S. 

PRESIDENT OP THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON, 

AUTHOR OP "THE PRINCIPLES OP GEOLOGY," 
AND " TRAVELS IN NORTH AMERICA." 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 

VOL. II. 



LONDON: 
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET. 

1849. 



CONTENTS 

LIBRARY 



THE SECOND VOLUME. 



CHAP. XX. 

Page 

Darien to Savannah. Black Baptist Church and Preacher. 
Negro Prayer. Negro Intelligence. Bribery of Irish 
Voters. Dirt-Eaters. Railway Expedition on Hand- 
Car. Geology of Georgia. Negroes more progressive 
in Upper Country. Indifference of Georgians to Win- 
ter Cold. Want of Elbow-Room in Pine-Barrens - 1 



CHAP. XXI. 



Indian Mounds and Block-house at Macon, Georgia. 
Fashionists. Funeral of Northern Man. Geology and 
Silicified Corals and Shells. Stage Travelling to Milledge- 
ville. Negro Children. Home-made Soap. Decom- 
position of Gneiss. Deep Ravines recently excavated 
after clearing of Forest. Man shot in .a Brawl. Disap- 

J 1 pointed Place Hunter. Lynch Law in Florida. Repeal 
t>f English Corn-Laws. War Spirit abating - 14 

A 3 



VI CONTENTS. 



CHAP. XXII. 



Macon to Columbus by Stage. Rough Travelling. Pas- 
sage of Flint River. Columbus. Recent Departure of 
Creek Indians. Falls of the Chatahoochie. Competi- 
tion of Negro and White Mechanics. Age of Pine 
Trees. Abolitionist " Wrecker" in Railway Car. 
Runaway Slave. Sale of Novels by News-boys. 
Character of Newspaper Press. Geology and Creta- 
ceous Strata, Montgomery. Curfew. Sunday School 
for Negroes. Protracted Meeting - - 31 



CHAP. XXIII. 

Voyage from Montgomery to Mobile. Description of a 
large River Steamer. Shipping of Cotton at Bluffs. 
Fossils collected at Landings. Collision of Steamer with 
the Boughs of Trees. Story of a German Stewardess. 
Emigration of Stephanists from Saxony. Perpetuation 
of Stephanist and Mormon Doctrines. Distinct Table 
for Coloured and White Passengers. Landing at Clai- 
borne by Torchlight. Fossil Shells - - - 45 



CHAP. XXIV. 

Claiborne, Alabama. Movers to Texas. State Debts 
and Liabilities. Lending Money to half-settled States. 
Rumours of War with England. Macon, Alabama. 
Sale of Slaves. Drunkenness in Alabama. Laws 
against Duelling. Jealousy of Wealth. Emigration to 
the West. Democratic Equality of Whites. Skeleton 
of Fossil Whale or Zeuglodon. Voyage to Mobile - 60 



CONTENTS. Vll 



CHAP. XXV. 

Page 

Voyage from Mobile to Tuscaloosa. Visit to the Coal- 
Field of Alabama. Its Agreement in Age with the an- 
cient Coal of Europe. Absenteeism in Southern States. 
Progress of Negroes. Unthriftiness of Slave-Labour. 
University of Tuscaloosa. Churches. Bankruptcies. 
Judges and Law Courts. Geology on the Tombeckbee 
River. Artesian Wells. Limestone Bluff of St. Ste- 
phen's. Negro shot by Overseer. Involuntary Efforts 
of the Whites to civilise the Negroes. New Statute in 
Georgia against Black Mechanics. The Effects of 
speedy Emancipation and the free Competition of White 
and Black Labourers considered - 77 

CHAP. XXVI. 

Return to Mobile. Excursion to the Shores of the Gulf 
of Mexico. View from Lighthouse. Mouth of Alabama 
River. Gnathodon inhabiting Brackish Water. Banks 
of these Fossil Shells far Inland. Miring of Cattle. 
Yellow Fever at Mobile in 1 839. Fire in same Year. 
Voyage from Mobile to New Orleans. Movers to Texas. 
Lake Pontchartrain. Arrival at New Orleans. St. 
Louis Hotel. French Aspect of City. Carnival. Pro- 
cession of Masks - - - - - 102 

CHAP. XXVII. 

Catholic Cathedral, New Orleans. French Opera. Creole 
Ladies. Quadroons. Marriage of Whites with Qua- 
droons. St. Charles Theatre. English Pronunciation. 
Duellist's Grave. Ladies' Ordinary. Procession of 
Fire Companies. Boasted Salubrity of New Orleans. 
Goods selling at Northern Prices. Mr. Wilde. Roman 
Law. Shifting of Capital to Baton Rouge. Debates in 
Houses of Legislature. Convention and Revision of 
the Laws. Policy of Periodical State Conventions. 
Judges cashiered. Limitation of their Term of Office 114 



Vlll CONTENTS. 



CHAP. XXVIII. 

Page 

Negroes not attacked by Yellow Fever. History of Mr. 
Wilde's Poem. The Market, New Orleans. Motley 
Character of Population. Levee and Steamers. First 
Sight of Mississippi River. View from the Cupola of 
the St. Charles. Site of New Orleans. Excursion to 
Lake Pontchartrain. Shell Road. Heaps of Gnathodon. 
Excavation for Gas- Works. Buried upright Trees. 
Pere Antoine's Date-palm - 127 

CHAP. XXIX. 

Excursion from New Orleans to the Mouths of the River. 
Steam-Boat Accidents. River Fogs. Successive Growths 
of Willow on River Bank. Pilot-Station of the Balize. 
Lighthouse destroyed by Hurricane. Reeds, Shells, and 
Birds on Mud-Banks. Drift-wood. Difficulty of esti- 
mating the annual Increase of Delta. Action of Tides 
and Currents. Tendency in the old Soundings to be 
restored. Changes of Mouths in a Century inconsi- 
derable. Return to New Orleans. Battle-Ground. 
Sugar-Mill. Contrast of French and Anglo-American 
Races. Causes of Difference. State and Progress of 
Negroes in Louisiana - - 140 

CHAP. XXX. 

Voyage from New Orleans to Port Hudson. The Coast, 
Villas and Gardens. Cotton Steamers. Flat Boats. 
Crevasses and Inundations. Decrease of Steam-Boat 
Accidents. Snag-Boat. Musquitos. Natural Rafts. 
Bartram on buried Trees at Port Hudson. Dr. Carpen- 
ter's Observations. Landslip described. Ancient Sub- 
sidence in the Delta followed by an upward Movement, 
deducible from the buried Forest at Port Hudson - 1G5 



CONTENTS. IX 



CHAP. XXXI. 



Fontania near Port Hudson. Lake Solitude. Floating 
Island. Bony Pike. Story of the Devil's Swamp. 
Embarking by Night in Steam-Boat. Literary Clerk. 
Old Levees undermined. Succession of upright buried 
Trees in Bank. Kaccourci Cut-off. Bar at Mouth of 
Red River. Shelly Freshwater Loam of Natchez. 
Recent Ravines in Table-Land. Bones of extinct Qua- 
drupeds. Human Fossil Bone. Question of supposed 
co- existence of Man with extinct Mammalia discussed. 
Tornado at Natchez. Society, Country Houses, and 
Gardens. Landslips. Indian Antiquities - - 185 



CHAP. XXXII. 

Natchez. Vidalia and Lake Concordia. Hybernation of 
Alligator. Bonfire on Floating Raft. Grand Gulf. 
Magnolia Steamer. Vicksburg to Jackson (Mississippi) by 
Railway. Fossils on Pearl River. Ordinary at Jackson. 
Story of Transfer of State-House from Natchez. Vote 
by Ballot. Popular Election of Judges. Voyage from 
Vicksburg to Memphis. Monotony of River Scenery. 
Squall of Wind. Actors on Board. Negro mistaken 
for White. Manners in the Backwoods. Inquisitiveness. 
Spoilt Children. Equality and Levelling. Silence of 
English Newspapers on Oregon Question - 202 



CHAP. XXXIII. 

Bluffs at Memphis. New Madrid. No Inn. Under- 
mining of River Bank. Examination of Country shaken 
by Earthquake of 1811-12. Effects of Passage of Waves 
through Alluvial Soil. Circular Cavities or Sand-Bursts. 
Open Fissures. Lake Eulalie drained by Shocks. Bor- 



CONTENTS. 

Page 

ders of Sunk Country, West of New Madrid. Dead 
Trees standing erect. A slight Shock felt. Trade in 
Peltries increased by Earthquake. Trees erect in new- 
formed Lakes. Indian Tradition of Shocks. Dreary 
Forest Scene. Rough Quarters. Slavery in Missouri 225 



CHAP. XXXIV. 

Alluvial Formations of the Mississippi, ancient and modern. 
Delta denned. Great Extent of Wooded Swamps. 
Deposits of pure Vegetable Matter. Floors of Blue 
Clay with Cypress Roots. Analogy to ancient Coal- 
Measures. Supposed " Epoch of existing Continents." 
Depth of Freshwater Strata in Deltas. Time required 
to bring down the Mud of the Mississippi. New Expe- 
riments and Observations required. Great Age of buried 
and living Cypress-trees. Older and newer Parts of 
Alluvial Plain. Upraised Terraces of Natchez, &c., and 
the Ohio, the Monuments of an older Alluvial Formation. 
Grand Oscillation of Level. The ancient Valleys inha- 
bited by Quadrupeds now extinct. Land-shells not 
changed. Probable Rate of Subsidence and Upheaval. 
Relative Age of the ancient Alluvium of the Mississippi, 
and the Northern Drift - 242 

CHAP. XXXV. 

Departure from New Madrid. Night-watch for Steamers. 
Scenery of the Ohio River. Mount Vernon, Ornitho- 
logy. No Undergrowth in Woods. Spring Flowers. 
Visit to Dr. Dale Owen, New Harmony. Fossil Forest 
of erect Trees in Coal-Measures. Movers migrating 
Westward. Voyage to Louisville. Professional Zeal of 
one of " the Pork Aristocracy." Fossil Coral-reef at the 
Falls of the Ohio, Louisville. Fossil Zoophites as perfect 
as recent Stone-corals - - - - 26 



CONTENTS. XI 



CHAP. XXXVI. 

Louisville. Noble Site for a Commercial City. Geology. 
Medical Students. Academical Rotation in Office. Epis- 
copal Church. Preaching against the Reformation. 
Service in Black Methodist Church. Improved Condi- 
tion of Negroes in Kentucky. A coloured Slave mar- 
ried as a free White. Voyage to Cincinnati. Naturalised 
English Artizan gambling. Sources of Anti-British 
Antipathies. Progress of Cincinnati. Increase of 
German Settlers. Democracy of Romanists. Geology 
of Mill Creek. Land Tortoises. Observatory. Culti- 
vation of the Vine. Sculpture by Hiram Powers - 279 

CHAP. XXXVII. 

Cincinnati to Pittsburg. Improved Machinery of Steamer. 
Indian Mound. Gravel Terraces. Pittsburg Fire. 
Journey to Greensburg. Scenery like England. Ore- 
gon War Question. Fossil Foot-prints of Air-breath- 
ing Reptile in Coal Strata. Casts of Mud-cracks. 
Foot-prints of Birds and Dogs sculptured by Indians. 
Theories respecting the Geological Antiquity of highly 
organized Vertebrata. Prejudices opposed to the Re- 
ception of Geological Truths. Popular Education the 
only Means of preventing a Collision of Opinion be- 
tween the Multitude and the Learned - - - 297 

CHAP. XXXVIII. 

Greensburg to Philadelphia. Crossing the Alleghany 
Mountains. Scenery. Absence of Lakes. Harris- 
burg. African Slave-trade. Railway Meeting at 
Philadelphia. Borrowing Money for Public Works. 
Negro Episcopal Clergyman. Washington. National 
Fair and Protectionist Doctrines. Dog- wood in Vir- 
ginia. Excursion with Dr. Wyman. Natural History. 
Musk-rats. Migration of Humming-birds to New 
Jersey -- - - - - -319 



Xll CONTENTS. 

CHAP. XXXIX. 

Page 

New York, clear Atmosphere and gay Dresses. Omni- 
buses. Naming of Streets. Visit to Audubon. Croton 
Aqueduct. Harper's Printing Establishment. Large 
Sale of Works by English and American Authors. 
Cheapness of Books. International Copyright. Sale of 
Eugene Sue's Wandering Jew. Tendency of the Work. 
Mr. Gallatin on Indian Corn. War with Mexico. Fa- 
cility of raising Troops. Dr. Dewey preaching against 
War. Cause of Influence of Unitarians. Geological 
Excursion to Albany. Helderberg War. Voting 
Thanks to the Third House. Place-hunting. Spring 
Flowers. Geology and Taconic System - - 332 

CHAP. XL. 

Construction and Management of Railways in America. 
Journey by Long Island from New York to Boston. 
Whale Fishery in the Pacific. Chewing Tobacco. Vi- 
sit to Wenham Lake. Cause of the superior Permanence 
of Wenham Lake Ice. Return to Boston. Skeletons 
of Fossil Mastodon. Food of these extinct Quadru- 
peds. Anti-war Demonstration. Voyage to Halifax. 
Dense Fog. Large Group of Icebergs seen on the 
Ocean. Transportation of Rocks by Icebergs. Danger 
of fast sailing among Bergs. Aurora Borealis. Con- 
nection of this Phenomenon with Drift Ice. Pilot with 
English Newspapers. Return to Liverpool - - 355 



A SECOND VISIT 



THE UNITED STATES 

IN THE YEAKS 1845 6. 



CHAP. XX. 

Darien to Savannah. Black Baptist Church and Preacher. 
Negro Prayer. Negro Intelligence. Bribery of Irish Voters. 
Dirt-Eaters. Railway Expedition on Hand- Car. Geology 
of Georgia. Negroes more progressive in Upper Country. 
Indifference of Georgians to Winter Cold. Want of Elbow - 
Room in Pine-Barrens. 

Jan. 9. 1846. WHEN I had finished my geological 
examination of the southern and maritime part of 
Georgia, near the mouth of the Alatamaha river, I 
determined to return northward to Savannah, that I 
might resume my survey at the point where I left 
off in 1842% and study the tertiary and cretaceous 
strata between the Savannah and Alabama rivers. 

On our way back from Hopeton to Darien, Mr. 
Couper and his son accompanied us in a canoe, and 

* See " Travels in North America," vol. i. pp. 155174. 
VOL. II. B 



2 BLACK BAPTIST CHURCH [CHAP. XX. 

we passed through the General's Cut, a canal so 
called because, according to tradition, Oglethorpe's 
soldiers cut it out with their swords in one day. 
We met a great number of negroes paddling their 
canoes on their way back from Darien, for it was 
Saturday, when they are generally allowed a half 
holiday, and they had gone to sell on their own 
account their poultry, eggs, and fish, and were bring- 
ing back tobacco, clothes, and other articles of use or 
luxury. 

Having taken leave of our kind host, we waited 
some hours at Darien for a steamer, which was 
to touch there on its way from St. Augustine in 
Florida, and which conveyed us speedily to Sa- 
vannah. Next day, I attended afternoon service in 
a Baptist church at Savannah, in which I found that 
I was the only white man, the congregation con- 
sisting of about 600 negroes, of various shades, most 
of them very dark. As soon as I entered, I was 
shown to a seat reserved for strangers, near the 
preacher. First the congregation all joined, both 
men and women, very harmoniously in a hymn, most 
of them having evidently good ears for music, and 
good voices. The singing was followed by prayers, 
not read, but delivered without notes by a negro of 
pure African blood, a grey-headed venerable-looking 
man, with a fine sonorous voice, named Marshall. 
He, as I learnt afterwards, has the reputation of 
being one of their best preachers, and he concluded 
by addressing to them a sermon, also without notes, 
in good style, and for the most part in good English ; 
so much so, as to make me doubt whether a few 



CHAP. XX.] AND PREACHER. 

ungrammatical phrases in the negro idiom might not 
have been purposely introduced for the sake of 
bringing the subject home to their familiar thoughts. 
He got very successfully through one flight about 
the gloom of the valley of the shadow of death, and, 
speaking of the probationary state of a pious man 
left for a while to his own guidance, and when in 
danger of failing saved by the grace of God, he 
compared it to an eagle teaching her newly fledged 
offspring to fly by carrying it up high into the air, 
then dropping it, and, if she sees it falling to the 
earth, darting with the speed of lightning to save it 
before it reaches the ground. Whether any eagles 
really teach their young to fly in this manner, I leave 
the ornithologist to decide; but when described in 
animated and picturesque language, yet by no means 
inflated, the imagery was well calculated to keep the 
attention of his hearers awake. He also inculcated 
some good practical maxims of morality, and told 
them they were to look to a future state of rewards 
and punishments in which God would deal impar- 
tially with " the poor and the rich, the black man 
and the white." 

I went afterwards, in the evening, to a black 
Methodist church, where I and two others were the 
only white men in the whole congregation; but I 
was less interested, because the service and preaching 
were performed by a white minister. Nothing in 
my whole travels gave me a higher idea of the capa- 
bilities of the negroes, than the actual progress which 
they have made, even in a part of a slave state, where 
they outnumber the whites, than this Baptist meet- 

B 2 



4 NEGRO BAPTISTS. [CHAP. XX. 

ing. To see a body of African origin, who had 
joined one of the denominations of Christians and 
built a church for themselves, who had elected a 
pastor of their own race and secured him an annual 
'salary, from whom they were listening to a good 
sermon, scarcely, if at all, below the average standard 
of the compositions of white ministers, to hear the 
whole service respectably, and the singing admirably 
performed, surely marks an astonishing step in civil- 
isation. 

The pews were well fitted up, and the church 
well ventilated, and there was no disagreeable odour 
in either meeting-house. It was the winter season, 
no doubt, but the room was warm and the numbers 
great. The late Mr. Sydney Smith, when he had 
endeavoured in vain to obtain from an American of 
liberal views, some explanation of his strong objec- 
tion to confer political and social equality on the 
blacks, drew from him at length the reluctant con- 
fession that the idea of any approach to future amal- 
gamation was insufferable to any man of refinement, 
unless he had lost the use of his olfactory nerves. 
On hearing which Mr. Smith exclaimed 

" ' Et si non aliiim late jactaret odorem 
Civis erat ! ' * 

And such, then, are the qualifications by which the 
rights of suffrage and citizenship are to be deter- 
mined ! " 

A Baptist missionary, with whom I conversed on 
the capacity of the negro race, told me that he was 
once present when one of their preachers delivered a 
* Virgil, Georg. ii. 133. 



CHAP. XX.] NEGRO PRAYER. 5 

prayer, composed by himself, for the ordination of a 
minister of his sect, which, said he, was admirable in 
its conception, although the sentences were so un- 
grammatical, that they would pass, with a stranger, 
for mere gibberish. The prayer ran thus : 

" Make he good, like he say, 
Make he say, like he good, 
Make he say, make he good, like he God." 

Which may be thus interpreted : Make him good as 
his doctrine, make his doctrine as pure as his life, and 
may both be in the likeness of his God. 

This anecdote reminds me of another proof of negro 
intelligence, related to me by Dr. Le Conte, whose 
black carpenter came to him one day, to relate to him, 
with great delight, a grand discovery he had made, 
namely, that each side of a hexagon was equal to the 
radius of a circle drawn about it. When informed 
that this property of a hexagon had long been known, 
he remarked that if it had been taught him, it would 
have been practically of great use to him in his busi- 
ness. 

There had been " a revival " in Savannah a short 
time before my return, conducted by the Methodists, 
in the course of which a negro girl had been so much 
excited, as to be thrown into a trance. The physi- 
cian who attended her gave me a curious description 
of the case. If the nerves of only one or two victims 
are thus overwrought, it is surely more than ques- 
tionable whether the evil does not counterbalance 
all the good done, by what is called " the awakening" 
of the indifferent. 

I inquired one day, when conversing with some of 

B 3 



6 BRIBERY OF VOTERS. [CHAP. XX. 

the citizens here, whether, as New York is called the 
Empire State, Pennsylvania the Keystone State, 
Massachusetts the Bay State, and Vermont, when 
the question of its separation from New Hampshire 
was long under discussion, " the Future State," 
in short, as almost all had some name, had they any 
designation for Georgia ? It ought, they said, to be 
styled the Pendulum State, for the Whigs and 
Democrats get alternately possession of power; so 
that each governor is of opposite politics to his pre- 
decessor. The metropolis, they added, imitates the 
example of the State, electing the mayor and alder- 
men of Savannah one year from the Democratic and 
the next from the Whig party. It has been of late 
a great point, in electioneering tactics, to secure the 
votes of fifty or sixty Irish labourers, who might turn 
the scale here, as they have so often done in New 
York, in the choice of city officers. In the larger 
city they were conciliated for some years by employ- 
ment in the Croton waterworks, so that "pipe- 
laying" became the slang term for this kind of 
bribery ; here, it ought to be called " reed-cutting," 
for they set the Hibernians to cut down a dense 
crop of tall reeds (Sesbania vesicaria), which covers 
the canal and the swamps round the city, grow- 
ing to the height of fifteen feet, and, like the city 
functionaries, renewed every year. Some members 
of the medical college, constituting a board of health, 
have just come out with a pamphlet, declaring, that 
by giving to the sun's rays, in summer, free access 
to the mud in the bogs, and thus promoting the 
decay of vegetable matter, the cutting down of these 
reeds has caused malaria. 



CHAP. XX.] DIRT-EATERS. 7 

In the course of all my travels, I had never seen 
one opossum in the woods, nor a single racoon, their 
habits being nocturnal, yet we saw an abundant 
supply of both of them for sale in the market here. 
The negroes relish them much, though their flesh is 
said to be too coarse and greasy for the palate of a 
white man. The number of pine-apples and bananas 
in the market, reminded us of the proximity of the 
West Indies. "We observed several negroes there, 
whose health had been impaired by dirt-eating, or 
the practice of devouring aluminous earth, a diseased 
appetite, which, as I afterwards found, prevails in 
several parts of Alabama, where they eat clay. I 
heard various speculations on the origin of this 
singular propensity, called " geophagy " in some me- 
dical books. One author ascribes it to the feeding 
of slaves too exclusively on Indian corn, which is 
too nourishing, and has not a sufficiency in it of inor- 
ganic matter, so that when they give it to cattle, they 
find it best to grind up the cob and part of the stalk 
with the grain. But this notion seems untenable, for 
a white person was pointed out to me, who was quite 
as sickly, and had a green complexion, derived from 
this same habit ; and I was told of a young lady in 
good circumstances, who had never been stinted of 
her food, yet who could not be broken of eating clay. 

Jan. 13. From Savannah we went by railway 
to Macon in Georgia, a distance of 191 miles, my 
wife going direct in a train which carried her in 
about twelve hours to her destination, accompanied 
by one of the directors of the railway company, who 
politely offered to escort her. The same gentleman 

B 4 



8 EXPEDITION ON HAND-CAR. [CHAP. XX. 

supplied me with a hand-car and three negroes, 
so that I was able to perform the journey at my 
leisure, stopping at all the recent cuttings, and ex- 
amining the rocks and fossils on the way. I was 
desirous of making these explorations, because this 
line of road traverses the entire area occupied by the 
tertiary strata between the sea and the borders of 
the granitic region, which commences at Macon, and 
the section was parallel to that previously examined 
by me on. the Savannah river in 1842. When I 
came to low swampy grounds, or pine-barrens, where 
there were no objects of geological interest, my black 
companions propelled me onwards at the rate of ten 
or twelve miles an hour by turning a handle con- 
nected with the axis of the wheels. Their motions 
were like those of men drawing water from a well. 
Throughout the greater part of the route, an intel- 
ligent engineer accompanied me. As there was only 
one line of rail, and many curves, and as the negroes 
cannot be relied on for caution, he was anxious for my 
safety, while I was wholly occupied with my geology. 
I saw him frequently looking at his watch, and often 
kneeling down, like " Fine-ear " in the fairy tale, so as 
to place his ear in contact with the iron rails to ascer- 
tain whether a passenger or luggage-train were within 
a mile or two. We went by Parramore's Hill, where 
the sandstone rocks detained me some time, and, at the 
ninety-fifth mile station from Savannah, I collected 
fossils, consisting of marine shells and corals. These 
were silicified in the burr-stone, of which mill-stones 
are manufactured. Near Sandersville I saw a lime- 
stone from which Eocene shells and corals are pro- 



CHAP. XX.] GEOLOGY OF GEOKGIA. 9 

cured, as well as the teeth of sharks and the bones of 
the huge extinct cetacean called Zeuglodon. Here 
I had ample opportunities of confirming the opinion 
I had previously announced as the result of my 
labours in 1842, that this burr-stone, with its red, 
yellow, and white sands, and its associated porcelain 
clays or kaolin, constitutes one of the members of the 
Eocene group, overlying the great body of cal- 
careous rock, once supposed by some to be cretaceous, 
but which really belongs to the same tertiary period.* 
Although the summit level of the railway attains 
an elevation of about 500 feet, descending afterwards 
somewhat abruptly to Macon, which is only 300 feet 
above the sea, it is surprising how we stole imper- 
ceptibly up this ascent, as if on a perfectly level 
plain, every where covered with wood, following 
chiefly the swampy valley of the Ogeechee river, 
in such a manner as to miss seeing all the leading 
features in the physical geography of the country. 
Had I not, when at Hopeton, seen good examples 
of that succession of steps, or abrupt escarpments, by 
which a traveller in passing from the sea-coast to the 
granite region ascends from one great terrace to 
another, I should have doubted the accuracy of Bar- 
tram's description, f 

I had many opportunities, during this excursion, of 
satisfying myself of the fact for which I had been 
prepared by the planters " on the sea-board," that the 
intelligence of the coloured race increased in the 
interior and upland country in proportion as they 

* See Quarterly Journ. of Geol. Society, 1845, p. 563. 
t Ante, vol. i. pp. 345, 346. 

B 5 



10 NEGROES IN UPPER COUNTRY. [CHAP. XX. 

have more intercourse with the whites. Many of 
them were very inquisitive to know my opinion 
as to the manner in which marine shells, sharks' 
teeth, sea-urchins, and corals could have been buried 
in the earth so far from the sea and at such 
a height. The deluge had occurred to them as a 
cause, but they were not satisfied with it, observing 
that they procured these remains not merely near 
the surface, but from the bottom of deep wells, and 
that others were in flint stones. In some places, 
when I left the railway and hired a gig to visit 
plantations far from the main road, the proprietor 
would tell me he was unable to answer my questions, 
his well having been sunk ten or twelve years ago. 
In that period the property had changed hands two or 
three times, the former owners having settled farther 
south or south-west; but the estate had remained 
under the management of the same head negro, to 
whom I was accordingly referred. This per&onage, 
conscious of his importance, would begin by enlarging, 
with much self-complacency, on the ignorance of his 
master, who had been too short a time in those parts 
to understand anything I wished to know. When 
at length he condescended to come to the point, he 
could usually give me a clear account of the layers 
of sand, clay, and limestone they had passed 
through, and of fishes' teeth they had found, some 
of which had occasionally been preserved. In pro- 
portion as these coloured people fill places of trust, 
they are involuntarily treated more as equals by 
the whites. The prejudices which keep the races 
asunder would rapidly dimmish, were they not studi- 



CHAP. XX.] NEGROES IN UPPER COUNTRY. 11 

ously kept up by artificial barriers, unjust laws, and 
the re-action against foreign interference. In one 
of the small farms, where I passed the night, I was 
struck with the good manners and pleasant expres- 
sion of countenance of a young woman of colour, 
who had no dash of white blood in her veins. She 
managed nearly all the domestic affairs of the house, 
the white children among the rest, and, when next 
day I learnt her age, from the proprietor, I ex- 
pressed surprise that she had never married. " She 
has had many offers," said he, " but has declined all, 
for they were quite unworthy of her, rude and un- 
cultivated country people. I do not see how she 
is to make a suitable match here, though she might 
easily do so in a large town like Savannah." He 
spoke of her just as he might have done of a white 
free maid-servant. 

If inter-marriages between the coloured and white 
races were not illegal here, how can we doubt that 
as Englishwomen sometimes marry black servants in 
Great Britain, others, who came out here as poor 
emigrants, would gladly accept an offer from a well- 
conducted black artizan or steward of an estate, a 
man of intelligence and sober habits, preferable in 
so many respects to the drunken and illiterate Irish 
settlers, who are now so unduly raised above them 
by the prejudices of race! 

In one family, I found that there were six white 
children and six blacks, of about the same age, and 
the negroes had been taught to read by their com- 
panions, the owner winking at this illegal proceeding, 
and seeming to think that such an acquisition would 

B 6 



1 2 INDIFFERENCE TO COLD. [CHAP. XX 

rather enhance the value of his slaves than otherwise. 
Unfortunately, the whites, in return, often learn 
from the negroes to speak broken English, and, in 
spite of losing much time in unlearning ungramma- 
tical phrases, well-educated people retain some of 
them all their lives. 

As I stopped every evening at the point where 
my geological work for the day happened to end, 
I had sometimes to put up with rough quarters 
in the pine-barrens. It was cold, and none of 
my hosts grudged a good fire, for large logs of 
blazing pine-wood were freely heaped up on the 
hearth, but the windows and doors were kept wide 
open. One morning, I was at breakfast with a 
large family, at sunrise, when the frost was so hard, 
that every pool of water in the road was encrusted 
with ice. In the course of the winter, some ponds, 
they said, had borne the weight of a man and horse, 
and there had been a coroner's inquest on the body 
of a man, lately found dead on the road, where the 
question had been raised whether he had been mur- 
dered or frozen to death. They had placed me in a 
thorough draught, and, unable to bear the cold any 
longer, I asked leave to close the window. My 
hostess observed, that " I might do so, if I preferred 
sitting in the dark." On looking up, I discovered 
that there was no glass in the windows, and that 
they were furnished with large shutters only. For 
my own part, I would willingly have been content 
with the light which the pine-wood gave us, but 
seeing the women and girls, with bare necks and 
light clothing, perfectly indifferent to the cold, I 



CHAP. XX.] PINE-BARRENS. 13 

merely asked permission to put on my great coat and 
hat. These Georgians seemed to me, after their 
long summer, to be as insensible to the frost as 
some Englishmen the first winter after their return 
from India, who come back charged, as it were, with 
a superabundant store of caloric, and take time, like 
a bar of iron out of a furnace, to part with their heat. 
A farmer near Parramore's Hill, thinking I had 
come to settle there, offered to sell me some land at 
the rate of two dollars an acre. It was well timbered, 
and I found that the wood growing on this sandy 
soil is often worth more than the ground which it 
covers. Another resident in the same district, told 
me he had bought his farm at two and a half dollars 
(or about half-a-guinea) an acre, and thought it dear, 
and would have gone off to Texas, if he were not 
expecting to reap a rich harvest from a thriving 
plantation of peach trees and nectarines, just coming 
into full bearing. A market for such fruit had re- 
cently been opened by the new railway, from Macon 
to Savannah. He complained of want of elbow-room, 
although I found that his nearest neighbour was six 
or seven miles distant ; but, he observed, that having 
a large family of children, he wished to lay out his 
capital in the purchase of a wider extent of land in 
Texas, and so be the better able to provide for 
them. 



14 INDIAN MOUNDS. [CHAP. XXI. 



CHAP. XXL 

Indian Mounds and Block-house at Macon, Georgia. Fashion- 
ists. Funeral of Northern Man. Geology and silicified 
Corals and Shells. Stage travelling to Milledgeville. Negro 
Children. Home-made Soap. Decomposition of Gneiss. 
Deep Ravines recently excavated after clearing of Forest. 
Man shot in a Brawl. Disappointed Place- Hunter. Lynch 
Law in Florida. Repeal of English Corn-Laws. War 
Spirit abating. 

Jan. 15. 1846. WHEN I was within twenty miles 
of Macon, I left the hand-car and entered a railway- 
train, which carried me in one hour into the town. 
About a mile south of the place, we passed the base 
of two conical Indian mounds, the finest monuments 
of the kind I had ever seen. The first appearance 
of a large steam-vessel ascending one of the western 
tributaries of the Mississippi, before a single Indian 
has been dispossessed of his hunting grounds, or a 
single tree of the native forest has been felled, 
scarcely affords a more striking picture of a wilder- 
ness invaded by "the arts of civilised life, than Macon, 
in Georgia, resounding to the sound of a locomotive 
engine. On entering the town, my eye was caught 
by a striking object, a wooden edifice of very peculiar 
structure and picturesque form, crowning one of the 
hills in the suburbs. This, I was told, on inquiry, 
was a block-house, actually in use against the Indians 



CHAP. XXL] FASHIONISTS. 15 

only twenty-five years ago, before any habitations of 
the white men were to be seen in the forest here. 
It was precisely one of those wooden forts so faith- 
fully described by Cooper in the "Path-finder." After 
the mind has become interested with such antiquities, 
it is carried back the next moment to the modern 
state of things by an extraordinary revulsion, when 
a fellow- passenger, proud of the sudden growth of 
his adopted city, tells you that another large building, 
also conspicuous on a height, is a female seminary 
lately established by the Methodists, " where all the 
young ladies take degrees;" and then, as you pace 
the streets with your baggage to the hotel, another 
says to you, " There go two of our fashionists," 
pointing to two gaily-dressed ladies, in the latest 
Parisian costume. 

I had seen, in the pale countenances of the whites 
in the pine-woods I had lately travelled through, 
the signs of much fever and ague prevalent in the 
hot season in Georgia, but at Macon we heard 
chiefly of consumptive patients, who have fled from 
the Northern States in the hope of escaping the cold 
of winter. The frost, this year, has tried them se- 
verely in the South. Two days before I reached 
Macon, a young northern man had died in the hotel 
where my wife was staying, a melancholy event, as 
none of his friends or relatives were near him. Lucy, 
the chambermaid of the hotel, an intelligent bright 
mulatto, from Maryland, who expressed herself as 
well as any white woman, came to tell my wife that 
the other ladies of the house were to be present at the 
funeral, and invited her to attend. She found the two 



16 FUNERAL OF NORTHERN MAN. [CHAP. XXI. 

drawing-rooms thrown into one, and the coffin placed 
on a table between the folding doors, covered with 
a white cloth. There were twenty or thirty gen- 
tlemen on the one side, and nearly as many ladies 
and children on the other, none of them in mourning. 
The Episcopal clergyman who officiated, before read- 
ing the usual burial service, delivered a short and 
touching address, alluding to the stranger cut oif 
in his youth, far from his kindred, and exhorting 
his hearers not to defer the hour of repentance to a 
death-bed, when their reason might be impaired or 
taken from them. After the prayers, six of the 
gentlemen came forward to carry the coffin down 
stairs, to put it into a small hearse drawn by a single 
horse, and three carriages followed with as many as 
they could hold, to the cemetery of Eose Hill. This 
burial-ground is in a beautiful situation on a wooded 
hill, near the banks of the Ocmulgee and overlooking 
the Falls. 

These Falls, like so many of those on the rivers 
east of the Alleghanies, are situated on the line of 
junction of the granitic and tertiary regions.* The 
same junction may also be seen at the bridge over 
the Ocmulgee, at Macon, the red loam of the ter- 
tiary formation resting there on mica schist. At 
the distance of one mile south-east of the town, 
a railway cutting has exposed a series of beds 
of yellow and red clay, with accompanying sands 
of tertiary formation, and, at the depth of forty 
feet, I observed a large fossil tree converted into 

* See " Travels in K America," vol. i. p. 132. 



CHAP. XXL] SILICIFIED SHELLS AND CORALS. 17 

lignite, the concentric rings of annual growth being 
visible. Receding from the granitic rocks, six or 
eight miles still farther to the south-east, I found 
at Brown Mountain, a bluff on the Ocmulgee river, 
and at other places in the neighbourhood, a great 
many siliceous casts of fossil shells and corals, and 
among others a large nautilus, the whole indicating 
that these beds of cherty sandstone and impure lime- 
stone belong to the Eocene period. 

As there is much kaolin in this series of chert and 
burr-stone strata, I have little doubt that the petri- 
faction of fossil wood, and of shells and corals, has 
taken place in consequence of the decomposition of 
the imbedded felspathic rocks and crystals of felspar, 
taking place simultaneously with the putrefaction of 
the organic bodies. The silex, just set free from its 
chemical combination in the felspar, would replace 
each organic particle as fast as it decayed or was re- 
solved into its elements. 

From Macon I went to Milledgeville, twenty-five 
miles to the north-east, the capital of Georgia. 
Instead of taking the direct road, we made a detour, 
going the first thirty miles on the Savannah railway, 
to a station called Gordon, where we found a stage- 
coach ready to drag us through the deep sands of the 
pine-barrens, or to jolt us over corduroy roads in the 
swamps. As we were traversing one of the latter, at 
the rate of half a mile an hour, I began to contrast 
the speed of the new railway with stage-travelling. 
Our driver maintained that he could go as fast as the 
cars. " How do you make that out ? " said I. " Put 
a locomotive," he replied, " on this swamp, and see 



18 NEGRO CHILDREN. [ CHAP. XXI. 

which will get on l>est. The most you can say is, 
that each kind of vehicle runs fastest on its own line 
of road." 

We were passing some cottages on the way-side, 
when a group of children rushed out, half of them 
white and half negro, shouting at the full stretch of 
their lungs, and making the driver fear that his 
horses would be scared. They were not only like 
children in other parts of the world, in their love of 
noise and mischief, but were evidently all associating 
on terms of equality, and had not yet found out that 
they belonged to a different caste in society. One 
of our passengers was a jet black youth, about ten 
years old, who got down at a lone house in the woods, 
from the door of which two mulatto boys a year or 
two younger ran out. There was much embracing 
and kissing, and mutual caressing, with more warmth 
of manner than is usually shown by the whites. We 
were glad to see the white mistress of the house, 
probably the owner of them and their parents, looking 
on with evident pleasure and interest at the scene. 

Milledgeville, a mere village, though the capital of 
the State, is provided with four neat and substantial 
wooden churches, clustered together, the Presbyterian, 
Baptist, Methodist, and Episcopalian. In the latter we 
found there was to be no service, as the clergyman had 
been recently " called" to a larger church, newly built, 
at Savannah. The Presbyterian minister was from 
New England, and an excellent preacher. He ex- 
horted his congregation to take the same view of 
their short sojourn on this globe, which the emigrant 
takes of his journey to the far west, bearing patiently 



CHAP. XXI.] THE "EXECUTIVE MANSION." 19 

great hardships and privations, because, however 
severe at the time, he knows they will soon end, and 
prove momentary in their duration, in comparison 
with the longer period which he hopes to spend in a 
happier land. 

At our hotel apologies were made to us by a 
neatly-dressed coloured maid, for the disorderly 
state of our room, the two beds having been recently 
occupied by four members of the Legislature, who, 
according to her, " had turned the room into a hog- 
pen, by smoking and spilling their brandy and wine 
about the floor." 

While I was geologising in the suburbs, the Go- 
vernor's lady called on my wife and took her to her 
residence, called here the " Executive Mansion," as 
appears by the inscription over the door. It con- 
tained some handsome reception-rooms newly fur- 
nished by the last Governor, but the white ground of 
a beautiful Axminster carpet had been soiled and 
much damaged the first evening after it was put 
down, at a levee, attended by several hundred men, 
each walking in after a heavy rain with his shoes 
covered with mud. 

When the Governor's wife paid us a second visit, 
our landlady made herself one of the party just as 
if we were all visitors at her house. She was very 
much amused at my wife's muff, having never seen 
one since she was a'girl, half a century before, at Balti- 
more, yet the weather Was now cold enough to make 
such an article of dress most comfortable. Among 
other inquiries, she said to my wife, " Do tell me 
how you make your soap in England." Great was 



20 HOME-MADE SOAP. [CHAP. XXI. 

her surprise to hear that ladies in that country were 
in the habit of buying the article in shops, and would 
be much puzzled if called upon to manufacture it 
for themselves. As it was evident she had never 
studied Adam Smith on the Division of Labour, she 
looked upon this fine-lady system of purchasing 
every article at retail stores, as very extravagant. 
" That's the way they do in the North," said she, 
fc though I never could understand where all their 
money comes from." She then explained how eco- 
nomically she was able to supply herself with soap. 
"First, there is the wood, which costs nothing but 
the trouble of felling the trees ; and, after it has 
served for fuel, it yields the ashes, from which we 
get the potash. This is mixed with the fat of sixty 
hogs, which costs nothing, for what else could I do 
with all this fat at killing time ? As for the labour, 
it is all done by my own people. I have nine maids, 
and they make almost everything in the house, even 
to the caps I wear." Touching the soap, she ob- 
served, we must be careful to select the ashes of the 
oak, hiccory, ash, and other hard wood, for the pines 
yield no potash"; a remark which led me to speculate 
on the luxuriant growth of the long-leaved pines 
in the purely siliceous tertiary soils, from which it 
would have been difficult to conceive how the roots 
of the trees could extract any alkaline matter, 
whereas the soil of the " hiccory grounds " is derived 
from the disintegration of granitic rocks, which arc 
very felspathic here, and are decomposing in situ. 

Having occasion to hire a horse, I found that the 
proprietor of the livery stables was a coloured man, 



CHAP. XXL] BLOCKS OF GKANITE AND GNEISS. 21 

who came himself to bargain about the price, which 
was high compared to that asked in the North. 

The site of Milledgeville is 577 feet above the 
level of the sea, and, like Macon, it stands on the 
boundary of the tertiary and granitic region. Dr. J. 
R. Getting, who had been employed by the State to 
make a geological survey of part of Georgia, showed 
me in the State House some fossils collected by him, 
and he accompanied me in an excursion into the 
neighbourhood of the capital. It is well worthy of 
remark, that here, as everywhere in Georgia and Ala- 
bama, there are loose blocks of granite and gneiss 
strewed over the granitic area ; but no fragments of 
them are ever seen to cross the boundary into the 
area composed of the tertiary strata, where small 
pebbles only are seen washed out of the sands. 
Farther to the north, in Massachusetts, for example, 
and the island of Martha's Vineyard, we see enor- 
mous erratics of granite, twenty-five and thirty feet 
in diameter, which must have come from the north, 
probably from the mountains of New Hampshire, rest- 
ing on the tertiary clays and rocks * ; and in Long 
Island (New York), a variety of transported blocks 
repose upon, or are interstratified with, very modern 
deposits. In the Southern States the same causes 
have not been in action, and if we suppose, ice- 
bergs to have been the transporting power in the 
north, it seems natural that their action should not 
have extended to the Southern States, so as to carry 
fragments of crystalline rocks out of the granitic 

* Travels in N. America, vol. i. p. 259. chap, xii. 



22 DECOMPOSITION OF GNEISS. [CHAP. XXI. 

region. Yet it is striking around Milledgeville, to see 
so many large detached and rounded boulders of 
granite lying on the surface of the soil, and all strictly 
confined within the limits of the granitic region. One 
of these, on the slope of a hill three miles from the 
town, resting on gneiss, measured twelve feet in its 
longest diameter, and was four feet high. I pre- 
sume that these boulders are nearly in situ ; they 
may have constituted " tors " of granite, like those in 
Cornwall, fragments of masses, once more extensive, 
left by denudation at a period when the country was 
rising out of the sea, and fragments may have been 
occasionally thrown down by the waves, and swept 
to a small distance from their original sites. The lati- 
tude of Milledgeville is 32 20' north, or considerably 
to the south of the most southern limits to which 
the northern drift with its erratics has hitherto been 
traced in the United States. 

Another most singular phenomenon in the environs 
of Milledgeville is the depth to which the gneiss and 
mica schist have decomposed in situ. Some very in- 
structive sections of the disintegrated rocks have been 
laid open in the precipices of recently formed ravines. 
Were it not that the original intersecting veins of 
white quartz remain unaltered to show that the 
layers of sand, clay, and loam are mere lamina? of 
gneiss and mica schist, resolved into their elements, a 
geologist would suppose that they were ordinary 
alternations of sandy and clayey beds with occasional 
cross stratification, the w r hole just in the state in 
which they were first deposited. Now and then, as 
if to confirm the deception, a large crystal of felspar, 



CHAP. XXL] MODERN RATINES. 23 

eight or ten inches long, is seen to retain its angles, 
although converted into kaolin. Similar crystals, 
almost as perfect, may be seen washed into the tertiary 
strata south of the granitic region, where white 
porcelain clays, quartzose, gravel, sand, and micaceous 
loam are found, evidently derived from the waste of 
decomposed crystalline rocks. I am not surprised, 
therefore, that some geologists should have con- 
founded the ancient gneiss of this district, thus de- 
composed in situ, with the tertiary deposits. Their 
close resemblance confirms me in the opinion, that 
the arrangement of the gneiss and mica schist in beds 
with subordinate layers, both horizontal and oblique, 
was originally determined, in most cases at least, by 
aqueous deposition, although often modified by sub- 
sequent crystalline action. 

The surprising depth of some of the modern 
ravines, in the neighbourhood of Milledgeville, sug- 
gests matter of curious speculation. At the distance 
of three miles and a half due west of the town, on the 
direct road to Macon, on the farm of Pomona, is the 
ravine represented in the annexed wood-cut (p. 25.). 
Twenty years ago it had no existence ; but when the 
trees of the forest were cut down, cracks three feet 
deep were caused by the sun's heat in the clay ; and, 
during the rains, a sudden rush of water through 
these cracks, caused them to deepen at their lower ex- 
tremities, from whence the excavating power worked 
backwards, till, in the course of twenty years, a 
chasm, measuring no less than 55 feet in depth, 300 
yards in length, and varying in width from 20 to 



24 MODERN RAVINES. [CHAP. XXI. 

180 feet, was the result. (See fig. 7. p. 25.) The high 
road has been several times turned to avoid this 
cavity, the enlargement of which is still proceeding, 
and the old line of road may be seen to have held 
its course directly over what is now the widest part 
of the ravine. In the perpendicular walls of this 
great chasm appear beds of clay and sand, red, white, 
yellow, and green, produced by the decomposition in 
situ of hornblendic gneiss, with layers and veins of 
quartz, as before-mentioned, and of a rock consisting 
of quartz and felspar, which remain entire to prove 
that the whole mass was once crystalline. 

In another place I saw a bridge thrown over a 
recently formed gulley, and here, as in Alabama, the 
new system of valleys and of drainage, attendant on 
the clearing away of the woods, is a source of serious 
inconvenience and loss. 

I infer, from the rapidity of the denudation caused 
here by running water after the clearing or re- 
moval of wood, that this country has been always 
covered with a dense forest, from the remote time 
when it first emerged from the sea. However long 
may have been the period of upheaval required to 
raise the marine tertiary strata to the height of more 
than 600 feet, we may conclude that the surface has 
been protected by more than a mere covering of 
herbage from the effects of the sudden. flowing off 
of the rain water. 

I know it may be contended that, when the granite 
and gneiss first rose as islands out of the sea, they may 
have consisted entirely of hard rock, which resisted 
denudation, and therefore that we can only affirm 



CHAP. XXL] RAVINE NEAR MILLEDGEVILLE. 25 



Fig. 7. 




Ravine on the Farm of Pomona, near Milledgeville, Georgia, 
January, 1846. 

Excavated in the last twenty years, 55 feet deep, and 180 feet broad. 
VOL. II. C 



GHAP. XXL] MAN SHOT IN A BRAWL. 27 

that the forest has been continuous from the time 
of the decomposition and* softening of the upper 
portion of these rocks. But I may reply, that 
similar effects are observable, even on a grander 
scale, in recently excavated ravines seventy or eighty 
feet deep, in some newly cleared parts of the tertiary 
regions of Alabama, as in Clarke county for ex- 
ample, and also in some of the cretaceous strata of 
loose gravel, sand, and clay, in the same State at 
Tuscaloosa. These are at a much greater height 
above the sea, and must, from the first, have been as 
destructible as they are now. 

We returned to Macon by our former route, 
through the pine woods, and when we stopped to 
change horses, a lady, who was left for a time alone 
in the coach with my wife, informed her, that a 
young man who had been sitting opposite to them, 
had, the day before, shot an Irishman in a tavern, 
and was flying from justice. A few days later we 
learnt that the wounded man had not died, but as it 
was a Penitentiary offence, it was prudent for the 
culprit to keep out of the way for a time. On hear- 
ing this, I asked one of my companions, how it was 
possible, when such affairs were occurring, and the 
police was so feeble, we could travel night and day, 
and feel secure from personal violence. " There is 
no danger here," he said, " of robbery, as in Europe, 
for we have none who are poor, or rendered vicious 
and desperate by want. No murders are committed 
here except in personal quarrels, and are almost 
always the act of restless and unquiet spirits, who 

c 2 



28 DISAPPOINTED PLACE-HUNTER. [CHAP. XXI. 

seek excitement in gambling and drink. The wars 
in Texas relieved us of many of these dare-devils." 

One of our fellow-travellers seemed to be a disap- 
pointed place-hunter, who had been lobbying the 
Houses of Legislature in vain for the whole session. 
He was taking his revenge by telling many a story 
against an assembly, which had been so obtuse as not 
to discover his merits. Twelve of them, he said, 
from the upper country, could not even read, and 
one of these happening, when in the House, to receive 
an invitation to the Governor's annual dinner, rose, 
and, holding the card in his hand, with the writing 
upside down, said, " Mr. Speaker, I am determined 
to oppose this resolution." Another, when they 
were debating whether they should move the Capitol, 
or seat of legislature, from Milledgeville to Macon, 
went out, and, on resuming his seat, declared they were 
wasting their time, for he had measured, and made a 
rough estimate of the weight of the building (which 
was of stone), and found, on calculation, that all the 
oxen in Georgia could not drag it a single mile ! 

There was much talk here of a recent exhibition 
on the frontiers of Georgia, of what is commonly 
called Lynch Law," which invalidated the assertion 
of my companion in regard to the absence of robbers. 
Many people having been plundered of their pro- 
perty, especially their negroes, organised a private 
association for putting down the thieves, who came 
from Florida, and having arrested one of them, 
named Yoermans, they appointed a committee of 
twelve to try him. Witnesses having been sworn, a 
verdict of guilty was returned, and the punishment 



CHAP. XXL] LYNCH LAW IN FLORIDA. 29 

of death decided upon, by a vote of six to one. They 
then crossed from Georgia into Florida, where the 
prisoner confessed, under the gallows, that he was a 
murderer and robber, and called upon a preacher of 
the gospel, three or four of whom were present, as 
well as a justice of the peace, to pray for him, after 
which he was hung. 

I expressed my horror at these transactions, ob- 
serving that Florida, if in so rude and barbarous a 
state, ought not to have been admitted into the 
Union. My companions agreed to this, but said 
they believed the man had fair play on his trial, and 
added, " If you were a settler there, and had no 
other law to defend you, you would be glad of the 
protection of Judge Lynch." 

The news had just reached Milledgeville and 
Macon of the English Premier's speech in favour of 
the free importation of foreign corn, a subject dis- 
cussed here with as much interest as if it were a 
question of domestic policy. The prospect of in- 
creased commercial intercourse with England, is 
regarded by all as favourable to peace, especially as 
the Western States, the most bellicose in the whole 
Union, will be the chief gainers. Even before this 
intelligence arrived, the tone of the public mind was 
beginning to grow somewhat less warlike. The hero 
in a new comic piece, on the stage at New York, 
personifies the member for Oregon, and talks big 
about f( our destiny," and (( the whole of Oregon or 
none." We also observe an extract from the " North 
American Review" going the round of the news- 
papers, in which the Oregon dispute is compared to 

c s 



30 WAR SPIRIT ABATING. [ CHAI>. XXI. 

Dandle Dinmont's famous law-suit with Jock 
o'Dawston about the marches of their farms, and 
Counsellor Pleydell's advice to his client is recom- 
mended for imitation. 

" We should have a war to-morrow," said a Whig 
politician to me at Macon, " if your democracy were 
as powerful as ours, for the most radical of your 
newspapers are the most warlike. Your ministers 
seem more free from anti- American prejudices than 
the ordinary writers of travels, reviews, or newspaper 
articles, and they have a great advantage over our 
government at Washington. One of our statesmen, 
a late candidate for the presidentship, is said to have 
declared, that when so many millions are admitted 
into the Cabinet, it is scarcely possible to manage a 
delicate point of foreign policy with discretion." 



CHAP. XXII.] MACON TO COLUMBUS. 31 



CHAP. XXII. 

Macon to Columbus by Stage. Rough Travelling. Passage 
of Flint River. Columbus. Recent Departure of Creek 
Indians. Falls of the Chatahoochie. Competition of Negro 
and White Mechanics. Age of Pine Trees. Abolitionist 
" Wrecker " in Railway Car. Runaway Slave. Sale of 
Novels by News-boys. Character of Newspaper Press. 
Geology and Cretaceous Strata, Montgomery. Curfew. 
Sunday School for Negroes. Protracted Meeting. 

Jan. 21. 1846. HITHERTO we had travelled from 
the north by railway or steam-ship, but from Macon, 
on our way south, we were compelled to resort to 
the stage-coach, and started first for Columbus. For 
the first time, we remarked that our friends, on part- 
ing, wished us a safe journey, instead of a pleasant 
one, as usual. There had been continued rains, and 
the roads were cut up by waggons bringing heavy 
bales of cotton to the Savannah railroad. We passed 
Knoxville, a small and neat town, and, after dark, 
supped at a small road-side inn, on pork-chops, 
waffles, and hominy, or porridge, made of Indian 
meal. Here we were told that the stage of the 
night before had been water-bound by the rising of 
the rivers. We went on, however, to the great Flint 
river, where the stage drove into a large flat boat or 
raft. The night was mild, but dark, and the scene 
which presented itself very picturesque. A great 

c 4 



32 ROUGH TRAVELLING. [CHAP. XXII. 

number of negroes were standing on both banks, 
chattering incessantly, and holding in their hands 
large blazing torches of pine-wood, which threw a 
red light on the trees around. The river was much 
swollen, but we crossed without impediment. It 
was the first stream we had come to of those flowing 
into the Gulf of Mexico. 

Our coach was built on a plan almost universal in 
America, and like those used in some parts of 
France, with three seats, the middle one provided 
with a broad leather strap, to lean back upon. The 
best places are given to the ladies, and a husband is 
seated next his wife. There are no outside pas- 
sengers, except occasionally one sitting by the 
driver's side. We were often called upon, on a 
sudden, to throw our weight first on the right, and 
then on the left side, to balance the vehicle and 
prevent an upset, when one wheel was sinking into a 
deep rut. Sometimes all the gentlemen were or- 
dered to get out in the dark, and walk in the wet 
and muddy road. The coachman would then whip 
on his steeds over a fallen tree or deep pool, causing 
tremendous jolts, so that my wife was thrown first 
against the roof, and then against the sides of the 
lightened vehicle, having almost reason to envy those 
who were merely splashing through the mud. To 
sleep was impossible, but at length, soon after day- 
break, we found ourselves entering the suburbs of 
Columbus; and the first sight we saw there was a 
long line of negroes, men, women, and boys, well 
dressed and very merry, talking and laughing, who 
stopped to look at our coach. On inquiry, we were 



CHAP. XXII. ] COLUMBUS. 33 

told that it was a gang of slaves, probably from Vir- 
ginia, going to the market to be sold. 

Columbus, like so many towns on the borders of 
the granitic and tertiary regions, is situated at the 
head of the navigation of a large river, and the 
rapids of the Chatahoochie are well seen from the 
bridge by which it is here spanned. The vertical 
rise and fall of this river, which divides Georgia 
from Alabama, amounts to no less than sixty or 
seventy feet in the course of the year; and the 
geologist should visit the country in November, 
when the season is healthy, and the river low, for 
then he may see exposed to view, not only the hori- 
zontal tertiary strata, but the subjacent cretaceous 
deposits, containing ammonites, baculites, and other 
characteristic fossils. These organic remains are met 
with some miles below the town, at a point called 
" Snake's Shoals ; " and Dr. Boykin showed us a 
collection of the fossils, at his agreeable villa in 
the suburbs. In an excursion which I made with 
Mr. Pond to the Upotoy Creek, I ascertained that 
the cretaceous beds are overlaid everywhere by ter- 
tiary strata, containing fossil wood and marine shells. 

The last detachment of Indians, a party of no less 
than 500, quitted Columbus only a week ago for 
Arkansas, a memorable event in the history of the 
settlement of this region, and part of an extensive 
and systematic scheme steadily pursued by the Go- 
vernment, of transferring the Aborigines from the 
Eastern States to the Far- West. 

Here, as at Milledgeville, the clearing away of the 
woods, where these Creek Indians once pursued 

c 5 



34 NEGRO AND WHITE MECHANICS. [CHAP. XXII. 

their game, has caused the soil, previously level and 
unbroken, to be cut into by torrents, so that deep 
gullies may everywhere be seen ; and I am assured 
that a large proportion of the fish, formerly so 
abundant in the Chatahoochie, have been stifled by 
the mud. 

The water-power at the rapids has been recently 
applied to some newly-erected cotton mills, and 
already an anti-free-trade party is beginning to be 
formed. The masters of these factories hope, by- 
excluding coloured men or, in other words, slaves 
from all participation in the business, to render it 
a genteel employment for white operatives ; a mea- 
sure which places in a strong light the inconsistencies 
entailed upon a community by slavery and the an- 
tagonism of races, for there are numbers of coloured 
mechanics in all these Southern States very expert 
at trades requiring much more skill and knowledge 
than the functions of ordinary work-people in fac- 
tories. Several New Englanders, indeed, who have 
come from the North to South Carolina and Georgia, 
complain to me that they cannot push on their 
children here, as carpenters, cabinet-makers, black- 
smiths, and in other such crafts, because the planters 
bring up the most intelligent of their slaves to these 
occupations. The landlord of an inn confessed to 
me, that, being a carrier, he felt himself obliged to 
have various kinds of work done by coloured artisans, 
because they were the slaves of planters who employed 
him in his own line. " They interfere," said he, 
"with the fair competition of white mechanics, by 
whom I could have got the work better done." 



CHAP. XXII.] JOUKNEY TO MONTGOMERY. 35 

These Northern settlers are compelled to pre- 
serve a discreet silence about such grievances when 
in the society of Southern slave-owners, but are 
open and eloquent in descanting upon them to a 
stranger. They are struck with the difficulty ex- 
perienced in raising money here, by small shares, for 
the building of mills. " Why," say they, " should 
all our cotton make so long a journey to the North, 
to be manufactured there, and come back to us at so 
high a price ? It is because all spare cash is sunk 
here in purchasing negroes. In order to get a 
week's work done for you, you must buy a negro 
out and out for life." 

From Columbus we travelled fifty-five miles west to 
Chehaw, to join a railway, which was to carry us on to 
Montgomery. The stage was drawn by six horses, 
but as it was daylight we were not much shaken. 
We passed through an undulating country, sometimes 
on the tertiary sands covered with pines, sometimes 
in swamps enlivened by the green palmetto and tall 
magnolia, and occasionally crossing into the borders 
of the granitic region, where there appeared imme- 
diately a mixture of oak, hiccory, and pine. There 
was no grass growing under the pine trees, and the 
surface of the ground was everywhere strewed with 
yellow leaves, and the fallen needles of the fir trees. 
The sound of the wind in the boughs of the long- 
leaved pines always reminded me of the waves break- 
ing on a distant sea-shore, and it was agreeable to 
hear it swelling gradually, and then dying away, as 
the breeze rose arid fell. Observing at Chehaw a 
great many stumps of these firs in a new clearing, I 

c 6 



36 AGE OF PINE TREES. [CHAP. XXII. 

was curious to know how many years it would take 
to restore such a forest if once destroyed. The first 
stump I examined measured 2 feet 5 inches in di- 
ameter at the height of 3 feet from the ground, and 
I counted in it 120 rings of annual growth; a second 
measured less by 2 inches in diameter, yet was 260 
years old ; a third, at the height of 2 feet above the 
ground, although 180 years old, was only 2 feet in 
diameter ; a fourth^ the oldest I could find, measured, 
at the height of 3 feet above its base, 4 feet, and pre- 
sented 320 rings of annual growth; and I could have 
counted a few more had the tree been cut down even 
with the soil. The height of these trees varied from 
70 to 120 feet. From the time taken to acquire 
the above dimensions, we may confidently infer that 
no such trees will be seen by posterity, after the 
clearing of the country, except where they may 
happen to be protected for ornamental purposes. I 
once asked a surveyor in Scotland why, in planting 
woods with a view to profit, the oak was generally 
neglected, although I had found many trunks of very 
large size buried in peat-mosses. He asked if I had 
ever counted the rings of growth in the buried trees, 
to ascertain their age, and I told him I had often 
reckoned up 300, and once upwards of 800 rings; to 
which he replied, " then plant your shillings in the 
funds, and you will see how much faster they would 
grow." 

Before reaching Chehaw, we stopped to dine at a 
small log-house in the woods, and had prepared our 
minds, from outward appearances, to put up with 
bad fare ; but, on entering, we saw on the table a 



CHAP. XXII.] RUNAWAY SLAVE. 37 

wild turkey roasted, venison steaks, and a partridge- 
pie, all the product of the neighbouring forest, 
besides a large jug of delicious milk, a luxury not 
commonly met with so far south. 

The railway cars between Chehaw and Mont- 
gomery consisted, like those in the North, of a long 
apartment, with cross benches and a middle passage. 
There were many travellers, and among them one 
rustic, evidently in liquor, who put both his feet on 
one of the cushioned benches, and began to sing. 
The conductor told him to put his feet down, and 
afterwards, on his repeating the offence, lifted them 
off. On his doing it a third time, the train was 
ordered to stop, and the man was told, in a pe- 
remptory tone, to get out immediately. He was a 
strong-built labourer, and would have been much 
more than a match for the conductor, had he re- 
sisted ; but he instantly complied, knowing, doubt- 
less, that the officer's authority would be backed by 
the other passengers, if they were appealed to. We 
left him seated on the ground, many miles from any 
habitation, and with no prospect of another train 
passing for many a long hour. As we go south- 
wards, we see more cases of intoxication, and hear 
more swearing. 

At one of the stations we saw a runaway slave, 
who had been caught and handcuffed ; the first I had 
fallen in with in irons in the course of the present 
journey. On seeing him, a New Englander, who 
had been with us in the stage before we reached 
Chehaw, began to hold forth on the miserable con- 
dition of the negroes in Alabama, Louisiana, Mis- 



38 ABOLITIONIST " WRECKER." [CHAP. XXII. 

sissippi, and some other States which I had not yet 
visited. For a time I took for granted all he said of 
the sufferings of the coloured race in those regions, 
the cruelty of the overseers, their opposition to the 
improvement and education of the blacks, and espe- 
cially to their conversion to Christianity. I began 
to shudder at what I was doomed to witness in the 
course of my further journey ings in the South and 
West. He was very intelligent, and so well in- 
formed on politics and political economy, that at first 
I thought myself fortunate in meeting with a man so 
competent to give me an unprejudiced opinion on 
matters of which he had been an eye-witness. At 
length, however, suspecting a disposition to exag- 
gerate, and a party-feeling on the subject, I gradually 
led him to speak of districts with which I was already 
familiar, especially South Carolina and Georgia. I 
immediately discovered that there also he had every- 
where seen the same horrors and misery. He went 
so far as to declare that the piny woods all around 
us were full of hundreds of runaways, who subsisted 
on venison and wild hogs ; assured me that I had 
been deceived if I imagined that the coloured men in 
the upper country, where they have mingled more with 
the whites, were more progressive ; nor was it true 
that the Baptists and Methodists had been successful 
in making proselytes. Few planters, he affirmed, 
had any liking for their negroes ; and, lastly, that a 
war with England about Oregon, unprincipled as 
would be the measure on the part of the democratic 
faction, would have at least its bright side, for it 
might put an end to slavery. ff How in the world," 



CHAP. XXII] ABOLITIONIST " WKECKEE." 39 

asked I, " could it effect this object ? " " England," 
he replied, " would declare all the slaves in the South 
free, and thus cripple her enemy by promoting a 
servile war. The negroes would rise, and although, 
no doubt, there would be a great loss of life and 
property, the South would nevertheless be a gainer 
by ridding herself of this most vicious and impo- 
verishing institution." This man had talked to me 
so rationally on a variety of topics so long as he was 
restrained by the company of Southern fellow-pas- 
sengers from entering on the exciting question of 
slavery, that I now became extremely curious to 
know what business had brought him to the South, 
and made him a traveller there for several years. 
I was told by the conductor that he was "a wrecker ;" 
and I learnt, in explanation of the term, that he was 
a commercial agent, and partner of a northern house 
which had great connexions in the South. To him 
had been assigned the unenviable task, in those times 
of bankruptcy and repudiation which followed the 
financial crisis of 1839-40, of seeking out and re- 
covering bad debts, or of seeing what could be saved 
out of the wreck of insolvent firms or the estates of 
bankrupt planters. He had come, therefore, into 
contact with many adventurers who had been over- 
trading, and speculators who had grown unscrupu- 
lous, when tried by pecuniary difficulties. Every 
year, on revisiting the Free States, he had contrasted 
their progress with the condition of the South, which 
by comparison seemed absolutely stationary. His 
thoughts had been perpetually directed to the eco- 
nomical and moral evils of slavery, especially its 



40 NEWS-BOYS. [CHAP. XXII. 

injuriousness to the fortunes and characters of that 
class of the white aristocracy with which he had most 
to do. In short, he had seen what was bad in the 
system through the magnifying and distorting me- 
dium of his own pecuniary losses, and had imbibed 
a strong anti-negro feeling, which he endeavoured to 
conceal from himself, under the cloak of a love of 
freedom and progress. While he was inveighing 
against the cruelty of slavery, he had evidently dis- 
covered no remedy for the mischief but one, the hope 
of which he confessedly cherished, for he was ready 
to precipitate measures which would cause the Afri- 
cans to suffer that fate which the aboriginal Indians 
have experienced throughout the Union. 

When I inquired if, in reality, there were hun- 
dreds of runaway slaves in the woods, every one 
laughed at the idea. As a general rule, they said, 
the negroes are well fed, and, when they are so, will 
very rarely attempt to escape unless they have com- 
mitted some crime : even when some punishment is 
hanging over them, they are more afraid of hunger 
than of a whipping. 

Although we had now penetrated into regions 
where the schoolmaster has not been much abroad, 
we observe that the railway cars are everywhere 
attended by news-boys, who, in some places, are 
carried on a whole stage, walking up and down " the 
middle aisle " of the long car. Usually, however, at 
each station, they, and others who sell apples and 
biscuits, may be seen calculating the exact speed at 
which it is safe to jump off, and taking, with the 
utmost coolness, a few cents in change a moment 



CHAP. XXII.] NEWSPAPER PRESS. 41 

before they know that the rate acquired by the train 
will be dangerous. I never witnessed an accident, 
but as the locomotive usually runs only fifteen miles 
an hour, and is some time before it reaches half that 
pace, the urchins are not hurried as they would be in 
England. One of them was calling out, in the midst 
of the pine-barren between Columbus and Chehaw, 
" A novel, by Paul le Koch, the Bulvver of France, 
for 25 cents all the go ! more popular than the 
Wandering Jew," &c. Newspapers for a penny or 
two-pence are bought freely by the passengers ; and, 
having purchased them at random wherever we went 
in the Northern, Middle, Southern, and Western 
States, I came to the conclusion that the press of 
the United States is quite as respectable as our own. 
In the present crisis the greater number of prints 
condemn the war party, expose their motives, and do 
justice to the equitable offers of the English ministry 
in regard to Oregon. A large portion of almost 
every paper is devoted to literary extracts, to novels, 
tales, travels, and often more serious works. Some 
of them are specially devoted to particular religious 
sects, and nearly all of this class are against war. 
There are also some "temperance," and, in the 
North, " anti-slavery " papers. 

We at length arrived at Montgomery, on the river 
Alabama, where I staid a few days to examine the 
geology of the neighbourhood. From the high 
ground near the town there is a distant view of the 
hills of the granitic region around Wetumpka. But 
the banks of the river at Montgomery are composed 
of enormous beds of unconsolidated gravel, thirty 



42 CRETACEOUS STRATA. [CHAP. XXII. 

feet thick, alternating with red clay and sand, which 
I at first supposed to be tertiary, from their re- 
semblance to strata near Macon and Augusta in 
Georgia. The fossil shells, however, of the accom- 
panying marls (Inoceramus and Rostellaria arenaruni), 
soon convinced me that they belonged to the cre- 
taceous formation. About three miles south of the 
town there is a broad zone of calcareous marl, con- 
stituting what is called the prairie, or cane-brake 
country, bare of natural wood, and where there is so 
great a want of water, that it was at first difficult for 
settlers to establish themselves upon it, until, by aid 
of the Artesian auger, they obtained an abundant 
supply from a depth of 300, and often 500 feet, 
derived from the underlying gravelly and sandy beds. 
Farther from the outcrop of these gravelly beds 
borings have been made 800 feet deep without suc- 
cess. The temperature of the water was found to 
increase in proportion to the depth of the wells. 
A proprietor told me he had found it very difficult 
to get trees to grow on the prairie land, but he 
had succeeded, with great care, in rearing a few- 
mulberries. 

The common name for themarlite, of which this tree- 
less soil is composed, is " rotten limestone." I found 
many lumps on the surface, much resembling white 
chalk, and containing shells of the genera, Inocera- 
mus, Baculite, Ammonite, Hippurite, and that well- 
known fossil of the English chalk, Ostrea vesicularis. 

In the market-place of Montgomery, I saw an 
auctioneer selling slaves, and calling but, as I passed, 
" Going for 300 dollars." The next day another 



CHAP. XXII.] CURFEW. 43 

auctioneer was selling horses in the same place. 
Nearly the same set of negroes, men, women, and 
boys, neatly dressed, were paraded there, day after 
day. I was glad to find that some settlers from the 
North, who had resided here many years, were an- 
noyed at the publicity of this exhibition. Such 
traffic, they say, might as well be carried on quietly in 
a room. Another resident, who had come from Ken- 
tucky, was forming a party, who desire to introduce 
into Alabama a law, like one now in force in Ken- 
tucky, that no negroes shall henceforth be imported. 
By that statute, the increase of slaves has, he says, 
been checked. A case had lately occurred, of a dealer 
who tried to evade the law by bringing forty slaves 
into Kentucky, and narrowly escaped being fined 
600 dollars for each, but had the ingenuity to get off 
by pretending that he was ignorant of the prohibi- 
tion, and was merely passing through with them to 
Louisiana. " By allowing none to come in, while so 
many are emigrating to the West and Texas, we may 
hope," he said, " very soon to grow white." 

Every evening, at nine o'clock, a great bell, or cur- 
few, tolls in the market-place of Montgomery, after 
which no coloured man is permitted to be abroad without 
a pass. This custom has, I understand, continued ever 
since some formidable insurrections, which happened 
many years ago, in Virginia and elsewhere. I was glad 
to find that the episcopal clergyman at Montgomery 
had just established a Sunday school for the negroes. 
I also hear that a party in this church, already com- 
prising a majority of the clergy, are desirous that the 
negro congregations should be represented in their 



44 PKOTKACTED MEETING.. [CHAP. XXIL 

triennial conventions, which would be an important 
step towards raising the black race to a footing of 
equality with the whites. In these times when many 
here are entertaining a hostile feeling towards Great 
Britain, and when the government is lending itself 
to the excitement, I find the ministers of the Epis- 
copal Church peculiarly free from such a spirit, and 
cherishing a desire for peace and a friendly disposi- 
tion towards the English. The Methodists had just 
been holding a protracted meeting in Montgomery, 
and such is the effect of sympathy and of the spirit 
of competition, that the religious excitement had 
spread to all the other sectst 



CHAP. XXIII.] MONTGOMERY TO MOBILE. 45 



CHAP. XXIII. 

Voyage from Montgomery to Mobile. Description of a large 
River Steamer. Shipping of Cotton at Bluffs. Fossils 
collected at Landings. Collision of Steamer with the Soughs 
of Trees. Story of a German Stewardess. Emigration of 
Stephanists from Saxony. Perpetuation of Stephanist and 
Mormon Doctrines. Distinct Table for Coloured and White 
Passengers. Landing at Claiborne by Torchlight. Fossil 
Shells. 

Wednesday, Jan. 28. 1846. THE steamer Ama- 
ranth was lying at the bluff at Montgomery on 
the Alabama river, and was advertised to sail for 
Mobile, a navigation of more than 300 miles, at 
ten o'clock in the morning. From information ob- 
tained here, I had determined to follow up my 
geological inquiries by going next to Tuscaloosa, on 
the Black Warrior river, about 100 miles distant 
by land, in a north-westerly direction. Every one 
agreed, however, that it was better for me to go 800 
miles by water, half of it against the stream, instead 
of taking the direct road ; so I determined to go first 
to Mobile, due south, and then up the Tombecbee to 
the capital of Alabama, being assured that I should 
gain, both in time and money, by this great detour. 
Should I attempt the straight road at this season, no 
one could ensure my making two miles an hour, so 
tenaciously does the marlite of the cretaceous forma- 



46 SOUTHERN STEAM-BOAT. [CHAP. XXIII. 

tion, when it is wet, hold the carriage wheels which 
sink into it. 

Accustomed to the punctuality of northern steam- 
ers, we got down with our luggage to the landing at 
the hour appointed, but were told they were not 
ready. I re-examined a good geological section in 
the bluff, till a friend came to me, and regretted I 
had come down to the boat so early, for perhaps she 
might not sail till the next day. I was much annoyed 
at this intelligence, although I had been forewarned 
that much less value was set on time in the Southern 
States than in the North. At length we went on 
board, and, having engaged a good private cabin, 
made up our minds to read and write there, and 
consider it as our inn. It was the first of these mag- 
nificent southern river boats we had seen, fitted up 
for the two-fold purpose of carrying as many bales of 
cotton as can be heaped upon them without their gink- 
ing, and taking in as many passengers as can enjoy 
the luxuries which southern manners and a hot cli- 
mate require, especially spacious cabins, abundance 
of fresh air, and protection from the heat of the sun. 
We afterwards saw many larger steam-vessels, and 
some of them fitted up in finer style, but none which 
made such an impression on our minds as the 
Amaranth. A vessel of such dimensions makes a 
grand appearance in a river so narrow as the Alabama 
at Montgomery ; whereas, if she were a third longer, 
she would be comparatively insignificant on the 
Mississippi. The principal cabins run the whole 
length of the ship on a deck above that on which 
the machinery is placed, and where the cotton is 



CHAP. XXIII.] SOUTHERN STEAM-BOAT. 47 

piled up. This upper deck is chiefly occupied with 
a handsome saloon, about 200 feet long, the ladies' 
cabin at one end, opening into it with folding doors. 
Sofas, rocking-chairs, tables, and a stove are placed in 
this room, which is lighted by windows from above. 
On each side of it is a row of sleeping apartments, each 
communicating by one door with the saloon, while 
the other leads out to the guard, as they call it, a 
long balcony or gallery, covered with a shade or 
verandah, which passes round the whole boat. The 
second class, or deck passengers, sleep where they 
can on the lower floor, where, besides the engine and 
the cotton, there are prodigious heaps of wood, which 
are devoured with marvellous rapidity by the furnace, 
and are as often restored at the different landings, a 
set of negroes being purposely hired for that work. 

These steamers, notwithstanding their size, draw 
very little water, for they are constructed for rivers 
which rise and fall very rapidly. They cannot quite 
realise the boast of a Western captain, " that he 
could sail wherever it was damp;" but I was as- 
sured that some of them could float in two-foot 
water. The high-pressure steam escapes into the air, 
by a succession of explosions alternately from the pipes 
of the two engines. It is a most unearthly sound, like 
that of some huge monster gasping for breath ; and 
when they clear the boilers of the sediment collected 
from the river-water, it is done by a loud and pro- 
tracted discharge of steam, which reminded us of the 
frightful noise made by the steam gun exhibited at 
the Adelaide Gallery in London. Were it not for 
the power derived from the high-pressure principle, 



48 SOUTHERN STEAM-BOAT. [CHAP. XXIII. 

of blowing out from the boilers the deposit collected 
in them, the muddiness of the American rivers would 
soon clog the machinery. Every stranger who has 
heard of fatal accidents by the bursting of boilers 
believes, the first time he hears this tremendous 
noise, that it is all over with him, and is surprised to 
see that his companions evince no alarm. Habit 
soon reconciled us to the sound ; and I was amused 
afterwards to observe that the wild birds perched on 
the trees which overhung the river, looked on with 
indifference while the paddle-wheels were splashing 
in the water, and the steam-pipes puffing and gasping 
loud enough to be heard many miles off. 

After we had been on board a great part of the 
day, we at length got under weigh in the afternoon ; 
but. what was my surprise when I actually discovered 
that we were ascending the stream instead of sailing 
down towards Mobile. On asking the meaning of 
this proceeding, the mate told me, very coolly, that 
the captain had just heard of some cotton ready for 
exportation some miles above Montgomery. To this 
higher landing we repaired ; but news being sent that 
a rival steam-boat was making her way up the river, 
the Amaranth set off down stream in good earnest, 
moving by aid of her powerful engines and the force 
of the mid-current with such velocity, that I could 
readily believe that 800 miles by river was shorter 
than 100 by land. 

The pilot put into my hands a list of the landings 
on the Alabama river from Wetumpka to Mobile, 
no less than 200 of them in a distance of 434 miles. 
A. small part only of these consisted of bluffs, or 



CHAP. XXIII. ] SHIPPING COTTON AT BLUFFS. 49 

those points where the high land comes up to the 
river's edge in other words, where there is no allu- 
vial plain between the great stream and the higher 
country. These spots, being the only ones not 
liable to inundation, and which can therefore 
serve as inland ports when the river is full, or 
when the largest boats can sail up and down, are of 
great importance in the inland navigation of the 
country. A proprietor whose farm is thus advan- 
tageously situated, usually builds a warehouse, not 
only for storing up for embarkation the produce of 
his own land, but large enough to take in the cotton 
of his neighbours. A long and steeply-inclined plane 
is cut in the high bank, down which one heavy bale 
after another is made to slide. The negroes show 
great dexterity in guiding these heavy packages ; but 
occasionally they turn over and over before reaching 
the deck of the boat, and sometimes, though rarely, 
run off the course and plunge into the river, where 
they float till recovered. Had I not been engaged 
in geological inquiries, I should probably have had 
my patience severely tried by such repeated stoppings 
at every river cliff; but it so happened that the 
captain always wanted to tarry at the precise points 
where alone any sections of the cretaceous and ter- 
tiary strata were visible, and was often obliged to 
wait long enough to enable me to make a tolerably 
extensive collection of the most characteristic fossils. 
In the present instance and I shall have by-and-by 
to mention other similar ones Captain Bragdon 
was not only courteous, but perfectly understood, 
and entered into my pursuits, and had himself col- 
VOL. II. D 



50 FOSSILS COLLECTED AT LANDINGS. [CHAP. XXIII. 

lected organic remains for a friend in the college of 
Louisville, Kentucky ; so that while the cotton or 
wood were taking on board, he would often assist me 
in my labours. Were it not for one serious drawback, 
a cruise in a cotton steamer would be the paradise of 
geologists. Unfortunately, in the season when the 
water is high, and when the facilities of locomotion 
are greatest, the base of every bluff is many feet, 
and sometimes fathoms, under water, and the lower 
portion of a series of horizontal strata is thus entirely 
concealed from view. The bluffs which I first exa- 
mined consisted of a marlite divided into horizontal 
layers as regular as those of the lias of Europe, and 
which might have been taken for lias but for the 
included fossils, which prove them to belong to the 
cretaceous formation. At Gentreport these unc- 
tuous marls or calcareous clays are called by the 
people soap-stone, and form cliffs 150 feet in per- 
pendicular height, in which, as well as at Selma, 
I collected the large Gryphcsa costata and the Ostrea 
falcata, more than one species of Inoceramus, and 
other characteristic fossil shells. At White Bluff, 
where the blue marlite whitens- when exposed to the 
air, a fine range of precipices covered with wood 
forms a picturesque feature in the scenery ; but I 
obtained the richest harvest of cretaceous fossils far 
below, at a landing called Prairie Bluff. 

The banks of the Alabama, like those of the Sa- 
vannah and Alatamaha rivers, are fringed with canes, 
over which usually towers the deciduous cypress, 
covered with much pendant moss. The misletoe 
enlivens the boughs of several trees, still out of 



CHAP. XXIII.] COLLISION WITH TREES. 51 

leaf, and now and then, through an opening in the 
thicket bordering the river, the evergreen pine-forest 
appears in the back-ground. Some of the largest 
trees on the banks are sycamores (Platanus occiden- 
talis), called button-wood, one of which I measured, 
and found it to be eighteen feet in circumference. 
The old bark is continually peeling off, and the new 
is as white as if the trunk of the tree had been 
painted. 

When it was growing dusk, and nearly all had 
retired to their cabins, and some to their beds, we 
were startled by a loud crash, as if parts of the wood- 
work of the steamer were giving way over our heads. 
At the same moment a shower of broken glass came 
rattling down on the floor of the cabin. As I ex- 
pected to land in the course of the night at Clai- 
borne, I had not taken off my clothes, so I rushed 
immediately on deck, and learnt from the captain 
that there was no danger. I then went down to tell 
the passengers, especially the women, who were na- 
turally in no small alarm, that all was safe. I found 
them, in great consternation, crowded together at 
the door of the ladies' cabin, several mothers with 
children in their arms. When I returned to see 
what had happened, a most singular and novel 
scene presented itself. Crash after crash of broken 
spars and the ringing of shattered window-glasses 
were still heard, and the confusion and noise were 
indescribable. " Don't be alarmed ; we have only 
got among the trees," said the captain. This, I 
found, was no uncommon occurrence when these 
enormous vessels are sweeping down at full speed 



D 2 



52 COLLISION WITH TREES. [CHAP. XXIII. 

in the flood season. Strange as it may seem, the 
higher the waters rise the narrower is the river 
channel. It is true that the adjoining swamps and low 
lands are inundated far and wide ; but the steamers 
must all pass between two rows of tall trees which 
adorn the opposite banks, and as the branches of 
these noble trees stretch half way over the stream, 
the boat, when the river has risen forty or sixty feet, 
must steer between them. In the dark, when they 
are going at the rate of sixteen miles an hour or 
more, and the bends are numerous, a slight miscal- 
culation carries the woodwork of the great cabin in 
among the heads of the trees. In this predicament 
I found the Amaranth when I got on deck. Many 
a strong bough had pierced right through the cabin- 
windows on one side, throwing down the lights, and 
smashing the wooden balustrade and the roof of the 
long gallery, and tearing the canvas awning from the 
verandah. The engine had been backed, or its 
motion reversed, but the steamer, held fast by the 
trees, was swinging round with the force of the 
current. A large body of men were plying their 
axes freely, not only cutting off boughs, but treating 
with no respect the framework of he cabin itself. 
I could not help feeling thankful that no branch had 
obtruded itself into our berths. At length we got 
off, and the carpenters and glaziers set to work 
immediately to make repairs. 

The evening before this adventure we had been 
sitting for some hours enjoying the privacy of our 
own state-room, from the windows of which we had 
a good view of the river's bank, when at length my 



CHAP. XXIIL] A GERMAN STEWARDESS. 53 

wife had thought it polite to visit the ladies' cabin, 
as they might otherwise think her unsociable. She 
found there a young Irish milliner who had come out 
from the county of Monaghan, and was settled at 
Sehna, one of the towns on this river, where she said 
she was getting on extremely well. There was also 
a cracker family, consisting of a squalling child and 
its two parents, who were " moving to the Washita 
river in Louisiana." The young mother was smoking 
a pipe, which her husband, a rough-looking back- 
woodsman, had politely lighted for her. As this prac- 
tice was against the regulations, my wife joined the 
other ladies in remonstrating, and she immediately 
went out to smoke in the open air on the guard. I 
had been before amused by seeing a girl, about nine 
years old, employed, by way of imitating her elders, 
in smoking a paper cigar on the deck, and a mother, 
after suckling an infant of two years, give it some 
tobacco to chew. 

Another inmate of the ladies' cabin was a Ger- 
man stewardess, who soon found out that my wife 
understood her mother tongue, and, being in .great 
want of sympathy, poured out her tale of suffer- 
ing in the New World with the simplicity of cha- 
racter and unreservedness of her countrywomen. 
Seven years ago she had been a happy and con- 
tented peasant at Chemnitz in Saxony, one of a 
united family of Lutherans, when she was persuaded 
by a priest to embrace the opinions of Martin Stephan, 
a preacher of Dresden, who taught that all theolo- 
gical study should be confined to the Bible ; that 
literature and the fine arts, being of human, origin 

D 3 



54 EMIGRATION OF STEPHAN1STS. [CHAP. XXIII. 

and worldly in their nature, ought to be despised ; 
that no one could enjoy freedom of conscience in 
Germany ; and that the only path to salvation was 
to follow him, and emigrate to North America. He 
himself was to be their temporal and spiritual chief, 
and to him they were to deliver up all their property. 
In November, 1838, 700 victims of this impostor 
embarked from Bremen, including six pastors and 
four schoolmasters. One of the transports, the 
Amelia, carrying about sixty emigrants, including 
children, a crazy old ship, was never heard of again, 
and doubtless foundered on the Atlantic. The other 
carried Stephan and the rest of his followers to New 
Orleans, from whence they ascended the Mississippi, 
and founded a settlement, called Wittenberg, on a 
rich, aguish flat, bordering the Missouri, above St. 
Louis. Here one fourth of their number were swept 
off by fever, and Stephan, who had deserted a wife 
and nine children in Germany, was detected carrying 
on a licentious intercourse with some of the women of 
the new community. Before, however, this scandal 
became notorious, he contrived to make off with all 
the money which had been entrusted to him to buy 
land for the new colony. Hanne Rottgen, the young 
woman who related this story, went, as soon as she 
recovered from the ague, to St. Louis, her eyes 
having at length been opened, like those of many 
other Stephanists, to the fraud of which they had been 
the dupes. She was immediately employed to attend a 
hospital filled with numbers of her poor country people 
of both sexes, who had been scalded by the bursting of 
the boiler of a large steam-boat. After witnessing 



CHAP. XXIII.] STEPHANISTS AND MOKMONS. 55 

the terrible sufferings and death of not a few of these 
emigrants, she had engaged herself as stewardess in 
several vessels, and at length in the Amaranth. 
" But what became of Stephan ? " asked my wife. 
" He escaped entirely," she said, " for you know, 
madam, there is no law in this country as there is in 
Saxony ; but for all that, this is the land for the poor 
to thrive in. They pay me twenty dollars a month, 
and I am saving money fast ; for, though home-sick, 
I cannot, after all my follies, return and throw myself 
penniless on my relations." Here she began to shed 
tears and to be much affected, wondering whether 
her mother was still alive. She had written to ask 
her forgiveness, as she had been her darling, and in 
spite of her prayers and entreaties had left her almost 
heart-broken. " I thought it my duty to go ; for 
how should we poor peasants not be deceived when 
so many of our clergy were led astray by the cunning 
of that artful man ? I have written to my two sis- 
ters to tell them how bitterly I repent, and to ask 
them to pardon me." 

When I afterwards talked of this adventure in a 
steamer on the Mississippi, a fellow traveller ex- 
claimed, " But would you believe it, there are still 
many Stephanists ? " " Why not," said I, " are 
there not also many thousand Mormons ? The fraud 
of Stephan was not more transparent than that of 
Joseph Smith or his vision, and the story he related 
so circumstantially of records engraven on metallic 
plates, shining like gold, which were delivered to him 
by the angel of the Lord on the 22d day of Septem- 
ber, 1827." 

D 4 



56 STEPHANISTS AND MORMONS. [CHAP. XXIII. 

Are we then to despair of the progress of the 
human mind in inquiries in which it must ever 
take the deepest interest, because in a land where 
there are so many schools, and so many millions 
of readers, a free press, and religious toleration, 
it is so hard to extinguish a belief in the grossest 
impostures ? By no means in the doctrines 
taught by Stephan and Smith there was a mixture of 
some fiction with much truth ; they adopted nearly 
all the highest truths of theology common to the pre- 
vailing religions of the world, with the addition of 
nearly all which Christians believe. In each sect the 
difficulty consists in clearing away a greater or less 
amount of human error and invention from the divine 
truths which they obscure or conceal. The multi- 
tude are taught by their spiritual guides in three 
fourths of Christendom, that they are not to inquire 
for themselves. Even of the Protestant minority, 
who profess that it is their right and duty to exercise 
their own judgment, how many are there who annex 
the condition "provided they arrive at the conclusions 
to which the Church has come, without which they 
cannot be saved ! " What more would a Stephanist or 
Mormon preacher ask, than the privilege of borrow- 
ing and inculcating these maxims ? and how, if the 
use of them be freely granted, and they have motives 
for perpetuating some peculiar sectarian dogmas, is 
the delusion ever to end ? 

In a Southern steamer abundant opportunities are 
afforded of witnessing the inconveniences arising out 
of the singular relation subsisting between the ne- 
goes, whether free or slave, and the white race. 



CHAP. XXIII.] DEMOCRACY AND SLAVERY. 57 

The succession of breakfasts, dinners, and suppers 
entailed by it appears endless. In a Northern boat, 
after the passengers and officers of the ship have 
dined, the few servants who waited on them have 
their meal ; but here we had five distinct repasts 
set out, one after the other. First, the cabin pas- 
sengers dine ; then come the white nurses, children, 
and officers of the ship ; thirdly, the deck pas- 
sengers, being white, answering to our steerage ; 
fourthly, the white waiters, waited upon by co- 
loured men ; fifthly, coloured passengers, free or 
slave, and coloured waiters. It sometimes happens 
that a free negro who has made a good deal of 
money is on board ; he must wait till all the white 
aristocracy, including the waiters, are served, and 
then take his turn with the lowest of the blacks. 
To a European this exclusiveness seems the more 
unnatural and offensive in the Southern States, be- 
cause they make louder professions even than the 
Northerners of democratic principles and love of 
equality. I must do them the justice, however, to 
admit, that they are willing to carry out their prin- 
ciples to great lengths when the white race alone is 
concerned. I heard of a newly-arrived Irish ditcher 
at Chehaw, who was astonished when invited to sit 
down at table with his employer, a proprietor in the 
neighbourhood, who thought it necessary to recog- 
nise him as an equal. On one occasion, when I 
visited a lawyer at his country-house in Alabama 
one accustomed to the best society of a large city, 
and the ladies of whose family were refined and cul- 
tivated he felt it incumbent on him, to my great 

D 5 



58 LANDING AT CLAIBOKNE. [CHAP. XXIII 

discomfiture, to invite the driver of my gig, a half- 
caste Indian, who travelled without any change 
of clothes, to sit down with us at table. He was of 
a dark shade, but the blood was Indian, not African, 
and he was therefore one of the Southern aristocracy. 
The man was modest and unobtrusive, and scarcely 
spoke ; but it need scarcely be said, that his pre- 
sence checked the freedom of conversation, and I 
was glad when his duties in the stable called him 
away. 

In the course of the night we were informed that 
the Amaranth had reached Claiborne. Here we 
found a flight of wooden steps, like a ladder, lead- 
ing up the nearly perpendicular bluff, which was 
150 feet high. By the side of these steps was a 
framework of wood, forming the inclined plane down 
which the cotton bales were lowered by ropes. 
Captain Bragdon politely gave his arm to my wife, 
and two negroes preceded us with blazing torches of 
pine-wood, throwing their light on the bright shining 
leaves of several splendid magnolias which covered 
the steep. We were followed by a long train of 
negroes, each carrying some article of our baggage. 
Having ascended the steps, we came to a flat terrace, 
covered with grass, the first green sward we had 
seen for many weeks, arid found there a small, quiet 
inn, where we resolved to spend some days, to make 
a collection of the fossil tertiary shells, so well 
known to geologists as abounding in the strata of 
this cliff. About 400 species, belonging to the 
Eocene formation, derived from this classic ground, 
have already been named, and they agree, some of 



CHAP. XXIII.] FOSSIL REMAINS. 59 

them specifically, and a much greater number in 
their generic forms, with the fossils of the middle 
division of the deposits of the same age of London 
and Hampshire.* 

The remains of the zeuglodon have been also 
found, by Mr. Hale, in this cliff; but, although I 
met with many leaves of terrestrial plants, I could 
neither obtain here, nor in any part of the United 
States, a single bone of any terrestrial quadruped, 
although we know that many of that class inhabited 
Europe at this period. That some of these may be 
discovered in America, I can hardly doubt ; but the 
fact is worthy of remark, as connected with the 
weight due to negative evidence. When strata have 
been formed far from land, so as to afford few, if 
any, indications of land plants, we must not look for 
indications of air-breathing quadrupeds, nor infer 
their non-existence, if it be so difficult to discover 
them even at Claiborne, where the land, at the 
period of the deposition of the marine strata, cannot 
have been far distant, f 

* They correspond with the middle or Bracklesham series of 
Prestwich's triple division. See " Quart. Journ. of Geol. Soc.," 
voL iii. May, 1847. 

f Since writing the above, I hear that Mr. Hale, of Mobile, 
has met with some bones of land quadrupeds in these strata. 
For remarks on the strata at Claiborne, see a paper by the 
Author, "Quart. Journ. of Geol. Society of London," vol. iv. 
p. 10. June, 1848. 



D 6 



60 MOVERS TO TEXAS. [CHAP. XXIV. 



CHAP. XXIV. 

Claiborne, Alabama. Movers to Texas. State Debts and 
Liabilities. Lending Money to half -settled States. Rumours 
of War with England. Macon, Alabama. Sale of Slaves. 
Drunkenness in Alabama. Laws against Duelling. Jealousy 
of Wealth. Emigration to the West. Democratic Equality 
of Whites. Skeleton of Fossil Whale or Zeuglodon. 
Voyage to Mobile. 

THE morning after our arrival at Claiborne, we 
found at the inn a family of "movers" on their way 
to Texas, sitting in the verandah enjoying the warm 
sunshine after a shower of rain. At this season, 
January 29th, the thermometer stood at 80 Fahren- 
heit in the shade, and the air was as balmy as on an 
English summer day. The green sward was covered 
with an elegant flower, the Houstonia serpyllifolia, 
different from the H. cerulea, so common in the New 
England meadows. Before the house stood a row of 
Pride-of-India trees (Melia azedarach\ laden with 
bunches of yellow berries. I had been often told 
by the negroes that the American robin (Turdus 
miyratorius) "got drunk" on this fruit, and we had 
now an opportunity of witnessing its narcotic pro- 
perties ; for we saw some children playing with one 
of these birds before the house, having caught it 
after it had been eating freely of the berries. My 
wife, seeing that the robin was in no small danger of 



CHAP. XXIV.] MOVERS TO TEXAS. 61 

perishing, bought it of the children for some sugar- 
plums, and it soon revived in our room, and flew out of 
the window. In the evening we enjoyed a sight of 
one of those glorious sunsets, the beauty of which in 
these latitudes is so striking, when the clouds and 
sky are lighted up with streaks of brilliant red, 
yellow, and green, which, if a painter should repre- 
sent faithfully, might seem as exaggerated and gaudy 
as would the colours of an American forest in 
autumn, when compared with European woods. 

The movers, who were going to Texas, had come 
down 200 miles from the upper country of Alabama, 
and were waiting for some others of their kindred 
who were to follow with their heavy waggons. One 
of these families is carrying away no less than forty 
negroes, and the cheerfulness with which these slaves 
are going they know not where with their owners, 
notwithstanding their usual dislike to quit the place 
they have been brought up in, shows a strong bond 
of union between the master and " his people." In 
the last fifteen months, 1300 whites, and twice that 
number of slaves, have quitted Alabama for Texas 
and Arkansas, and they tell me that Monroe county 
has lost 1 500 inhabitants. " Much capital," said one 
of my informants, " is leaving this State, and no won- 
der ; for if we remain here, we are reduced to the 
alternative of high taxes to pay the interest of money 
so improvidently borrowed from England, or to suffer 
the disgrace of repudiation, which would be doubly 
shameful, because the money was received in hard cash, 
and lent out, often rashly, by the State, to farmers for 
agricultural improvements. Besides," he added, " all 



62 STATE DEBTS. [CHAP. XXIV. 

the expenses of Government were in reality defrayed 
during several years by borrowed money, and the 
burthen of the debt thrown on posterity. The 
facility with which your English capitalists, in 
1821, lent their cash to a State from which the In- 
dians were not yet expelled, without reflecting on 
the migratory nature of the white population, is as- 
tonishing! The planters who got grants of your 
money, and spent it, have nearly all of them moved 
off and settled beyond the Mississippi. 

"First, our Legislature negotiates a loan ; then bor- 
rows to pay the interest of it ; then discovers, after 
some years, that five out of the sixteen millions lent 
to us have evaporated. Our democrats then stig- 
matise those who vote for direct taxes to redeem 
their pledges as ( the high taxation men.' Possibly 
the capital and interest may eventually be made 
good, but there is some risk at least of a suspension 
of payment. At this moment the State is selling 
land forfeited by those to whom portions of the bor- 
rowed money were lent on mortgage, but the value 
of property thus forced into the market, is greatly 
depreciated." 

Although, since my departure in 1846, Alabama 
has not repudiated, I was struck with the warn- 
ing here conveyed against lending money to a new 
and half-formed community, where everything is 
fluctuating and on the move a State from which 
the Indians are only just retreating, and where few 
whites ever continue to reside three years in one 
place, where thousands are going with their negroes 
to Louisiana, Texas, or Arkansas, where even the 



CHAP. XXIV.] WAK WITH ENGLAND. 63 

County Court Houses and State Capitol are on the 
move, the Court House of Clarke county, for ex- 
ample, just shifted from Clarkesville to Macon, and 
the seat of Legislature about to be transferred from 
Tuscaloosa to Montgomery. In the midst of such in- 
stability, a feeling of nationality, or State pride, cannot 
easily be fostered. Nevertheless, the resources, both 
mineral and agricultural, of so vast a territory as 
Alabama, a fifth larger in area than the whole of 
England proper, may enable them with moderate 
economy to overcome all their difficulties. 

Often was the question put to us, "Are you 
moving ?" But at the small tavern at Claiborne it 
was supposed that I might be the Methodist minister 
whom they were expecting to come from the North, 
to preach a trial sermon. Two Alabamans, who, as 
I afterwards learnt, were under this persuasion, 
were talking beside me of the chances of a war with 
England, and praised the British ministers for their 
offer of mediation. They condemned the folly of 
the Government at Washington for not accepting it, 
and agreed that the trade of Mobile would suffer 
seriously, if they came to blows with the English. 
" Calhoun," said one of them, " has pronounced in 
favour of peace; but they say that the Governor 
General of Canada is spending a mint of money on 
fortifications." "It is satisfactory," replied his com- 
panion, " to think that we have not yet spent a dollar 
on preparations ; yet I doubt not, if we had to fight, 
that the English would get the worst of it." " Yes," 
said his friend, " we have whipped them twice, and 
should whip them a third time." 



64 INNS OF SOUTHERN STATES. [CHAP. XXIV. 

I am bound to state, that never once, where I was 
known to be an Englishman, were any similar speeches, 
uncourteous in their tone towards my country, 
uttered in my hearing. 

On the table of the inn at Claiborne, I found a 
book entitled " Walsh's Appeal from the Judgment 
of Great Britain," in which all the provocations given 
to the Americans by English travellers, and the 
daily and periodical press of Great Britain, were 
brought together in one view. It is at least in- 
structive, as showing that a disposition to run down 
our Transatlantic brethren was quite as marked, and 
perhaps even more conspicuous, before any of the 
States had repudiated, than after the financial crisis of 
1841. So long as such an unfriendly and disparaging 
tone is encouraged, England does well to keep up a 
larger military force in Canada, and a larger navy 
than would otherwise be called for. It is only to be 
regretted that the Chancellor of the Exchequer can- 
not set down as a separate item, the charge for in- 
dulging in anti- American prejudices, for it is possible 
that John Bull, patient as he is of taxation, might 
doubt whether the luxury was worth its cost. When 
the landlord saw me making an extract from Walsh, 
he begged me to accept the book; the second occa- 
sion in this tour in which mine host had pressed me 
to take a volume out of his library, which he had seen 
me reading with interest. 

There is a considerable uniformity in the scale of 
charges in country inns in the Southern States. Great 
hotels in large cities are more expensive, and small 
inns in out-of-the-way places, where there were few 



CHAF. XXIV.] MACON, ALABAMA. 65 

comforts, considerably cheaper. We never made any 
bargains, and observed that the bill was always 
equitably adjusted according to the accommodation 
provided. 

From Claiborne we crossed the Alabama river, 
and were hospitably received by Mr. Blount, to 
whom I had a letter of introduction from Mr. 
Hamilton Couper. While my wife stayed with 
Mrs. Blount at Woodlands, he took me in his 
carriage through the forest, to the county town of 
Macon, where he had business as a magistrate. 
Macon (Alabama) happened to lie directly in my 
way to Clarkesville, where I wished to examine the 
geology of the region where the fossil skeletons of the 
gigantic zeuglodon had been procured. The district 
we passed through was situated in the fork of the 
Alabama and Tombeckbee rivers, where the abo- 
riginal forest was only broken here and there by a 
few clearings. To travel with an accomplished and 
agreeable resident proprietor, who could entirely 
sympathise with my feelings and opinions in a district 
so recently deserted by the Indians, was no small ad- 
vantage. When I got to Macon, my attention was 
forcibly called to the newness of things, by my 
friend's pointing out to me the ground where there 
had been a bloody fight with the Chocktaws and 
Chickasaws, and I was told how many Indians had 
been slaughtered there, and how the present clerk of 
the Circuit Court was the last survivor of those who 
had won the battle. The memory of General Jackson 
is quite idolized here. It was enough for him to give 
public notice in the papers that he should have great 



66 SALE OF SLAVES. [CHAP. XXIV. 

pleasure in meeting his friends at a given point on a 
given day, and there was sure to be a muster of 
several hundred settlers, armed with rifles, and pre- 
pared for a desperate fight with 5000 or 7000 
Indians. 

At Macon I was fortunate enough to meet with Mr. 
William Pickett, a friend of Mr. Blount's, who, after 
returning from the wars in Texas, had most actively 
aided Mr. Koch in digging up the skeleton of the 
fossil whale, or zeuglodon, near Clarkesville. As I 
was anxious to know the true position of that re- 
markable fossil, and to ascertain how much of it had 
been obtained in a single locality, I gladly accepted 
Mr. Pickett's offer, to act as guide in this excursion. 
On repairing to the stable for the horse destined to 
draw our vehicle, we were met with a singular piece 
of intelligence. The stable-boy who had groomed it 
in the morning was "up for sale." Without his 
assistance we could not start, for this boy had the 
key of the harness-room. So I determined to go to 
the auction, where I found that a sale of land and 
negroes was going on, in consequence of the State 
having foreclosed one of those mortgages, before 
alluded to, on which public money borrowed from Eu- 
ropean capitalists had been lent by the State, for agri- 
cultural improvements. I first saw an old man sold for 
150 dollars ; then a boy, seventeen years old, knocked 
down for 535 dollars, on which a bystander remarked 
to me, " They are selling well to-day." Next came 
on the young man in whose immediate release I was 
more especially interested. He stepped forward, hat 
in hand, with an easy natural air, seeming to be very 



CHAP. XXIV.] DRUNKENNESS IN ALABAMA. 67 

indifferent to the scene around him, while the 
auctioneer began to describe him as a fine griff (which 
means three parts black), twenty -four years old, and 
having many superior qualities, on which he enlarged 
in detail. There was a sharp bidding, which lasted 
only a few minutes, when he was sold for 675 dollars. 
Mr. Pickett immediately asked him to get ready our 
horse, and, as he came away with us, began to joke 
with him, and told him " they have bid a hundred 
dollars more for you than I would have given ; " to 
which he replied, very complacently, " My master, 
who has had the hire of me for three years, knew 
better than to let any one outbid him." I discovered, 
in short, that he had gone to the sale with a full con- 
viction that the person whom he had been serving 
was determined to buy him in, so that his mind was 
quite at ease, and the price offered for him had made 
him feel well satisfied with himself. 

I witnessed no mal-treatment of slaves in this State, 
but drunkenness prevails to such a degree among their 
owners, that I cannot doubt that the power they exer- 
cise must often be fearfully abused. In the morning the 
proprietor of the house where I lodged was intoxicated, 
yet taking fresh drams when I left him, and evidently 
thinking me somewhat unpolite when I declined to 
join him. In the afternoon, when I inquired at the 
house of a German settler, whether I could see some 
fossil -bones discovered on his plantation, I was told 
that he was not at home ; in fact, that he had not re- 
turned the night before, and was supposed to be lying 
somewhere drunk in the woods, his wife having set 
out in search of him in one direction, and his sister 



68 LAWS AGAINST DUELLING. [CHAP. XXIV. 

in another. In the Congress at Washington I had 
seen one of the representatives of this State, the 
worse for liquor, on his legs in the House, and I 
afterwards heard of his being killed in a brawl in 
Alabama; yet every one here speaks of the great 
reform which the Temperance movement has made, 
it being no longer an offence to decline taking a 
dram with your host. 

When the conversation at Macon turned on duel- 
ling, I remarked to one of the lawyers, that a new 
bill had just been passed by the State of Mississippi, 
inflicting political disfranchisement as a penalty on 
every one concerned, whether as first or second, in a 
duel. He laughed, and said, " We have a similar 
statute here, but it is nugatory, for the forfeited rights 
are always restored by the Legislature, as a matter of 
course, if the offenders can prove that there was no 
unfair play in the fight." Notwithstanding this 
assertion, such enactments are not without their sig- 
nificance, and I believe that the example of New 
England and the progress of civilisation is rapidly 
changing the tone of public opinion in regard to this 
barbarous practice. Soon after I left Macon, the 
news reached us of a fatal duel at Richmond, in 
Virginia, between two newspaper editors, one of 
whom, in the prime of life, and leaving a family de- 
pendent on him, was killed ; and where the coroner's 
jury had given a verdict of murder, although the 
survivor was afterwards acquitted. The newspaper 
comments on this tragedy, even in some of the 
Southern States, were admirable. The following ex- 
tract may be taken as an example : " Mr. P , 



CHAP. XXIV.] JEALOUSY OF WEALTH. 69 

a man of fifty years' experience, had been called a 

coward by a young man, Mr. Thomas R . This 

touched his honour, which must be vindicated by 
putting his duty as a son, a father, a citizen, a Chris- 
tian, and a man at stake. The point to be proved 

by being murdered, was that Tom R 's opinion 

was incorrect, and that Mr. P was a man of 

honour and of courage. Mr. P is dead. Did his 

conduct prove that he was a brave or wise man ? Is 
his reputation better, or is it worse for all this ? If 
he could rise from the dead, and appear again in the 
streets of Richmond, would he be counted more a 
man of courage or honour, than if he had never taken 

the least notice of T. R or his opinion ? Mr. 

R lives, and has his opinion still, and other 

people have also their opinion of him," &c. 

I heard many anecdotes, when associating with 
small proprietors in Alabama, which convinced me 
that envy has a much ranker growth among the 
aristocratic democracy of a newly settled Slave State 
than in any part of New England which I visited. 
I can scarcely conceive the ostracism of wealth or 
superior attainments being carried farther. Let 
a gentleman who has made a fortune at the bar, in 
Mobile or elsewhere, settle in some retired part of 
the newly cleared country, his fences are pulled 
down, and his cattle left to stray in the woods, and 
various depredations committed, not by thieves, for 
none of his property is carried away, but by neigh- 
bours who, knowing nothing of him personally, have 
a vulgar jealousy of his riches, and take for granted 
that his pride must be great in proportion. In a 



70 JEALOUSY OF WEALTH. [CHAP. XXIV. 

recent election for Clarke county, the popular candi- 
date admitted the upright character and high qualifi- 
cations of his opponent, an old friend of his own, and 
simply dwelt on his riches as a sufficient ground for 
distrust. " A rich man," he said, " cannot sympa- 
thise with the poor." Even the anecdotes I heard, 
which may have been mere inventions, convinced me 
how intense was this feeling. One, who had for 
some time held a seat in the Legislature, finding 
himself in a new canvass deserted by many of his 
former supporters, observed that he had always voted 
strictly according to his instructions. " Do you 
think," answered a former partisan, "that they would 
vote for you, after your daughter came to the ball in 
them fixings?" His daughter, in fact, having been 
at Mobile, had had a dress made there with flounces 
according to the newest Parisian fashion, and she 
had thus sided, as it were, with the aristocracy of the 
city, setting itself up above the democracy of the 
pine woods. In the new settlements there the small 
proprietors, or farmers, are keenly jealous of thriving 
lawyers, merchants, and capitalists. One of the 
candidates for a county in Alabama confessed to 
me that he had thought it good policy to go every- 
where on foot when soliciting votes, though he could 
have commanded a horse, and the distances were 
great. That the young lady, whose " fixings " I 
have alluded to, had been ambitiously in the fashion, 
I make no doubt; for my wife found that the cost of 
making up a dress at Mobile was twenty dollars, or 
four times the ordinary London price ! The material 
costs about the same as in London or Paris. At 



CHAP. XXIV.] INCONVENIENCES IN BACKWOODS. 71 

New Orleans the charge for making a gown is equally 
high. 

I often rejoiced, in this excursion, that we had 
brought no servants with us from England, so strong 
is the prejudice here against what they term a white 
body-servant. Besides, it would be unreasonable to 
expect any one, who is not riding his own hobby, 
to rough it in the backwoods. In many houses I 
hesitated to ask for water or towels, for fear of giving 
offence, although the yeoman with whom I lodged 
for the night allowed me to pay a moderate charge 
for my accommodation. Nor could I venture to 
beg any one to rub a thick coat of mud off my boots 
or trousers, lest I should be thought to reflect on 
the members of the family, who had no idea of in- 
dulging in such refinements themselves. I could 
have dispensed cheerfully with milk, butter, and 
other such luxuries ; but I felt much the want of 
a private bed- room. Very soon, however, I came to 
regard it as no small privilege to be allowed to have 
even a bed to myself. On one occasion, when my 
host had humoured my whims so far in regard to 
privacy, I felt almost ashamed to see, in consequence, 
a similar sized bed in the same room, occupied by my 
companion and two others. When I related these in- 
conveniences afterwards to an Episcopal clergyman, he 
told me that the bishop and some of his clergy, when 
they travel through these woods in summer, and the 
lawyers, when on the circuit or canvassing for votes 
at elections, have, in addition to these privations, to 
endure the bites of countless musquitos, fleas, and 
bugs, so that I had great reason to congratulate 



72 EMIGRANTS TO THE WEST. [CHAP. XXIV. 

myself that it was now so cold. Moreover, there 
are parties of emigrants in some of these woods, 
where women delicately brought up, accustomed to be 
waited on, and with infants at the breast, may now 
be seen on their way to Texas, camping out, although 
the ground within their tent is often soaked with 
heavy rain. <e If you were here in the hot season," 
said another, " the exuberant growth of the creepers 
and briars would render many paths in the woods, 
through which you now pass freely, impracticable, 
and venomous snakes would make the forest dan- 
gerous." 

Calling on a proprietor to beg him to show me 
some fossil bones, he finished by offering me his 
estate for sale at 3500 dollars. He said he had been 
settled there for twenty years with his wife, longer 
than any one else in the whole country. He had no 
children ; and when I expressed wonder that he 
could leave, at his advanced age, a farm which he 
had reclaimed from the wilderness and improved so 
much, he answered, " I hope to feel more at home 
in Texas, for all my old neighbours have gone there, 
and new people have taken their place here." 

The uncertainty of the cotton crops, and the sudden 
fluctuations in the value of cotton from year to year, 
have been the ruin of many, and have turned almost 
every landowner into a merchant and speculator. The 
maize, or Indian corn, appears to be almost as pre- 
carious a crop, for this year it has entirely failed in 
many places owing to the intense summer heat. I 
passed some mills in which the grain, cob, and husk 
were all ground up together for the cattle and hogs, 



CHAP. XXIV.] DEMOCRATIC EQUALITY. 73 

and they are said to thrive more on this mixture 
than on the grain alone. 

The different stages of civilisation to which fami- 
lies have attained, who live here on terms of the 
strictest equality, is often amusing to a stranger, but 
must be intolerable to some of those settlers who 
have been driven by their losses from the more 
advanced districts of Virginia and South Carolina, 
having to begin the world again. Sometimes, in 
the morning, my host would be of the humblest 
class of "crackers," or some low, illiterate German 
or Irish emigrants, the wife sitting with a pipe in 
her mouth, doing no work and reading no books. 
In the evening, I came to a neighbour, whose library 
was well stored with works of French and English 
authors, and whose first question to me was, " Pray 
tell me, who do you really think is the author of the 
Vestiges of Creation?" If it is difficult in Europe, 
in the country far from towns, to select society on a 
principle of congeniality of taste and feeling, the 
reader may conceive what must be the control of 
geographical circumstances here, exaggerated by 
ultra-democratic notions of equality and the pride of 
race. Nevertheless, these regions will probably 
bear no unfavourable comparison with such parts of 
our colonies, in Canada, the Cape, or Australia, as 
have been settled for an equally short term of years, 
and I am bound to say, that I passed my time agree- 
ably and profitably in Alabama, for every one, as I 
have usually found in newly peopled districts, was 
hospitable and obliging to a stranger. Instead of 
the ignorant wonder, very commonly expressed in 

VOL. II. E 



74 FOSSIL WHALE, [CHAP. XXIV. 

out-of-the-way districts of England, France, or Italy, 
at travellers who devote money and time to a search 
for fossil bones and shells, each planter seemed to vie 
with another in his anxiety to give me information 
in regard to the precise spots where organic remains 
had been discovered. Many were curious to learn 
my opinion as to the kind of animal to which the 
huge vertebra, against which their ploughs some- 
times strike, may have belonged. The magnitude, 
indeed, and solidity of these relics of the colossal 
zeuglodon, are such as might well excite the asto- 
nishment of the most indifferent. Dr. Buckley 
informed me, that on the estate of Judge Creagh, 
which I visited, he had assisted in digging out one 
skeleton, where the vertebral column, almost un- 
broken, extended to the length of seventy feet, and 
Dr. Emmons afterwards showed me the greater part 
of this skeleton in the Museum of Albany, New 
York. On the same plantation, part of another back- 
bone, fifty feet long, was dug up, and a third was 
met with at no great distance. Before I left Ala- 
bama, I had obtained evidence of so many localities 
of similar fossils, chiefly between Macon and Clarkes- 
ville, a distance of ten miles, that I concluded they 
must have belonged to at least forty distinct in- 
dividuals. 

I visited, with Mr. Pickett, the exact spot where 
he and Mr. Koch disinterred a portion of the skeleton 
afterwards exhibited in New York under the name 
of Hydrarchos, or " the Water- king." The bones were 
imbedded in a calcareous marly stratum of the Eocene 
formation, and I observed in it many casts of the 



CHAP. XXIV.] OR ZEUGLODON. 75 

chambers of a large nautilus, which were at first 
mistaken by Koch for the paddles of the huge 
animal. Portions of the vertebral column, exhibited 
by him, in 1845, at New York and Boston, were 
procured in Washington county, fifteen miles dis- 
tant in a direct line from this place, where the head 
was discovered.* Some single vertebrae, which I 
found here, were so huge and so impregnated with 
carbonate of lime, that I could not lift them from 
the ground without an effort. Professor Jeffries 
Wyman was the first who clearly pointed out that 
the bones, of which the factitious skeleton called 
Hydrarchos was made up, must have belonged to 
different individuals. They were in different stages 
of ossification, he said, some adult, others immature, 
a state of things never combined in one and the same 
individual. Mr. Owen had previously maintained, 
that the animal was not reptilian, but cetacean, be- 
cause each tooth was furnished with double roots, 
implanted in corresponding double sockets. After 
my return from America, a nearly entire skull of 
the zeuglodon was found by Mr. S. F. Holmes and 
Professor L. R. Gibbes, of Charleston, S. C., and it 
was found to have the double occipital condyles, only 
met with in mammals, and the convoluted tympanic 
bones which are characteristie of cetaceans, so that 
the real nature of this remarkable extinct species of 
the whale tribe has now been placed beyond all 
doubt. 

Feb. 5. On my return from this excursion, 

* See " American Journ. of Science," New Series, vol. i. 
p. 312. 



76 VOYAGE TO MOBILE. [CHAP. XXIV. 

I rejoined my wife at Mr. Blount's, and we then 
went back to the inn at Claiborne to wait for a 
steamer bound for Mobile. The first large vessel 
which touched for a moment at the landing, came 
up the river from that city, and stopped to know if 
there were any passengers. The answer was, " No, 
what news ? " To which they replied, " Cotton up one 
eighth no war." They were off in an instant, and, 
a few hours later, when it was dark, another large 
vessel was hailed coming down stream. We were 
glad to find that it was the Amaranth, commanded 
by our old friend Captain Bragdon, who had sailed 
up and down, more than 800 miles, in the interval 
since we saw him. Once more we descended the 
steep cliff, on the slope of which we had spent many 
pleasant hours, gathering hundreds of beautifully 
preserved shells, and saw it illuminated by a blaze 
of torch-light. 

Between Claiborne and Mobile, there are about 
100 miles of river navigation, our course being nearly 
due south. About half way, we passed, in the night, 
the junction of the Tombeckbee and Alabama rivers, 
and, in the morning, saw in all directions a low flat 
country, which continued till we reached the metro- 
polis of Alabama. 



CHAP. XXV.] MOBILE TO TUSCALOOSA. 77 



CHAP. XXV. 

Voyage from Mobile to Tuscaloosa. Visit to the Coal-Field of 
Alabama. Its Agreement in Age with the ancient Coal of 
Europe. Absenteeism in Southern States. Progress of 
Negroes. Unthriftiness of Slave-Labour. University of 
Tuscaloosa. Churches. Bankruptcies. Judges and Law 
Courts. Geology on the Tombechbee River. Artesian 
Wells. Limestone Bluff of St. Stephen's. Negro shot by 
Overseer. Involuntary Efforts of the Whites to civilise the 
Negroes. New Statute in Georgia against Black Mechanics. 
The Effects of speedy Emancipation and the free Com- 
petition of White and Black Labourers considered. 

Feb. 8. 1846. THE Tuscaloosa steamer was just 
ready to sail the next morning from Mobile, up the 
great western tributary of the Alabama, called the 
Tombeckbee (or more familiarly "the Bigby"); I 
determined, therefore, to embark in her for the capital 
of the State, about 400 miles distant by water to the 
north, where I wished to explore the coal-field in 
which the coal used for gas and fuel at Mobile is pro- 
cured, and to ascertain its geological age. Our steamer 
was 170 feet long, and made about ten miles an hour 
against the stream. She carried stores of all kinds to 
the upper country, but was not heavily laden ; and, on 
her return, is to bring down a large freight of cotton. 
By means of the high pressure principle and the 
horizontal movement of the piston, she draws only a 

E 3 



78 THE TOMBECKBEE KIVER. [CHAP. XXV. 

few feet water, notwithstanding her great length. 
These steamers never appear to such advantage as 
when stemming an adverse current, for the boat can 
then be steered with more precision, and less time is 
lost at the landings ; at each of these they can go up 
direct to the bank, whereas, in descending, they have 
to turn round and reascend the stream before they 
can stop. There were also rafts laden with huge 
piles of wood ready to be taken in tow at different 
points, the logs being thrown on board by our ne- 
groes, while the steamer was going on at full speed. 
The empty raft is then turned adrift, and is easily 
piloted down stream by two men, a mano3uvre which 
could not be practised when vessels are going in the 
opposite direction. All the chairs in the cabin of 
the Tuscaloosa were so constructed as to be capable 
of floating, and acting as life-preservers a useful 
precaution on a river, whatever may be thought of 
such safe-guards in an ocean steamer. 

The river Tombeckbee was so high that the trees 
of both banks seemed to be growing in a lake. Be- 
fore dark, we came to the limestone bluff at St. 
Stephen's, more than sixty miles due north of Mobile, 
and nearly 150 miles by the windings of the river. 
The tide is still slightly perceptible, even at this dis- 
tance from the sea, and the water never rises during 
a flood more than five or six feet above its ordinary 
level ; whereas, higher up, at Demopolis, the extreme 
rise is "not less than fifty feet, and at Tuscaloosa, 
sixty-nine feet. At the latter place, indeed, we 
found the waters so high, that the falls were con- 
verted into mere rapids. The magnificent scale of 



CHAP. XXV.] TUSCALOOSA. 79 

the navigation on these southern rivers in the rainy 
season, contrasts remarkably with the want of similar 
facilities of water communication in Texas and the 
more western countries bordering the Gulf of Mexico. 
We admired the canes on the borders of the river 
between Tuscaloosa and Demopolis, some of which I 
found to be thirty feet high. Whether this mag- 
nificent reed, which is said sometimes to grow forty 
feet high, is a distinct species, or merely a variety of 
Miegia macrosperma, which I had seen from six to 
ten feet high, as far north as Kentucky and North 
Carolina, botanists are not yet agreed. 

Tuscaloosa is situated, like Augusta, Milledgeville, 
and Columbus, at the falls of a river, though, in this 
instance, the falls do not occur, as usual at the junc- 
tion of the granitic rocks, with the tertiary or cre- 
taceous strata, but at the point where the latter first 
meet the carboniferous formation. The lower beds 
of the horizontal cretaceous series in contact with the 
inclined coal-measures, consist of gravel, some of the 
quartzose pebbles being as large as hen's eggs, and 
they look like an ancient beach, as if the cretaceous 
sea had terminated here, or shingle had been accu- 
mulated near a shore. 

There is a flourishing college at Tuscaloosa, stand- 
ing upon a hill 450 feet above the level of the sea. 
Here I was welcomed by the professor of chemistry, 
Mr. Brumby, who had the kindness to set out im- 
mediately with me (Feb. 10.) to examine the coal- 
fields lying immediately north of this place. Starting 
in a north-easterly direction, we first entered a hilly 
country formed of sandstone, grit, and shale of the 

E 4 



80 COAL-FIELD OF ALABAMA. [ CHAP. XXV. 

coal formation, precisely like the strata in which 
coal occurs in England. These hills were covered 
with long-leaved pines, and the large proportion 
they bear to the hard wood is said to have been 
increased by the Indian practice of burning the 
grass ; the bark of the oak and other kinds of hard 
wood being more combustible, and more easily in- 
jured by fire, than that of the fir tribe. Everywhere 
the young seedlings of the long-leaved pine were 
coming up in such numbers, that one might have sup- 
posed the ground to have been sown with them ; and 
I was reminded how rarely we see similar self-sown 
firs in English plantations. When we had gone 
about twenty miles north-east of Tuscaloosa, we came 
to a higher country, where nearly all the pines dis- 
appeared, and were replaced by oak, hiccory, sumach, 
gum trees, sassafras, and many others. In some 
clearings here, as in Georgia and the Carolinas, the 
quantity or cordage of wood fit for charcoal produced 
in thirty years by the new growth, is said, from its 
greater density, to have equalled the wood contained 
in the aboriginal forest. 

Near the banks of the Black Warrior river, we 
examined several open quarries of coal, where the 
edges of the beds had been dug into by different pro- 
prietors, no regular mining operations having as yet 
been attempted. Even at the outcrop the coal is of 
excellent quality, and highly bituminous, and I soon 
satisfied myself that the strata were not of the age of 
the Richmond coal before described * , but were 
as ancient as that of the Alleghany Hills, or of 

* Ante, vol. i. p. 283. 



CHAP. XXV.] COAL-FIELD OF ALABAMA. 81 

Western Virginia. In the beds of black shale cover- 
ing each coal-seam, were impressions of fossil plants, 
precisely similar to those occurring in the ancient 
coal-measures of Europe and America. Among these 
we found more than one species of Calamite, several 
ferns of the genera Sphenopteris and Neuropteris, 
the trunks of Lepidodendron and Sigillaria, the stems 
and leaves of Aster ophyllite, and in other beds the 
characteristic root called Stigmaria, not uncommon.* 

According to Professor Brumby, this coal-field of 
the Warrior river is ninety miles long from north to 
south, and from ten to thirty miles in breadth, and in- 
cludes in it some coal-seams not less than ten feet 
thick. It forms a southern prolongation of the great 
Appalachian coal-field, with which I was unacquainted 
when I compiled my map, published in 1845, of the 
geology of North America .f Its geographical situa- 
tion is peculiarly interesting ; for, being situated in 
lat. 33 10' north, it constitutes at present the extreme 
southern limit to which the ancient carboniferous vege- 
tation has been traced in the northern hemisphere, 
whether on the east or west side of the Atlantic. 

Continuing our route into the upland country, we 
entered, about thirty-three miles N. E. of Tuscaloosa, 
a region called Rook's Valley, where rich beds of 
ironstone and limestone bid fair, from their proximity 
to the coal, to become one day a source of great 
mineral wealth. At present the country has been 
suffered to retrograde, and the population to grow less 

* See " Quart. Journ. of Geol. Soc.," vol. ii. p. 278., and for 
a list of the plants, by Mr. C. J. F. Bunbury, p, 282. ibid, 
t See " Travels," &c., vol. ii. 

E 5 



82 ABSENTEEISM IN SOUTHERN STATES. [CHAP. XXV. 

numerous than it was twenty years ago, owing to 
migrations to Louisiana and Texas, and partly to the 
unthriftiness of slave-labour. 

We travelled in a carriage with two horses, and could 
advance but a few miles a day, so execrable and often 
dangerous was the state of the roads. Occasionally 
we had to get out and call at a farm-house to ask 
the proprietor's leave to take down his snake-fence, 
to avoid a deep mud-hole in the road. Our vehicle 
was then driven over a stubble field of Indian corn, 
at the end of which we made our exit, some fifty 
yards on, by pulling down another part of the fence. 
In both places the labour of rebuilding the fence, 
which consists simply of poles loosely placed together, 
and not nailed, was entailed upon us, and caused 
no small delay. 

One of the evils, tending greatly to retard the pro- 
gress of the Southern States, is absenteeism, which is 
scarcely known in the North. The cheapness of 
land, caused by such rapid emigration to the South and 
West, and the frequent sales of the estates of insol- 
vents, tempts planters to buy more land than they can 
manage themselves, which they must therefore give 
in charge to overseers. Accordingly, much of the 
property in Alabama belongs to rich Carolinians, and 
some wealthy slave-owners of Alabama have estates 
in Mississippi. With a view of checking the increase 
of these " pluralities," a tax has recently been imposed 
on absentees. In Alabama, as in Georgia, I found 
that the coloured people were more intelligent in the 
upper country, and I listened with satisfaction to 
complaints of their setting themselves up, and being 



CHAP. XXV.] PROGRESS OF NEGROES. 83 

less content than formerly with their lot. That men 
of colour can sometimes make large fortunes in trade, 
was proved to me by a fact which came accidentally 
to my knowledge. One of them, by standing security 
for a white man, had lately lost no less than 17,000 
dollars, or 3400 guineas ; yet he was still prospering, 
and kept a store, and, being a free man, would wil- 
lingly have sent his son to the college of Tuscaloosa, 
had he not been prevented by the prejudices of a 
white aristocracy, ostentatiously boastful of its love of 
equality. In consequence of similar impediments, 
many thriving artisans of the coloured race remain 
uneducated, and are obliged to have white men to 
write for them and collect their debts ; and I found 
that many cabinet-makers, carpenters, builders, and 
other mechanics earning high wages, who, in New 
England, would send their sons to college, do not 
contribute here even to the maintenance of common 
schools, their children not being permitted by law to 
learn to read and write. I cannot believe, however, 
that this state of things can endure many years, for I 
found that an excellent sabbath school had been 
established by the Presbyterians in Tuscaloosa, for 
the children of negroes. There are two coloured men 
in this town, who, having a dash of Indian as well as 
negro blood in their veins, have become the owners 
of slaves. 

Frequent mention was made during our stay in 
Alabama, of a negro named Ellis, a blacksmith, who 
had taught himself Greek and Latin. He is now 
acquiring Hebrew, and I was sorry to hear that the 
Presbyterians contemplate sending him as a mission- 



E 6 



84 COLOURED DOMESTICS. [CHAP. XXV. 

ary to Liberia. If it were an object in the South to 
elevate the blacks, he might be far more instrumental 
in forwarding the cause of civilisation and Chris- 
tianity by remaining at home, for the negroes like a 
preacher of their own race. 

The coloured domestic servants are treated with 
great indulgence at Tuscaloosa. One day some of 
them gave a supper to a large party of their friends 
in the house of a family which we visited, and they 
feasted their guests on roast turkeys, ice-creams, 
jellies, and cakes. Turkeys here cost only seventy- 
five cents, or about three shillings the couple, pre- 
pared for the table ; the price of a wild turkey, an 
excellent bird, is twenty-five cents, or one shilling. 
After calculating the interest of the money laid out 
in the purchase of the slaves, and the price of their 
food, a lawyer undertook to show me that a negro 
cost less than an English servant ; "but, as two blacks 
do the work of only one white, it is a mere delusion," 
he said, " to imagine that their labour is not dearer." 
It is usual, moreover, not to exact the whole of their 
time for domestic duties. I found a footman, for 
example, working on his own account as a bootmaker 
at spare hours, and another getting perquisites by 
blacking the student's shoes. 

That slave labour is more expensive than free, is 
an opinion which is certainly gaining ground in the 
higher parts of Alabama, and is now professed openly 
by some Northerners who have settled there. One 
of them said to me, " Half the population of the 
South is employed in seeing that the other half do 
their work, and they who do work, accomplish half 



CHAP. XXV.] FREE AND SLAVE LABOUR. 85 

what they might do under a better system." " We 
cannot," said another, " raise capital enough for new 
cotton factories, because all our savings go to buy 
negroes, or, as has lately happened, to feed them, 
when the crop is deficient." A white bricklayer had 
lately gone from Tuscaloosa to serve an apprentice- 
ship in his trade at Boston. He had been earning 
there 2^ dollars a day, by laying 3000 bricks daily. 
A Southern planter, who had previously been ex- 
ceedingly boastful and proud of the strength of one of 
his negroes (who could, in fact, carry a much greater 
\\eight than this same white bricklayer), was at first 
incredulous when he heard of this feat, for his pattern 
slave could not lay more than 1000 bricks a day. 

During my absence on the geological excursion 
above mentioned, through forests recently abandoned 
by the Indians, and where their paths may still be 
traced, I found that my wife had made many agree- 
able acquaintances at Tuscaloosa. Two of the ladies 
she had seen (New Englanders, who had married 
Southerners), were reading the works of Schiller and 
Goethe in the original for their amusement. My 
companion, the Professor of Chemistry, was not the 
only one from whom I obtained much scientific in- 
formation, and we enjoyed the pleasure, one clear 
night, of looking through a telescope recently sent 
from London, and were shown by Mr. Barnard, the 
teacher of astronomy, some double stars and southern 
constellations not visible in England. 

The annual expense of a student in the University 
is 300 dollars, or sixty guineas a year, including 
board. A gentleman, whose family consisted of eight 



86 CHURCHES. [CHAP.. XXV. 

individuals, with eight negro servants, told me that 
he could not live respectably for less than 1700 
dollars a year (340 guineas). Yet he paid no less 
than 40 dollars, or eight guineas, a year, for a pew in 
the Presbyterian church, holding six persons, which 
will give some idea of the liberal support afforded, 
under the voluntary system, to the ministers of re- 
ligion. Among the professors here, there are Bap- 
tists, Presbyterians, Episcopalians, and I was told of 
one that he was not a member of any church, but a 
regular attendant at the Baptist or Presbyterian 
meeting. On Sunday, we heard the Bishop of Ala- 
bama preach, the congregation here being reckoned 
the second in the State. The first is at Mobile, and 
there are about ten in all. The service was read by 
another clergyman, and as, according to the usual 
custom in America, there was no clerk, the Bishop 
read the responses and gave out the psalms, seeming 
to us, at first, to be performing the office of clerk. 
It often struck me as an advantage in the United 
States, that the responses are never read by an il- 
literate man, as happens not uncommonly in our 
country parishes, and the congregation joins in the 
service more earnestly when the part which pro- 
perly belongs to them does not devolve on a regular 
functionary. A few days later, when I was on my 
way, in a steamer, to Mobile, I conversed with an 
Episcopal clergyman, a high churchman, whose pro- 
fession I had recognised by the strictness of his 
costume. He told me he meant to visit England, 
and, with that view, had for some months abstained 
entirely from the chewing of tobacco, having been 



CHAP. XXV.] BANKRUPTCIES. 87 

told it would be considered a breach of good manners 
there. His physician, also, had assured him, that 
this habit, which he had taken pains to acquire when 
a boy, because he thought it manly, though much 
against his natural taste, was injuring his health. 
He seemed to know the names of almost every bishop 
and dignitary of the English Church, their incomes 
and shades of opinion, and regretted that Archbishop 
Whately had taken such low ground in regard to the 
apostolic succession. " The bishop of this diocese," 
he said, " receives about 800Z. a year, and has to 
pay his own travelling expenses, but in the older 
States the bishops have higher salaries." Episcopal 
clergymen usually receive about 500 dollars (or 
100 guineas) in country parishes, and four times 
that sum in large towns, or even more. Upon the 
whole, he thought them well paid, in proportion to 
the average scale of fortunes in the United States, 
and he was convinced, that as the wealthiest class 
are so often Episcopalians, his church is a gainer in 
worldly advantages as well as spiritual influence, by 
being wholly unconnected with the State. 

In the afternoon, the Presbyterian minister of 
Tuscaloosa delivered a good discourse on the neces- 
sity of a higher standard of honour in commercial 
affairs. Channing had said, that they who become 
insolvent by over-trading, often inflict more misery 
than highwaymen and thieves; and this preacher 
affirmed that for each hundred persons engaged in 
trade in Alabama, there had been ninety-seven bank- 
ruptcies. One of the citizens, who was scandalised 
at this assertion, afterwards raised the question, 



88 JUDGES AND LAW COURTS. [CHAP. XXV. 

whether it was true, and I asked if any one of the 
party could name a tradesman in their town who 
had not failed once in the last twenty years. They 
were only able to mention two. 

I was surprised at the number of lawyers at 
Tuscaloosa who enjoyed the title of Judge, and 
equally amused when the cause was explained to me. 
False notions of economy have from time to time 
induced the democracy to lower the salaries of the 
judges, especially in the inferior courts. The con- 
sequence has been, that as the State can no longer 
command the services of the best lawyers, the bench 
has grown weaker than the bar, and the authority of 
judicial decisions has been impaired. Hence the in- 
creased number of appeals to the Supreme Court of 
the State now sitting at Tuscaloosa. Yet, in spite 
of this augmentation of business, the income of the 
judges in this court also has been lowered from 3000 
to 2500 dollars ; although lawyers in good practice 
in Mobile have been known to make 10,000 or 
1 4,000 dollars a year. It is by no means uncommon, 
therefore, for one who has a large family, to give up 
the bench and return to the bar ; but, in that case, 
the title of Judge is still given to him by courtesy, 
and is much prized, especially by northern men, 
who are willing to make a sacrifice for this honour 
by serving a few years on the bench and then re- 
tiring from it. 

I have before alluded to the deep ravines recently 
cut through incoherent strata in Georgia, after the 
natural wood has been felled.* One of these modern 

* Ante, p. 25. 



CHAP. XXV.] GEOLOGY. 89 

gullies may now be seen intersecting most incon- 
veniently the main street of Tuscaloosa, and several 
torrents are cutting their way backwards through 
the " cretaceous " clay, sand, and gravel of the hill on 
which the Capitol stands. They even threaten in a 
few years to undermine that edifice. I had observed 
other recent ravines, from seventy to eighty feet deep, 
in the Eocene strata between Macon and Clarkes- 
ville (Alabama), where the forest had been felled a 
few years before. 

On my way back from Tuscaloosa to Mobile, I had 
a good opportunity of examining the geological struc- 
ture of the country, seeing various sections, first of 
the cretaceous, and then lower down of the tertiary 
strata. The great beds of gravel and sand above 
alluded to, forming the inferior part of the cretaceous 
series, might from their want of consolidation be 
mistaken for much newer deposits, if their position 
on the Tombeckbee, as well as on the Alabama river 
at Montgomery, were not perfectly clear. They 
pass beneath the great marlite formation, full of cre- 
taceous shells, which gives rise to the prairie soils 
before described*, as nearly destitute of natural wood, 
and crossing Alabama in an east and west direction. 
These I examined at Erie, at Demopolis, and at 
Arcola, where they contain hippurites and other 
characteristic fossils. The depth to which they have 
sunk Artesian wells through them in many places 
(between 500 and 1000 feet), is astonishing. One 
boring through blue marl and limestone at Erie, in 

* Ante, p. 42. 



90 ARTESIAN WELLS. [CHAP. XXV. 

Greene county, was 469 feet deep, and the well 
yielded 350 gallons of water per minute at the sur- 
face. The water rises forty feet above the surface, 
and can be made to reach fifty feet, though in di- 
minished quantity. Here, as in Europe, the tempe- 
rature of the earth's crust is found to increase as we 
descend, the water being sensibly warmer than that 
of the air, so much so that in cold weather it sends 
forth steam. Each new excavation at Erie robs the 
wells previously bored of part of their supply. The 
auger with which they perforate the soil is four 
inches in diameter, and the average cost of excavation 
sixty-two cents, or about 2s. 6d. per foot, for the 
whole depth of 469 feet. No solid rock has been 
pierced here, the strata consisting throughout of soft 
horizontally stratified blue limestone. They have 
also pierced these same rocks, at a distance of three 
miles from Demopolis (a town situated at the junction 
of the Tombeckbee and Black Warrior rivers), to the 
depth of 930 feet without gaining the water, yet 
they do not despair of success, as sand has just been 
reached. 

At Arcola, the proprietor presented me with se- 
veral cretaceous fossils, and some irregular tubular 
bodies, the origin of which he wished to have ex- 
plained. I immediately recognised them as identical 
with the vitreous tubes found at Drigg, in Cumber- 
land, in hills of shifting sand, which have been de- 
scribed and figured in the Transactions of the Geolo- 
gical Society of London.* They have a glazed and 

* Vol. ii. p. 528. and vol. v. p. 617., 1st series. 



CHAP. XXV.] BLUFF OF ST. STEPHEN'S. 91 

vitrified interior, and bodies of similar form and 
structure were first supposed by Saussure to have 
been due to the passage of lightning through sand, 
a theory now generally adopted. 

If any geologist retains to this day the doctrine 
once so popular, that at remote periods marine de- 
posits of contemporaneous origin were formed every- 
where throughout the globe with the same mineral 
characters, he would do well to compare the succes- 
sion of rocks on the Alabama river with those of the 
same date in England. If there were no fossils, he 
might suppose the Lower cretaceous beds of loose 
gravel to be the newest tertiary, the main body of 
the chalk to be lias, and the soft limestone of St. 
Stephen's, which is tertiary, to be the representative 
of chalk. When I arrived at the last-mentioned 
rock, or the white calcareous bluff of St. Stephen's, 
it was quite dark, but Captain Lavargy, who com- 
manded the vessel, was determined I should not be 
disappointed. He therefore said he would stop and 
take in a supply of wood at the place, and gave 
me a boat, with two negroes amply provided with 
torches of pine-wood, which gave so much light that 
I was able to explore the cliff from one end to the 
other, and to collect many fossils. The bluff was 
more than 100 feet high, and in parts formed of an 
aggregate of corals resembling nummulites, but 
called, by A. D'Orbigny, orbitoides. 

I had seen the same " orbitoidal " limestone in the 
interior of Clarke county, forming knolls, on which 
many cedars or junipers were growing, reminding 
me greatly of parts of the English South Downs, 



92 BLUFF OF ST. STEPHEN'S. [CHAP. XXV. 

covered with yew trees or juniper, where the pure 
calcareous soil of the chalk reaches the surface. 

When I looked down from the top of the precipice 
at St. Stephen's, the scene which presented itself was 
most picturesque. Near us was the great steam-boat, 
throwing off a dense column of white vapour, and 
an active body of negroes throwing logs on board 
by torch-light. One of my companions had clam- 
bered with me, torch in hand, to the top of the bluff; 
the other was amusing himself in the boat below by 
holding another blazing torch under large festoons 
of Spanish moss, which hung from the boughs of a 
huge plane tree. These mossy streamers had at 
length been so dried up by the heat, that they took 
fire, and added to the brilliant illumination. My 
fellow passengers were asleep during this transaction, 
but congratulated me the next morning on having 
had the command of the vessel during the night. 

On board the steamer were three gentlemen of 
respectable families and good standing in society, 
who had been ruined by their drunken habits. They 
had ah 1 been brought up to the bar, and two of them 
were married. One had become quite imbecile ; and 
I saw the captain and clerk interfere to prevent him 
from taking more spirits. We heard many lamenta- 
tions at the prevalence of this vice in Alabama, and 
were told of a skilful physician who had lost all his 
practice by giving way to intemperance. While one 
of the passengers was conversing with me on this 
subject, he called my attention to an overseer just 
coming on board, who, not long ago, had shot a 
negro, a ringleader in a conspiracy. The affair, he 



CHAP. XXV.] NEGRO SHOT BY OVEESEER. 93 

said, had not reached a desperate point, and might 
have been better managed, had he not been a pas- 
sionate man. I was going to express my indigna- 
tion at the idea of such an agent continuing to be 
entrusted with power, when I saw him approaching 
us. His countenance was by no means prepossessing, 
and I involuntarily withdrew. To my surprise, my 
companion, whose general opinions had pleased me 
much, greeted and shook hands with his acquaint- 
ance with apparent cordiality. 

This adventure, and my meeting with the slave- 
stealer on board the " General Clinch," before re- 
lated * , were the two cases which most shocked 
my feelings in the course of my present tour in 
Georgia and Alabama. To inquire into the condition 
of the negroes, and the evils arising out of the relation 
of master and slave, was not the object of my visit ; 
but when I afterwards related to an Abolitionist in 
Massachusetts, how little actual suffering had ob- 
truded itself on my notice, he told me that great 
pains must have been taken by the planters to con- 
ceal from me the true state of things, while they had 
taken care to propitiate me by hospitable attentions. 
I was glad, however, to find my experience borne 
out by that of a Scotch weaver, William Thomson, 
of Stonehaven, who travelled in the year 1841-42 
for his health in the Southern States. He supported 
himself as he went along by manual labour, and lived 
on intimate terms with persons of a different class of 
society from those with whom I had most intercourse. 

* Ante, vol. i. p. 309. 



94 SLAVERY IN SOUTHERN STATES. [CHAP. XXV. 

On his return home he published a small book, in 
which he says, " It will appear, to those who knew 
my opinions on slavery before I visited America, 
that, like most others who can judge dispassionately, 
I have changed my opinion considerably." He gives 
a detailed account of his adventures in the regions 
which I traversed in Alabama, Georgia, and many 
other States, and concludes by observing, " After 
witnessing negro slavery in mostly all the slave- 
holding States, having lived for weeks in cotton 
plantations, observing closely the actual condition of 
the negroes, I can assert, without fear of contra- 
diction from any man who has any knowledge of 
the subject, that I have never witnessed one-fifth 
of the real suffering that I have seen in manufac- 
turing establishments in Great Britain." In refer- 
ence to another topic, he affirms " that the members 
of the same family of negroes are not so much scat- 
tered as are those of working men in Scotland, whose 
necessities compel them to separate at an age when 
the American slave is running about gathering health 
and strength."* 

I am aware that there is some danger, when one 
hears the philanthropist declaiming in terms of gross 
exaggeration on the horrors of slavery and the crimes 
of the planters, of being tempted by a spirit of con- 
tradiction, or rather by a love of justice, to coun- 
teract misrepresentation, by taking too favourable a 
view of the condition and prospects of the negroes. 
But there is another reason, also, which causes the tra- 

* Tradesman's Travels in the United States, &c., in the years 
1840-42, p. 182. 



CHAP. XXV.] INCREASE OF NEGROES. 95 

veller in the South to moderate his enthusiasm for 
emancipation. He is forced continually to think of 
the responsibility which would be incurred, if several 
millions of human beings were hastily set aside, like 
so many machines, by withdrawing from them sud- 
denly the protection afforded by their present mo- 
nopoly of labour. In the opening of the market 
freely to white competitors, before the race is more 
improved, consists their danger. 

Yet, on taking a near view of the slave question, 
we are often thrown into opposite states of mind and 
feeling, according as the interests of the white or 
negro race happen, for the moment, to claim our 
sympathy. It is useless now to look back and wish, 
for the sake of civilisation, that no Africans had ever 
crossed the Atlantic. Their number in the Union 
now exceeds three millions, and, as they have doubled 
in the last twenty-five years, we must expect, unless 
some plan can be devised to check their increase, 
that they will amount, before the close of this cen- 
tury, to twelve millions, by which time the white 
population will have augmented to eighty millions. 
Notwithstanding this increase of negroes, were it 
not for disturbing causes, to which I shall presently 
advert, I should cherish the most sanguine hopes of 
their future improvement and emancipation, and even 
their ultimate amalgamation and fusion with the 
whites, so highly has my estimate of their moral and 
intellectual capabilities been raised by what I have 
lately seen in Georgia and Alabama. Were it not 
for impediments which white competition and po- 
litical ascendency threaten to throw in the way of 



96 CIVILISATION OF NEGROES. [CHAP. XXV. 

negro progress, the grand experiment might be fairly 
tried, of civilising several millions of blacks, not by 
philanthropists, but by a steadier and surer agency 
the involuntary efforts of several millions of whites. 
In spite of prejudice and fear, and in defiance of 
stringent laws enacted against education, three mil- 
lions of a more enlightened and progressive race are 
brought into contact with an equal number of la- 
bourers lately in a savage state, and taken from a 
continent where the natives have proved themselves, 
for many thousand years, to be singularly unpro- 
gressive. Already their task-masters have taught 
them to speak, with more or less accuracy, one 
of the noblest of languages, to shake off many old 
superstitions, to acquire higher ideas of morality, 
and habits of neatness and cleanliness, and have 
converted thousands of them to Christianity. Many 
they have emancipated, and the rest are gradually 
approaching to the condition of the ancient serfs of 
Europe half a century or more before their bondage 
died out. 

All this has been done at an enormous sacrifice of 
time and money, an expense, indeed, which all the 
governments of Europe and all the Christian mis- 
sionaries, whether Romanist or Protestant, could 
never have effected in five centuries. Even in the 
few States which I have already visited since I 
crossed the Potomac, several hundred thousand whites 
oY all ages, among whom the children are playing 
by no means the least effective part, are devoting 
themselves with greater or less activity to these in- 
voluntary educational exertions. 



CHAP. XXV.] LAW AGAINST BLACK MECHANICS. 97 

It had previously been imagined that an impassable 
gulf separated the two races ; but now it is proved 
that more than half that space can, in a few gene- 
rations, be successfully passed over, and the humble 
negro of the coast of Guinea has shown himself to 
be one of the most imitative and improvable of human 
beings. Yet the experiment may still be defeated, 
not so much by the fanaticism of abolitionists, or the 
prejudices of those slave-owners who are called per- 
petualists, who maintain that slavery should be per- 
manent, and that it is a blessing in itself to the negro, 
but by the jealousy of an unscrupulous democracy 
invested with political power. Of the imminent na- 
ture of this peril, I was never fully aware, until I 
was startled by the publication of an act passed by 
the Legislature of Georgia during my visit to that 
State, December 27. 1845. The following is the 
preamble and one of the clauses : 

" An act to prohibit coloured mechanics and ma- 
sons, being slaves, or free persons of colour, being 
mechanics or masons, from making contracts for the 
erection of buildings, or for the repair of buildings, 
and declaring the white person or persons directly or 
indirectly contracting with of employing them, as 
well as the master, employer, manager, or agent for 
said slave, or guardian for said free person of colour, 
authorising or permitting the same, guilty of a mis- 
demeanor," and prescribing punishment for the vio- 
lation of this act. 

" Section 1. Beit enacted by the Senate and House 
of Representatives of the State of Georgia in General 
Assembly met, and it is hereby enacted by the au- 

VOL. II. F 



98 LAW AGAINST BLACK MECHANICS. [CHAP. XXV. 

thority of the same, That from and after the 1st day 
of February next, each and every white person who 
shall hereafter contract or bargain with any slave, 
mechanic, or mason, or free person of colour, being a 
mechanic or mason, shall be liable to be indicted for 
a misdemeanor ; and, on conviction, to be fined, at 
the discretion of the Court, not exceeding two hun- 
dred dollars." 

Then follows another clause imposing the like 
penalties on the owners of slaves, or guardians of 
free persons of colour, who authorise the contracts 
prohibited by this statute. 

I may first observe, in regard to this disgraceful 
law, which was only carried by a small majority in 
the Georgian Legislature, that it proves that not a few 
of the negro race have got on so well in the world in 
reputation and fortune, and in skill in certain arts, that 
it was worth while to legislate against them in order 
to keep them down, and prevent them from entering 
into successful rivalry with the whites. It confirms, 
therefore, most fully the impression which all I saw 
in Georgia had left on my mind, that the blacks are 
steadily rising in social importance in spite of slavery ; 
or, to speak more correctly, by aid of that institution, 
assuming, as it does, in proportion as the whites be- 
come civilised, a more and more mitigated form. In 
the next place I shall endeavour to explain to the 
English reader the real meaning of so extraordi- 
nary a decree. Mr. R. H. Wilde, formerly senator 
for Georgia, told me that he once knew a coloured 
freeman who had been brought up as a saddler, and 
was a good workman. To his surprise he found him 



CHAP. XXV.] DEGRADED POSITION OF NEGROES. 99 

one day at Saratoga, in the State of New York, 
acting as servant at an hotel. " Could you not get 
higher wages," he inquired, " as a saddler ?" " Yes," 
answered he ; " but no sooner was I engaged by a 
6 boss,' than all the other workmen quitted." They 
did so, not because he was a slave, for he had long 
been emancipated, but because he was a negro. It 
is evident, therefore, that it requires in Georgia the 
force of a positive statute to deprive the negro, 
whether he be a freeman or slave, of those advan- 
tages from which, in a free State like New York, 
he is excluded, without any legislative interference. 

I have heard apologists in the North endeavouring 
to account for the degraded position which the negroes 
hold, socially and politically, in the Free States, by say- 
ing they belong to a race which is kept in a state of 
slavery in the South. But, if they really desired to 
accelerate emancipation, they would begin by setting 
an example to the Southern States, and treating the 
black race with more respect and more on a footing of 
equality. I once heard some Irish workmen complain in 
New York, "that the niggers shut them out from 
all the easiest ways of getting a livelihood ; " and many 
white mechanics, who had emigrated from the North 
to the Slave States, declared to me that every opening 
in their trades was closed to them, because black arti- 
sans were employed by their owners in preference. 
Hence, they are now using in Georgia the power 
given to them by an exclusive franchise, to pass dis- 
abling statutes against the blacks, to prevent them 
from engaging in certain kinds of work. In several 
States, Virginia among others, I heard of strikes, 

p 2 



100 EFFECTS OF [CHAP. XXV. 

where the white workmen bound themselves not to 
return to their employment until the master had 
discharged all his coloured people. Such combina- 
tions will, no doubt, forward the substitution of 
white for negro labour, and may hasten the era of 
general emancipation. But if this measure be pre- 
maturely adopted, the negroes are a doomed race, 
and already their situation is most critical. I found 
a deep conviction prevailing in the minds of expe- 
rienced slave-owners, of the injury which threatened 
them ; and, more than once, in Kentucky and else- 
where, in answer to my suggestions, that the time 
for introducing free labour had come, they said, " I 
think so ; we must get rid of the negroes." " Do 
you not think," said I, " if you could send them all 
away, that some parts of the country would be de- 
populated, seeing how unhealthy the low grounds 
are for the whites ? " " Perhaps so," replied one 
planter, " but other regions would become more pro- 
ductive by way of compensation ; the insalubrity of 
the Pontine marshes would be no excuse for negro 
slavery in Italy. All might end well," he added, 
" were it not that so many anti-slavery men in the 
North are as precipitate and impatient as if they 
believed, like the Millerites, that the world was 
coming to an end." 

One of the most reasonable advocates of immediate 
emancipation whom I met with in the North, said to 
me, " You are like many of our politicians, who can 
look on one side only of a great question. Grant the 
possibility of these three millions of coloured people, 
or even twelve millions of them fifty years hence, 



CHAP. XXV.] IMMEDIATE EMANCIPATION. 101 

being capable of amalgamating with the whites, such 
a result might be to you perhaps, as a philanthropist 
or physiologist, a very interesting experiment ; but 
would not the progress of the whites be retarded, and 
our race deteriorated, nearly in the same proportion 
as the negroes would gain ? Why not consider the 
interests of the white race by hastening the abolition 
of slavery. The whites constitute nearly six-sevenths 
of our whole population. As a philanthropist, you 
are bound to look to the greatest good of the two 
races collectively, or the advantage of the whole 
population of the Union." 



F 3 



102 RETURN TO MOBILE. [CHAP. XXVI. 



CHAP. XXVI. 

Return to Mobile. Excursion to the Shores of the Gulf of 
Mexico. View from Lighthouse. Mouth of Alabama River. 
Gnathodon inhabiting Brackish Water. Banks of these 
Fossil Shells far Inland. Miring of Cattle. Yellow Fever 
at Mobile in 1839. Fire in same Year. Voyage from Mo- 
bile to New Orleans. Movers to Texas. Lake Pontchar- 
train. Arrival at New Orleans. St. Louis Hotel. French 
Aspect of City. Carnival. Procession of Masks. 

Feb. 21. 1846. THERE had been some very cold 
weather in the beginning of the month in the upper 
country, the thermometer at Tuscaloosa having 
been down as low as 17 Fahr. ; yet, on our return to 
Mobile, we saw the signs of approaching spring, for 
on the banks of the Alabama river the deciduous 
cypress and cotton trees were putting out their 
leaves, and the beautiful scarlet seed-vessels of the 
red maple (Acer Drummondii) enlivened the woods. 

Once more at Mobile, I was impatient to see, 
for the first time, the shores of the Gulf of Mexico, 
and therefore lost no time in making an excursion to 
the mouth of the Alabama river. I was fortunate 
in having as my companion the Rev. Dr. Hamilton, 
minister of the principal Presbyterian congregation, 
who was well acquainted with the natural history of 
this region. He drove me first to the lighthouse, 



CHAP. XXVI.] VIEW FROM LIGHTHOUSE. 103 

where, from the top of the tower, we had a splendid 
view of the city to the north, and to the south the 
noble Bay of Mobile, fourteen miles across. The 
keeper of the lighthouse looked sickly, which is not 
surprising, as he is living in a swamp in this region 
of malaria. It was his first year of residence, and the 
second year is said to be most trying to the consti- 
tution. The women, however, of his family, seemed 
healthy. We then went to the sea-side, two miles to 
the eastward, and found the waters of the bay smooth 
and unrippled, like an extensive lake, the woods 
coming down everywhere to its edge, and the live oaks 
and long-leaved pines, with the buck-eye and several 
other trees just beginning to put forth their young 
leaves. As the most northern countries I had 
visited in Europe Norway and Sweden were 
characterised by fir trees mingled with birch, I was 
surprised to find the most southern spot I had yet- 
seen, a plain only a few feet above the level of 
the sea, almost equally characterised by a predomi- 
nance of pines. On the ground I observed a species 
of cactus, about one foot high, and the marshy spots 
were covered with the candleberry (Myrica caro- 
linensis), resembling the species so common in the 
North, in the scent of its aromatic leaves, but thrice 
as high as I had seen it before. The most common 
plant in flower was the English chickweed ( Cerastium 
vulgare), a truly cosmopolite species. 

A prodigious quantity of drift timber, of all sizes, 
and in every stage of decomposition, lay stranded far 
and wide along the shore. Many of the trunks had 
been floated a thousand miles and more down the 

F 4 



104 MARINE SHELLS. [CHAP. XXVI. 

Mississippi and its tributaries, and, after escaping by 
one of the many mouths of the great river, had 
drifted one hundred and fifty miles eastward to this 
spot. The fact of their long immersion in salt water 
was sometimes proved by a dense coat of encrusting 
barnacles, the only marine shells we could find here, 
for the mollusks proper to this part of the bay are 
such as belong to fresh or brackish water of the 
genera Cyrena, Gnathodon, and Neritina. Just before 
our visit, a north wind had been blowing and driving 
back the sea water for some days, and the bay was 
so freshened by the Alabama river pouring in at this 
season a full stream, that I could detect no brackish 
taste in the water. It is, in fact, so sweet here, that 
ships often resort to the spot to take in water. Yet 
there is a regular tide rising three feet every six 
hours, and, when the wind blows from the south, the 
waters are raised six or seven feet. 

After walking over a large expanse of ripple- 
marked sands, we came to banks of .rnud, inhabited 
by the bivalve shell called Gnaihodon, some of 
which we dug up alive from a depth of about two 
inches from the surface. This part of the Bay of 
Mobile is now the most northern locality of this re- 
markable brackish- water genus, but dead shells of 
the same species are traced many miles inland, form- 
ing banks three or four feet thick. They are called 
clams here in popular language, and, being thick and 
strong, afford a good material for road-making. From 
the same mud bank we dug out a species of Cyrena, 
the only accompanying shell. In some places not 
far off, a Neritina is also met with. As a geologist, 



CHAP. XXVI.] MIRING OF CATTLE. 105 

I was much interested by observing the manner in 
which these shells were living in the mud of the 
delta of the Alabama river. The deposits formed 
by the advance of this and other deltas along the 
northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico, will be here- 
after characterised by such shells in a fossil state, just 
as, in the Pampas, Mr. Darwin and M. A. D'Orbigny 
found the brackish-water shell, called Azara labiata, 
marking far inland the position of ancient estuaries. 
And as, in South America, " the Pampean mud," de- 
scribed by Mr. Darwin *, is filled with the skeletons 
of the extinct Megatherium, Toxodon, and other 
strange mammalia, so in the modern delta of the 
Alabama, the quadrupeds now inhabiting the south- 
ern shores of the United States will hereafter be 
met with buried in the same assemblage of deposits 
of mud and sand as the Gnathodon. I was told that 
in a great morass which we saw near the lighthouse 
some cattle had lately perished, and for many days 
the turkey buzzards have been snatching parts of 
the dead carcases out of the mud, watching their 
opportunity the moment the dogs, which are also 
preying on them, retire. Formerly the wolves used 
to prowl about these swamps in search of similar 
booty, tearing up portions of the mired cattle, and 
in this manner we may expect that, while some 
skeletons, which have sunk deep into the softer mud, 
may be preserved entire, the bones of others will be 
scattered about where the wolves have gnawed them, 
or birds of prey have picked off the flesh. 

* Geolog. Obs. on S. America (1846), p. 99. 

F 5 



106 BANKS OF FOSSIL SHELLS. [CHAP. XXVI. 

On our way back to the town, at places a mile 
and a half from the sea, I examined some large banks 
of fossil shells of the Gnathodon, lying as if they had 
been washed up by the waves at a time when the 
coast-line extended only thus far south. I also found 
that the city of Mobile itself was built upon a similar 
bed of shells, in which no specimens of the Neritina 
occurred ; but I was told by Mr. Hale, that he has 
met with them in banks much farther in the interior, 
and, as he truly remarked, they refute the theory 
which would refer such accumulations to the Indians, 
who, it is well known, were accustomed to feed on 
the Gnathodon. The distinct stratification seen in 
some of the heaps of shells and sand at Mobile, also 
satisfied me that they were thrown up by the action 
of water. Mr. Hale gave me a map, in which he 
had laid down the localities of these beds of fossil 
Gnathodon, some of which he has traced as far as 
twenty miles into the interior, the accumulations in- 
creasing in thickness in the most elevated and inland 
situations, and containing there an intermixture of 
the NeritincK with the Cyrena, which last seems only 
to occur in the recent banks of mud and sand. Mr. 
Hale observes, " that the inland heaps of shells often 
rise so far above the level of the highest tides, that 
it seems difficult to account for their position simply 
by the advance of the delta, and without supposing 
that there has been a slight upheaval of the land." 

In the gardens at Mobile, there were jonquils and 
snowdrops in flower, and, for the first time, we saw 
that beautiful evergreen, the yellow jessamine (Gel- 
semium sempervirens), in full bloom, trailed along the 



CHAP. XXVI.] YELLOW FEVEK. 107 

wall of Dr. Hamilton's house. Its fragrance is de- 
licious, more like that of our bind-weed than any 
other scent I could remember. It had not been in- 
jured by the late frost, although the thermometer at 
Mobile had been eight degrees below the freezing 
point. 

The citizens are beginning to natter themselves 
that the yellow fever has worn itself out at Mobile, 
because the hot season of 1845 was so healthy both 
here and at New Orleans. Some medical men, in- 
deed, confessed to me, that as the wind blew for 
many weeks from the north, passing over the marshes 
north of the city during the summer, without giving 
rise to the usual epidemic, all their former theories 
as to the origin of the pestilence have been refuted. 
It may still hold true, that to induce the disease, 
three causes must concur, namely, heat, a moist 
ground, and a decaying vegetation ; but it seems clear 
that all these may be present in their fullest intensity, 
and yet prove quite inoccuous. The dangerous 
months are July, August, and September, and great 
is the anxiety of those who then remain in the city. 
It is fearful to witness the struggle between the love 
of gain, tempting the merchant to continue at his 
post, and the terror of the plague, which causes him 
to stand always prepared for sudden flight. In 1839, 
such was the dismay, that only 3000 out of a popu- 
lation of 16,000 tarried behind in the city. Dr. 
Hamilton, one of those who staid, told me that he 
knew not a single family, a member of which was 
not attacked by the disease. Out of the 3000, 800 

F 6 



108 FIRE AT MOBILE. [CHAP. XXVI. 

died. All the clergy remained faithful to their 
duties, and many of them perished. 

The yellow fever is not the only scourge which 
has frequently devastated Mobile. I found it slowly 
recovering, like so many other American cities, from 
the ravages of a great fire, which, in 1839, laid the 
greater part of it in ashes. The fire broke out in so 
many places at once, as to give too much reason to 
suspect that it was the work of incendiaries seeking 
plunder. 

Feb. 23. The distance from Mobile to New Or- 
leans is 175 miles by what is called the inland pas- 
sage, or the channel between the islands and the 
main land. We paid five dollars, or one guinea each, 
for berths in the " James L. Day " steamer, which 
made about nine miles an hour. Being on the low- 
pressure principle, she was so free from noise and 
vibration, that we could scarcely believe we were 
not in a sailing vessel. The stunning sounds and 
tremulous motions of the boats on the Southern 
rivers are at first so distracting, that I often won- 
dered we could sleep soundly in them. The " James 
L. Day " is 1 85 feet long, drawing now 5^ feet 
water, and only seven feet when fully freighted. We 
sailed out of the beautiful Bay of Mobile in the 
evening, in the coldest month of the year, yet the air 
was warm, and there was a haze like that of a sum- 
mer's evening in England. Many gulls followed our 
ship, enticed by pieces of bread thrown out to them by 
the passengers, some of whom were displaying their 
skill in shooting the birds in mere wantonness. The 
stars were brilliant as the night came on, and we 



HAP. XXVI.] MOVERS TO TEXAS. 109 

passed between the islands and main land, where the 
sea was as smooth as a lake. 

On board were many " movers," going to Texas 
with their slaves. One of them confessed to me, 
that he had been eaten out of Alabama by his negroes. 
He had no idea where he was going, but after set- 
tling his family at Houston, he said he should look 
out for a square league of good land to be had cheap. 
Another passenger had, a few weeks before, returned 
from Texas, much disappointed, and was holding 
forth in disparagement of the country for its want of 
wood and water, declaring that none could thrive 
there unless they came from the prairies of Illinois, 
and were inured to such privations. " Cotton," he 
said, " could only be raised on a few narrow strips of 
alluvial land near the rivers, and as these were not 
navigable by steamers, the crop, when raised, could 
not be carried to a market." He also comforted the 
mover with the assurance, " that there were swarms 
of buftalo flies to torment his horses, and sand flies to 
sting him and his family." To this the undismayed 
emigrant replied, " that when he first settled in 
Alabama, before the long grass and canes had been 
eaten down by his cattle, the insect pests were 
as great as they could be in Texas." He was, I 
found, one of those resolute pioneers of the wilder- 
ness, who, after building a log-house, clearing the 
forest, and improving some hundred acres of wild 
ground by years of labour, sells the farm and mi- 
grates again to another part of the uncleared forest, 
repeating this operation three or four times in the 
course of his life, and, though constantly growing 



110 LAKE PONTCHARTRAIN. [CHAP XXVI. 

richer, never disposed to take his ease. In pursuing 
this singular vocation, they who go southwards from 
Virginia to North and South Carolina, and thence to 
Georgia and Alabama, follow, as if by instinct, the 
corresponding zones of country. The inhabitants of 
the red soil of the granitic region keep to their oak 
and hiccory, the " crackers " of the tertiary pine- 
barrens to their light-wood, and they of the newest 
geological formations in the sea-islands to their fish 
and oysters. On reaching Texas, they are all of 
them at fault, which will surprise no geologist who 
has read Ferdinand Roemer's account of the form 
which the cretaceous strata assume in that country, 
consisting of a hard, compact, siliceous limestone, 
which defies the decomposing action of the atmosphere, 
and forms table-lands of bare rock, so entirely un- 
like the marls, clays, and sands of the same age in 
Alabama. 

On going down from the cabin to the lower deck, I 
found a slave-dealer with sixteen negroes to sell, most 
of them Virginians. I heard him decline an offer of 500 
dollars for one of them, a price which he said he could 
have got for the man before he left his own State. 

Next morning at daylight, we found ourselves in 
Louisiana. We had already entered the large la- 
goon, called Lake Pontchartrain, by a narrow pas- 
sage, and, having skirted its southern shore, had 
reached a point six miles north of New Orleans. 
Here we disembarked, and entered the cars of a rail- 
way built on piles, which conveyed us in less than an 
hour to the great city, passing over swamps in which 
the tall cypress, hung with Spanish moss, was flou- 



CHAP. XXVI.] NEW ORLEANS. Ill 

rishing, and below it numerous shrubs just burst- 
ing into leaf. In many gardens of the suburbs, the 
almond and peach trees were in full blossom. In 
some places the blue-leaved palmetto, and the leaves 
of a species of iris (Iris cupred), were very abundant. 
We saw a tavern called the " Elysian Fields Coffee 
House," and some others with French inscriptions. 
There were also many houses with porte-cocheres, 
high roofs, and volets, and many lamps suspended 
from ropes attached to tall posts on each side of the 
road, as in the French capital. We might indeed 
have fancied that we were approaching Paris, but for 
the negroes and mulattos, and the large verandahs 
reminding us that the windows required protection 
from the sun's heat. 

It was a pleasure to hear the French language 
spoken, and to have our thoughts recalled to the 
most civilised parts of Europe by the aspect of a 
city, forming so great a contrast to the innumerable 
new towns we had lately beheld. The foreign ap- 
pearance, moreover, of the inhabitants, made me feel 
thankful that it was possible to roam freely and 
without hindrance over so large a continent, no 
bureaus for examining and signing of passports, no 
fortifications, no draw-bridges, no closing of gates at 
a fixed hour in the evening, no waiting till they are 
opened in the morning, no custom-houses separating 
one State from another, no overhauling of baggage 
by gensdarmes for the octroi, and yet as perfect a 
feeling of personal security as T ever felt in Ger- 
many or France. 

The largest of the hotels, the St. Charles, being 



112 ST. LOUIS HOTEL. [CHAP. XXVI. 

full, we obtained agreeable apartments at the St. 
Louis, in a part of the town where we heard French 
constantly spoken. Our rooms were fitted up in the 
French style, with muslin curtains and scarlet dra- 
peries. There was a finely proportioned drawing- 
room, furnished a la Louis Quatorze, opening into 
a large dining-room with sliding doors, where the 
boarders and the "transient visitors," as they are 
called in the United States, met at meals. The 
mistress of the hotel, a widow, presided at dinner, 
and we talked French with her and some of the at- 
tendants ; but most of the servants of the house were 
Irish or German. There was a beautiful ball-room, 
in which preparations were making for a grand 
masked ball, to be given the night after our arrival. 

It was the last day of the Carnival. From the 
time we landed in New England to this hour, we 
seemed to have been in a country where all, whether 
rich or poor, were labouring from morning till night, 
without ever indulging in a holiday. I had some- 
times thought that the national motto should be 
" All work and no play." It was quite a novelty 
and a refreshing sight to see a whole population 
giving up their minds for a short season to amuse- 
ment. There was a grand procession parading the 
streets, almost every one dressed in the most gro- 
tesque attire, troops of them on horseback, some in 
open carriages, with bands of music, and in a variety 
of costumes, some as Indians, with feathers in 
their heads, and one, a jolly fat man, as Mardi Gras 
himself. All wore masks, and here and there in the 
crowd, or stationed in a balcony above, we saw per- 



CHAP. XXVI.] THE CAENIVAL. 113 

sons armed with bags of flour, which they showered 
down copiously on any one who seemed particularly 
proud of his attire. The strangeness of the scene 
was not a little heightened by the blending of ne- 
groes, quadroons, and mulattos in the crowd; and 
we were amused by observing the ludicrous surprise, 
mixed with contempt, of several unmasked, stiff, 
grave Anglo-Americans from the North, who were 
witnessing, for the first time, what seemed to them so 
much mummery and torn-foolery. One waggoner, 
coming out of a cross street, in his working-day dress, 
drove his team of horses and vehicle heavily laden 
with cotton bales right through the procession, caus- 
ing a long interruption. The crowd seemed deter- 
mined to allow nothing to disturb their good humour ; 
but although many of the wealthy Protestant citizens 
take part in the ceremony, this rude intrusion struck 
me as a kind of foreshadowing of coming events, 
emblematic of the violent shock which the invasion 
of the Anglo-Americans is about to give to the old 
regime of Louisiana. A gentleman told me, that 
being last year at Rome, he had not seen so many 
masks at the Carnival there ; and, in spite of the in- 
crease of Protestants, he thought there had been 
quite as much " flour and fun " this year as usual. 
The proportion, however, of strict Romanists is not so 
great as formerly, and to-morrow, they say, when 
Lent begins, there will be an end of the trade in 
masks ; yet the butchers will sell nearly as much 
meat as ever. During the Carnival, the greater 
part of the French population keep open house, espe- 
cially in the country. 



114 CATHOLIC CATHEDRAL. [CHAP. XXVII. 



CHAP. XXVII. 

Catholic Cathedral, New Orleans. French Opera. Creole 
Ladies. Quadroons. Marriage of Whites with Quadroons. 

St. Charles Theatre. English Pronunciation. Duellisfs 
Grave. Ladies' Ordinary. Procession of Fire Companies- 

Boasted Salubrity of New Orleans. Goods selling at 
Northern Prices. Mr. Wilde. Roman Law. Shifting of 
Capital to Baton Rouge. Debates in Houses of Legislature. 
Convention and Revision of the Laws. Policy of Periodical 
State Conventions. Judges cashiered. Limitation of their 
Term of Office. 

New Orleans, February, 1846. WALKING first over 
the most ancient part of the city, called the First 
Municipality, we entered the Place d'Armes, and 
saw on one side of the square the old Spanish 
Government House, and opposite to it the Cathedral, 
or principal Catholic church, both in an antique style 
of architecture, and therefore strikingly unlike any 
thing we had seen for many months. Entering the 
church, which is always open, we found persons on 
their knees, as in Catholic countries, although it was 
not Sunday, and an extremely handsome quadroon 
woman coming out. 

In the evening we went to the French Opera, and 
were much pleased with the performance, the orchestra 
being the best in America. The audience were very 
quiet and orderly, which is said not to be always 



CHAP. XXVIL] CKEOLE LADIES. 115. 

the case in some theatres here. The French Creole 
ladies, many of them descended from Norman ances- 
tors, and of pure unmixed blood, are very handsome. 
They were attired in Parisian fashion, not over dressed, 
usually not so thin as the generality of American 
women ; their luxuriant hair tastefully arranged, 
fastened with ornamental pins, and adorned simply 
with a coloured riband or a single flower. My wife 
learnt from one of them afterwards, that they usually 
pay, by the month, a quadroon female hairdresser, a 
refinement in which the richest ladies in Boston 
would not think of indulging. The word Creole is 
used in Louisiana to express a native-born 'Ame- 
rican, whether black or white, descended from old 
world parents, for they would not call the abo- 
riginal Indians, Creoles. It never means persons of 
mixed breed ; and the French or Spanish Creoles 
here would shrink as much as a New Englander 
from intermarriage with one tainted, in the slightest 
degree, with African blood. The frequent alliances 
of the Creoles, or Louisianians, of French extraction 
with lawyers and merchants from the Northern States, 
help to cement the ties which are every day binding 
more firmly together the distant parts of the Union. 
Both races may be improved by such connection, for 
the manners of the Creole ladies are, for the most 
part, more refined ; and many a Louisianian might 
justly have felt indignant if he could have overheard 
a conceited young bachelor from the North telling 
me " how much they were preferred by the fair sex 
to the hard-drinking, gambling, horse-racing, cock- 
fighting, and tobacco-chewing Southerners." If the 



.116 QUADROONS. [CHAP. XXVII. 

Creoles have less depth of character, and are less 
striving and ambitious than the New Englanders, it 
must be no slight source of happiness to the former 
to be so content with present advantages. They 
seem to feel, far more than the Anglo-Saxons, that 
if riches be worth the winning, they are also worth 
enjoying. 

The quadroons, or the offspring of the whites and 
mulattos, sat in an upper tier of boxes appropriated 
to them. When they are rich, they hold a peculiar 
and very equivocal position in society. As children, 
they have often been sent to Paris for their edu- 
cation, and, being as capable of improvement as any 
whites, .return with refined manners, and not unfre- 
quently with more cultivated minds than the ma- 
jority of those from whose society they are shut out. 
By the tyranny of caste they are driven, therefore, 
to form among themselves a select and exclusive set. 
Among other stories illustrating their social relation 
to the whites, we were told that a young man of the 
dominant race fell in love with a beautiful quadroon 
girl, who was so light-coloured as to be scarcely dis- 
tinguishable from one of pure breed. He found 
that, in order to render the marriage legal, he was 
required to swear that he himself had negro blood 
in his veins, and, that he might conscientiously take 
the oath, he let some of the blood of his betrothed 
into his veins with a lancet. The romance of this 
tale was however greatly diminished, although I fear 
that my inclination to believe in its truth was 
equally enhanced, when the additional circumstance 
was related, that the young lady was rich. 



CHAP. XXVII.] ST. CHARLES THEATRE. 117 

Some part of the feeling prevailing in New 
England, in regard to the immorality of New Or- 
leans, may be set down to the fact of their theatres 
being open every Sunday evening, which is no indi- 
cation whatever of a disregard of religion on the 
part of the Catholics. The latter might, with as 
much reason, reflect on the Protestants for not keep- 
ing the doors of their churches open on week-days. 
But as a great number of the young mercantile men 
who sojourn here are from the North, and separated 
from their families, they are naturally tempted to 
frequent the theatres on Sundays ; and if they do so 
with a sense that they are violating propriety, or 
acting against what in their consciences they think 
right, the effect must be unfavourable to their moral 
character. 

During our stay here we passed a delightful even- 
ing in the St. Charles theatre, seeing Mr. and Mrs. 
Kean in the " Gamester" and " The Follies of a 
Night." Her acting of Mrs. Beverley was perfec- 
tion ; every tone and gesture full of feeling, and 
always lady-like, never overwrought in the most 
passionate parts. Charles Kean's acting, especially 
in Richard, has been eminently successful during his 
present tour in the United States. 

While at New Orleans, Mrs. Kean told my wife 
she had been complimented on speaking English so 
well ; and some wonder had been expressed that she 
never omitted or misplaced her h's. In like manner, 
during our tour in New England, some of the 
natives, on learning that we habitually resided in 
London, exclaimed that they had never heard us 



118 ENGLISH PRONUNCIATION. [CHAP. XXVII. 

confound our v's and w's. " The Pickwick Papers " 
have been so universally read in this country, that 
it is natural the Americans should imagine Sam 
Weller's pronunciation to be a type of that usually 
spoken in the old country, at least in and about the 
metropolis. In their turn, the English retaliate amply 
on American travellers in the British Isles : " You 
don't mean to say you are an American ? Is it pos- 
sible ? I should never have discovered it, you speak 
English so well ! " " Did you suppose that we had 
adopted some one of the Indian languages ?" "I 
really never thought about it ; but it is wonderful to 
hear you talk like us ! " 

Looking into the shop-windows in New Orleans, 
we see much which reminds us of Paris, and abund- 
ance of articles manufactured in the Northern States, 
but very few things characteristic of Louisiana. 
Among the latter I remarked, at a jeweller's, many 
alligators' teeth polished and as white as ivory, and 
set in silver for infants to wear round their necks to 
rub against their gums when cutting their teeth, in 
the same way as they use a coral in England. 

The tombs in the cemeteries on the outskirts of 
the town are raised from the ground, in order that 
they may be above the swamps, and the coffins are 
placed in bins like those of a cellar. The water is seen 
standing on the soil at a lower level in many places ; 
there are often flowers and shrubs round the tombs, 
by the side of walks made of shells of the Gna- 
thodon. Over the grave of one recently killed in a 
duel was a tablet, with the inscription " Mort, 
victime de 1'honneur ! " Should any one propose to 



CHAP, xxvii.] LADIES' ORDJNAKY. 119 

set up a similar tribute to the memory of a duellist 
at Mount Auburn, near Boston, a sensation would 
be created which would manifest how widely dif- 
ferent is the state of public opinion in New England 
from that in the " First Municipality." 

Among the signs of the tacit recognition of an 
aristocracy in the large cities, is the manner in which 
persons of the richer and more refined classes asso- 
ciate together in the large hotels. There is one 
public table frequented by bachelors, commercial tra- 
vellers, and gentlemen not accompanied by their 
wives and families, and a more expensive one, called 
the Ladies' Ordinary, at which ladies, their husbands, 
and gentlemen whom they invite, have their meals. 
Some persons who occupy a marked position in so- 
ciety, such as our friend the ex-senator, Mr. Wilde, 
often obtain leave by favour to frequent this ordi- 
nary ; but the keepers of the hotels grant or decline 
the privilege, as they may think proper. 

A few days after the Carnival we had another 
opportunity of seeing a grand procession of the na- 
tives, without masks. The corps of all the different 
companies of firemen turned out in their uniform, 
drawing their engines dressed up with flowers, ri- 
bands, and flags, and I never saw a finer set of young 
men. We could not help contrasting their healthy 
looks with the pale, sickly countenances of "the 
crackers," in the pine- woods of Georgia and Alabama, 
where we had been spending so many weeks. These 
men were almost all of them Creoles, and thoroughly 
acclimatised ; and I soon found that if I wished to 
ingratiate myself with natives or permanent settlers 



120 SALUBRITY OF NEW ORLEANS. [CHAP. XXVII. 

in this city, the less surprise I expressed at the 
robust aspect of these young Creoles the better. 
The late Mr. Sydney Smith advised an English 
friend who was going to reside some years in Edin- 
burgh to praise the climate : ( f When you arrive 
there it may rain, snow, or blow for many days, and 
they will assure you they never knew such a season 
before. If you would be popular, declare you think 
it the most delightful climate in the world." When 
I first heard New Orleans commended for its salu- 
brity, I could scarcely believe that my companions 
were in earnest, till a physician put into my hands 
a statistical table, recently published in a medical 
magazine, proving that in the year 1845 the mor- 
tality in the metropolis of Louisiana was 1-850, 
whereas that of Boston was 2-250, or, in other 
words, while the capital of Massachusetts lost 1 
out of 44 inhabitants, New Orleans lost only 1 in 54 ; 
"yet the year 1845," said he, " was one of great heat, 
and when a wider area than usual was flooded by 
the river, and exposed to evaporation under a hot 
sun." 

It appears that when New Orleans is empty in the 
summer in other words, when all the strangers, 
about 40,000 in number, go into the country, and 
many of them to the North, fearing the yellow fever, 
the city still contains between 80,000 and 100,000 
inhabitants, who never suffer from the dreaded dis- 
ease, whether they be of European or African origin. 
If, therefore, it be fair to measure the salubrity of 
a district by its adaptation to the constitutions of 
natives rather than foreigners, the claim set up for 



CHAP. XXVII.] GOODS AT NORTHERN PRICES. 121 

superior healthiness may be less preposterous than at 
first it sounded to my ears. I asked an Irishman if 
the summer heat was intolerable. " You would have 
something else to think of in the hot months," said 
he, " for there is one set of musquitos who sting 
you all day, and when they go in towards dusk, 
another kind comes out and bites you all night." 

The desertion of the city for five months by so 
many of the richer residents, causes the hotels, and 
the prices of almost every article in shops, to be very 
dear during the remainder of the year. " Goods 
selling at northern prices" is a common form of ad- 
vertisement, showing how high is the usual cost of 
all things in this city. The Irish servants in the 
hotel assure us that they cannot save, in spite of their 
high wages, for, whatever money they put by soon 
goes to pay the doctor's bill, during attacks of chill 
and fever. 

Hearing that a Guide-book of New Orleans had 
been published, we wished to purchase a copy, al- 
though it was of somewhat ancient date for a city of 
rapid growth. The bookseller said that we must 
wait till he received some more copies from New 
York, for it appears that the printing even of books 
of local interest is done by presses 2000 miles distant. 
Their law reports are not printed here, and there is 
only one newspaper in the First Municipality, which 
I was told as very characteristic of the French race ; 
for, in the Second Municipality, although so much 
newer, the Anglo-Americans have, during the last ten 
years, started ten newspapers. 

We were very fortunate in finding our old friend, 

VOL. II. G 



122 ROMAN LAW. [CHAP. XXVII. 

Mr. Richard Henry Wilde, residing in the same 
hotel, for he had lately established himself in New 
Orleans, and was practising in the courts of civil 
law with success. The Roman law, originally in- 
troduced into the courts here by the first settlers, 
was afterwards modified by the French, and assimi- 
lated to the Code Napoleon, and finally, by modern 
innovations, brought more and more into accordance 
with the common law of England. Texas, in her 
new constitution, and even some of the older States, 
those of New England not excepted, have borrowed 
several improvements from the Roman law. Among 
these is the securing to married women rights in 
property, real and personal, so as to protect them 
from the debts of their husbands, and enable them 
to dispose of their own property. 

Mr. Wilde took me to the Houses of the Legisla- 
ture, where a discussion was going on as to the pro- 
priety of changing the seat of government from New 
Orleans to some other place in Louisiana, for it had 
been determined, though by a majority of one only, 
in a convention appointed for that purpose, that they 
should go somewhere else, to a place at least sixty 
miles distant from the metropolis. I remarked, that 
the accessibility of New Orleans was so great, and 
so many must be drawn to it by business, that the 
determination to seek out a new site for a capital, 
seemed to me incomprehensible. " You will wonder 
still more," he replied, " when I tell you, that when 
the convention had been some time at Baton Rouge to 
frame the new constitution, they thought it advisable 
to adjourn to New Orleans, where they could consult 



CHAP. XXVIL] HOUSES OF LEGISLATURE. 123 

with lawyers who were attending the courts, and with 
the principal merchants, and where they might have 
access to good libraries, and be in daily communica- 
tion by steam with all parts of the State. In short, 
they found that for the faithful discharge of their 
task, they stood in need of a great variety of informa- 
tion which they could obtain nowhere so readily as 
in the metropolis. Yet it seems never to have struck 
them that our future law-makers might, with equal 
profit to the State, derive knowledge from the same 
sources." 

In the House of Eepresentatives, English is spoken 
exclusively, but in the Senate many were addressing 
the House in French, and when they sat down an 
interpreter rose and repeated the whole speech over 
again in English. An orator was on his legs, main- 
taining that Baton Rouge had the best claims to be- 
come the future capital, a proposition soon afterwards 
adopted by the majority. Another contended that 
Donaldsonville ought to be the place, as it would suit 
the convenience of 26,000 white male citizens, whilst 
Baton Rouge would only favour the interest of 12,000. 
This line of argument seemed to me to contain in it 
an implied censure on the abandonment of New 
Orleans, but that was no longer an open question. 
When I afterwards saw the insignificant village of 
Donaldsonville, I could not help being diverted at 
the recollection of the inflated terms in which its fu- 
ture prospects had been dwelt upon. The speaker 
said, " He liked to lift the veil off the face of futurity 
and contemplate the gigantic strides to wealth, popu- 
lation, and power, which that city was destined to 

G 2 



124 CHANGING SITE OF CAPITAL. [CHAP, XX Ml. 

make : he liked to behold it in imagination, as it will 
be in reality, built up from the bank of the river to 
the margin of the lake, sustaining and supporting a 
happy, industrious, and enterprising population of 
millions, and being at the same time the great em- 
porium of the trade and commerce of the world." 

Although I talked much with Louisianians of dif- 
ferent classes in society, as to their reasons for 
changing the site of the capital, I never could satisfy 
myself that I had fathomed the truth, and suspect 
that a spirit of envy and antagonism of country 
against town lies more at the bottom of the measure 
than they were willing to confess, aggravated, per- 
haps, in this case, by the rivalry of two races. No 
one pretended that they wished to retreat to a 
village, from fear that the populace, or mob, of New 
Orleans might control the free action of the repre- 
sentative body. Some told me, that as their mem- 
bers' received pay, they were desirous of taking away 
from them all temptations to protract the session, 
which the charms of a luxurious metropolis afforded. 
They also affirmed that, by living in so dear a place, 
their representatives acquired extravagant notions in 
regard to the expenditure of public money, and that 
they were exposed to the influence of rich merchants 
and capitalists, who gave them good dinners, and 
brought them round to their opinions. 

I asked if a convention for remodelling the con- 
stitution had been called for. My informants were 
generally disposed to think that the time had arrived 
when such a re-cast of the old system had become 
unavoidable. The recurrence, they said, of such 



UTOLJ 









126 TERM OF OFFICE. [CHAP. XXVII. 

tiring pensions, we hold, with your Jeremy Ben- 
tham, that no man can acquire a vested right in a 
public injury. Men are apt, when they have re- 
tained possession of an office for a great part of their 
lives, to think they own it." " But what is to be- 
come of the judges," said I, " who are thus cast off 
without pensions?" "Old Judge A ," he re- 
plied, " owns a plantation, and will go and farm it. 

Judge B will probably get a professor's chair in 

the new Law University ; " and so he went on, pro- 
viding for all of them. " In future," he continued, 
" our judges are to be appointed by the Governor 
and Senate, with good salaries, for eight years ; those 
first named being for two, four, six, and eight years, 
so that they may go out in rotation ; but members 
of the Legislature cannot be raised to the bench, as in 
Great Britain." I objected, that such a system 
might render a judge who desired to be re-elected 
subservient to the party in power, or at least open 
to such an imputation. " No doubt," he rejoined ; 
<f as in the case of your judges, who may be pro- 
moted to higher posts on the bench. As to the 
corrupting influence of their dependance on a legis- 
lature chosen by a widely-extended suffrage, many 
of your mayors and aldermen are elected for short 
terms, and exercise judicial functions in England." 



CHAP. XXVIIL] YELLOW FEVER. 127 



CHAP. XXVIIL 

Negroes not Attacked by Yellow Fever. History of Mr. Wilde's 
Poem. The Market, New Orleans. Motley Character of 
Population. Levee and Steamers. First Sight of Mississippi 
River. View from the Cupola of the St. Charles. Site of 
New Orleans. Excursion to Lake Pontchartrain. Shell 
Road. Heaps of Gnathodon. Excavation for Gas- Works. 
Buried Upright Trees. Pere Antoine's Date-palm. 

BEFOKE we left - New Orleans Mr. Wilde received a 
message from his negroes, whom he had left behind 
at Augusta, in Georgia, entreating him to send for 
them. They had felt, it seems, somewhat hurt and 
slighted at not having been sooner permitted to join 
him. He told us that he was only waiting for a 
favourable season to transplant them, for he feared 
that men of colour, when they had been acclimatised 
for several generations in so cool a country as the 
upper parts of Alabama and Georgia, might run 
great risk of the yellow fever, although the medical 
men here assured him that a slight admixture of 
negro blood sufficed to make them proof against this 
scourge. 

" No one," he said, " feels safe here, who has not 
survived an attack of the fever, or escaped unharmed 
while it has been raging." He mentioned the belief 
of some theorists, that the complaint was caused by 
invisible animalcules, a notion agreeing singularly 

G 4 



128 MR. WILDE'S POEM. [CHAP, xxvill. 

with that of many Komans in regard to the malaria 
of Italy. 

The year following this conversation, our excellent 
friend was himself carried off by this fatal disease. 
He is well known to the literary world as the author 
of a work on the " Love and Madness of Tasso," 
published in 1842, and perhaps still more generally 
by some beautiful lines, beginning " My life is like 
the summer rose," which are usually supposed to have 
derived their tone of touching melancholy, from his 
grief at the sudden death of a brother, and soon after 
of a mother, who never recovered the shock of her 
son's death. As there had been so much controversy 
about this short poem, we asked Mr. Wilde to relate 
to us its true history, which is curious. He had 
been one of a party at Savannah, when the question 
was raised whether a certain professor of the Univer- 
sity of Georgia understood Greek ; on which one of 
his companions undertook to translate Mr. Wilde's 
verses, called " The Complaint of the Captive," into 
Greek prose, so arranged as to appear like verse, and 
then see if he could pass it off upon the Professor as 
a fragment of Alcaeus. The trick succeeded, al- 
though the Professor said that not having the works 
of Alcaeus at hand, he could not feel sure that the poem 
was really his. It was then sent, without the know- 
ledge of Mr. Wilde and his friends, to a periodical at 
New York, and published as a fragment from Alcseus, 
and the Senator for Georgia was vehemently attacked 
by his political opponents, for having passed off a 
translation from the Greek as an original composition 
of his own. 



CHAP. XXVIII.] MR. WILDE'S POEM. 129 

Soon after this affair, Captain Basil Hall men- 
tioned in his " Schloss Hainfeld" (chap, x.), that the 
Countess Purgstall had read the lines to him, and 
would not tell him who was the author, but he had 
little doubt that she had written them herself. The 
verses had become so popular that they were set to 
music, and the name of Tampa, a desolate sea-beach 
on the coast of Florida, was changed into Tempe, 
the loveliest of the wooded valleys of Greece, in the 
concluding stanza : 

" My life is like the prints which feet 

Have left on Tampa's desert strand ; 
Soon as the rising tide shall beat, 

All trace will vanish from the sand. 
Yet, as if grieving to efface 
All vestige of the human race, 
On that lone shore loud moans the sea, 
But none, alas ! shall mourn for me ! " 

In the Countess's version Zara had been substi- 
tuted for Tampa. 

During our stay in New Orleans, Mr. Wilde in- 
troduced us to his friend Mr. Clay, the Whig candi- 
date in the late presidential election, and I was glad 
of the opportunity of conversing with this distin- 
guished statesman. In the principal episcopal church 
we were very fortunate in hearing Dr. Hawkes 
preach, and thought the matter and manner of his 
discourse deserving of his high reputation for pulpit 
eloquence. 

One morning we rose early to visit the market of 
the First Municipality, and found the air on the 

G 5 



130 THE MARKET, NEW ORLEANS. [CHAP. XXVIII. 

bank of the Mississippi filled with mist as dense as a 
London fog, but of a pure white instead of yellow 
colour. Through this atmosphere the innumerable 
masts of the ships alongside the wharf, were dimly 
seen. Among other fruits in the market we ob- 
served abundance of bananas, and good pine -apples, 
for 25 cents (or a shilling) each, from the West In- 
dies. There were stalls where hot coffee was selling 
in white china cups, reminding us of Paris. Among 
other articles exposed for sale, were brooms made of 
palmetto leaves, and waggon-loads of the dried Span- 
ish moss, or Tillandsia. The quantity of this plant 
hanging from the trees in the swamps surrounding 
New Orleans, and everywhere in the delta of the 
Mississippi, might suffice to stuff all the mattrasses 
in the world. The Indians formerly used it for ano- 
ther purpose to give porosity or lightness to their 
building materials. When at Natchez, Dr. Dicke- 
son showed me some bricks dug out of an old 
Indian mound, in which the tough woody fibre of 
the Tillandsia was still preserved. When passing 
through the stalls, we were surrounded by a popu- 
lation of negroes, mulattos, and quadroons, some 
talking French, others a patois of Spanish and 
French, others a mixture of French and English, or 
English translated from French, and with the French 
accent. They seemed very merry, especially those 
who were jet black. Some of the Creoles also, both 
of French and Spanish extraction, like many natives 
of the south of Europe, were very dark. 

Amidst this motley group, sprung from so many 
races, we encountered a young man and woman, arm- 



CHAP. XXVIII.] LEVEE AND STEAMERS. 131 

in-arm, of fair complexion, evidently Anglo-Saxon, 
and who looked as if they had recently come from the 
North. The Indians, Spaniards, and French standing 
round them, seemed as if placed there to remind us 
of the successive races whose power in Louisiana had 
passed away, while this fair couple were the repre- 
sentatives of a people whose dominion carries the 
imagination far into the future. However much 
the moralist may satirise the spirit of conquest, or 
the foreigner laugh at some vain-glorious boasting 
about " our destiny," none can doubt that from this 
stock is to spring the people who will supersede every 
other in the northern, if not also in the southern 
continent of America : 

" Immota manebunt 

Fata tibi ..... 
Romanes rerum dominos." 

Soon after our arrival we walked to the levee, or 
raised bank of the Mississippi, and, ascending to the 
top of the high roof of a large steamer, looked down 
upon the yellow muddy stream, not much broader 
than the Thames at London. At first I was disap- 
pointed that the "Father of Waters" did not present 
a more imposing aspect; but when I had studied 
and contemplated the Mississippi for many weeks, it 
left on my mind an impression of grandeur and vast- 
ness far greater than I had conceived before seeing 
it. We counted thirty-four large steam-ships lying 
at the wharf, each with their double chimneys, and 
some of truly magnificent dimensions. The vessel 
we had chanced to enter, had her steam up and was 

G 6 



132 VIEW OF CITY. [CHAP. XXVIII. 

bound for St. Louis, and we were informed that she 
would convey us to that city, a distance of 1100 
miles in five days, against the current, for eighteen 
dollars, or 47., board included. 

We next went, for the sake of obtaining a general 
view of the city and its environs, to the top of the 
cupola of the St. Charles Hotel, the most conspi- 
cuous building in New Orleans, finished in 1836, 
the lofty dome of which is of a beautiful form. 
Within the memory of persons now living, there 
were to be seen on the site of this massive edifice, 
ducks and other water birds, swimming about in 
pools of water, in a morass. The architect began 
the foundation by placing horizontally on the mud 
a layer of broad planks 21 inches thick, in spite of 
which, the heavy building has sunk slightly in some 
places, but apparently without sustaining material 
injury. 

If a traveller has expected, on first obtaining an 
extensive view of the environs of this city, to see an 
unsightly swamp, with scarcely any objects to relieve 
the monotony of the flat plain save the winding river 
and a few lakes, he will be agreeably disappointed. 
He will admire many a villa and garden in the 
suburbs, and in the uncultivated space beyond the 
effect of uneven and undulating ground is produced 
by the magnificent growth of cypress and other 
swamp timber, which have converted what would 
otherwise have formed the lowest points in the land- 
scape into the appearance of wooded eminences. 
From the gallery of the cupola we saw the well- 
proportioned, massive square tower of St. Patrick's 



CHAP. XX VIII.] SITE OF NEW ORLEANS. 133 

Church, recently built for the Irish Catholics, the 
dome of the St. Louis Hotel, and immediately below 
us that fine bend of the Mississippi, where we had 
just counted the steamers at the wharf. Here, in a 
convex curve of the bank, there has been a constant 
gain of land, so that in the last twenty-five years no 
less than three streets have been erected, one beyond 
the other, and all within the line of several large 
posts of cedar, to which boats were formerly at- 
tached. New Orleans was called the Crescent City, 
because the First Municipality was built along this 
concave bend of the Mississippi. The river in this 
part of its course varies in breadth from a mile to 
three-quarters of a mile, and below the city sweeps 
round a curve for eighteen miles, and then returns 
again to a point within five or six miles of that from 
which it had set out. Some engineers are of opinion 
that as the isthmus thus formed is only occupied by 
a low marsh, the current will in time cut through 
it, in which case the First Municipality will be 
deserted by the main channel. Even should this 
happen, the prosperity of a city which extends con- 
tinuously for more than six miles along the river 
would not be materially affected, for its site has been 
admirably chosen, although originally determined in 
some degree by chance. The French began their 
settlements on Lake Pontchartrain because they 
found there an easy communication with the Gulf 
of Mexico. But they fixed the site of their town 
on that part of the great river which was nearest to 
the lagoon, so as to command, by this means, the 
navigation of the interior country. 



134 SHELL EOAD. [CHAP. XXVIII. 

March 5. 1846. From New Orleans I made a 
short excursion with Dr. Carpenter and Dr. M'Cor- 
mac to Lake Pontchartrain, six miles to the north- 
ward. We went first along the " shell road " by the 
Bayou St. John's, and then returned by the canal. 
The shell road, so called from the materials used in 
its construction, namely, the valves of the Gnathodon 
cuneatus, before mentioned, is of a dazzling white 
colour, and in the bright sunshine formed a strong 
contrast with the vegetation of the adjoining swamps. 
Yet the verdure of the tall cypresses is somewhat 
dimmed by the sombre colour of the grey Spanish 
moss hanging everywhere from its boughs like dra- 
pery. The rich clusters of scarlet and purplish fruit 
of the red maple (Acer Drummondii) were very con- 
spicuous, and the willows have just unfolded their 
apple-green leaves. The swamp palmetto (Chamce- 
rops adansonia) raises its fan-shaped leaves, ten feet 
high, although without any main trunk, like the sea- 
island palmetto before described. Several of them 
are surmounted by spikes bearing seeds. Among 
the spring flowers we gathered violets ( Viola cucul- 
lata\ the elegant Houstonia serpyllifolia, which we 
had first seen at Claiborne, and a white bramble 
(Rubus trivialis), the odour of which resembles that 
of our primrose. The common white clover, also, 
is most abundant here, as on the banks of the Mis- 
sissippi, below New Orleans ; yet it is not a native of 
Louisiana, and some botanists doubt whether any 
of the European species now growing wild in this 
State are indigenous. 

Lake Pontchartrain is about fifteen feet below 



CHAP. XXVIII.] HEAPS OF GNATHODON. 135 

high water, and two feet below the lowest water of 
the Mississippi. It is said to have become sensibly 
shallower in the last forty years, its depth being now 
fourteen or fifteen feet only, for it receives annual 
supplies of mud from the Mississippi, poured into it 
by one of its mouths, called the Iberville river. 

The south-east wind sometimes drives the salt 
water into the great lagoon, and raises its level from 
five to ten feet. On a mud-bank near the shore 
I observed the living Gnaihodon, accompanied by a 
modiola (Dreissena ? ), and -there was a small bank 
of dead shells on the southern borders of the lake, 
which may have been thrown up by the waves in a 
storm, the valves of most of them being separate. 
I learnt that the road materials before spoken of 
were procured from the east end, where there is an 
enormous mound of dead shells, a mile long, fifteen 
feet high, and from twenty to sixty yards broad. 
Dr. Riddell, Director of the Mint at New Orleans, 
estimates the height of some of these shell-banks 
north of the lake, at twenty feet above its level ; yet 
he thinks they may have been washed up by the 
waves during storms. I suspect, however, that some 
change in the relative level of land and sea has taken 
place since their accumulation.' Dr. M'Cormac in- 
formed me that he had observed heaps of these same 
shells recently cast up along the margin of the bay 
called the Sabine Lake, where the waters of the 
delta are brackish. 

Returning to the bayou, we passed a splendid 
grove of live oaks on the Metairie ridge, supposed 
by some to be an old bank of the Mississippi. These 



136 EXCAVATION FOE GAS-WORKS. [CHAP. XXVIII. 

bayous, which traverse the delta and alluvial plain 
of the Mississippi in every direction, are some of 
them ancient arms of the great river, and others parts 
of its main channel which have been deserted. They 
are at a lower level than the present bed of the 
river, and convey the surface-waters to the sea from 
that part of the land which the Mississippi is inca- 
pable of draining. The bayous are sometimes stag- 
nant, and sometimes they flow in one direction when 
they convey the surplus waters of the Mississippi 
to the swamps, and in an opposite direction at seasons 
when they drain the swamps. 

When we reached the canal which connects Lake 
Pontchartrain with New Orleans, we found its sur- 
face enlivened with the sails of vessels laden with 
merchandize. On the stern of one of these I read, 
in large letters, a favourite name here " The 
Democrat." Many features of the country re- 
minded me of Holland. About a mile from the city 
we passed a building where there is steam ma- 
chinery for pumping up water and draining the low 
lands. 

It is not easy for a geologist who wishes to study 
the modern deposits in the delta, to find any natural 
sections. I was therefore glad to learn that, in 
digging the foundations of the gas-works, an exca- 
vation had been made more than fifteen feet deep, 
and therefore considerably below the level of the 
Gulf, for the land at New Orleans is elevated only 
nine feet above the sea. The contractors had first 
hired Irishmen, with spades, to dig this pit; but 
finding that they had to cut through buried timber, 



CHAP. XXVIII.] BURIED UPKIGHT TKEE6. 137 

instead of soil, they were compelled to engage, in- 
stead, 150 well-practised axe-men from Kentucky. 
I am informed that the superintendant of the gas- 
works, Dr. Rogers, who is now absent in Cuba, 
endeavoured to estimate the minimum of time re- 
quired for the growth of the cypress and other trees, 
superimposed one upon the other, in an upright 
position, with their roots as they grew, and had 
come to the opinion, that eighteen centuries must 
have been required for the accumulation. At the 
time of my* visit the section was too obscure to 
enable me to verify or criticise these conclusions ; 
but Mr. Bringier, the State surveyor, told me, that 
when the great canal, before alluded to, was dug to 
the depth of nine feet from Lake Pontchartrain, 
they had cut through a cypress swamp which had 
evidently filled up gradually, for there were three 
tiers of the stumps of trees, some of them very old, 
ranged one above the other ; and some of the trunks 
must have rotted away to the level of the ground in 
the swamp before the upper ones grew over them. 
If it be true, as I suspect from these statements, 
that the stools of trees which grew in fresh water 
can be traced down to a level below the Gulf of 
Mexico, we must conclude that the land has sunk 
down vertically. Perhaps some part of this sub- 
sidence might arise from the gradual decay or com- 
pression of large masses of wood slowly changing into 
lignite, for carbonated hydrogen is said to be con- 
stantly given out from the soil here wherever such 
masses of vegetable matter are decomposing ; and 
during the excavation of these works much inflam- 






138 



DATE-PALM. 



[CHAP. XXVIII. 



mable gas was observed to escape. That such 
upright buried trees are not everywhere to be met 
with in this part of the delta, I ascertained from 
Mr. Bringier. At his house, in the suburbs of 
New Orleans, a well has been sunk to the depth of 
twenty-seven feet, and the strata passed through 
consisted of sandy clay, with only here and there 
some buried timber and roots. 

Walking through one of the streets of New 
Orleans, near the river, immediately north of the 
Catholic cathedral, I was surprised to see a fine date- 
palm, thirty feet high, growing in the open air. (See 
fig. 8.) 

Fig. 8. 




Pdre Antoine's Date-palm (Phcenix daetyliferd). 

Mr. Wilde told me, that in 1829, in the island of 



CHAP. XXVIIL] DATE-PALM. 139 

Anastatic, opposite St. Augustine, in Florida, he 
saw one still taller, probably brought there by the 
Spaniards, who have introduced them into the south 
of Spain from Africa. The tree is seventy or eighty 
years old, for Pere Antoine, a Roman Catholic priest, 
who died about twenty years ago, at the age of 
eighty, told Mr. Bringier that he planted it himself, 
when he was young. In his will he provided, that 
they who succeeded to this lot of ground should 
forfeit it if they cut down the palm. Wishing to 
know something of Pere Antoine's history, I asked 
a Catholic Creole, who had a great veneration for 
him, when he died. He said it could never be 
ascertained, because, after he became very emaciated, 
he walked the streets like a mummy, and gradually 
dried up, ceasing at last to move ; but his flesh 
never decayed, or emitted any disagreeable odour. 

If the people here wish to adorn their metropolis 
with a striking ornament, such as the northern cities 
can never emulate, let them plant in one of their 
public squares an avenue of these date-palms. 



140 MOUTHS OF MISSISSIPPI. [CHAP. XXIX. 



CHAP. XXIX. 

Excursion from New Orleans to the Mouths of the River. 
Steam-Boat Accidents. River Fogs. Successive Growths 
of Willow on River Bank. Pilot-Station of the Balize. 
Lighthouse destroyed by Hurricane. Reeds, Shells, and Birds 
on Mud-Banks. Drift- Wood. Difficulty of estimating the 
annual Increase of Delta. Action of Tides and Currents. 
Tendency in the old Soundings to be restored. Changes of 
Mouths in a Century inconsiderable. Return to New Orleans. 
Battle- Ground. Sugar-Mill. Contrast of French and 
Anglo-American Races. Causes of Difference. State and 
Progress of Negroes in Louisiana. 

Feb. 28. 1846. BEFOKE my arrival at New Or- 
leans, I had resolved to visit the mouths of the Mis- 
sissippi, and see the banks of sand, mud, and drift 
timber, recently formed there during the annual 
inundations. Dr. William Carpenter, although in 
full practice as a physician, kindly offered to accom- 
pany me, and his knowledge of botany and geology, 
as well as his amiable manners, made him a most 
useful and agreeable companion.* 

I had heard much of the dangers of the Missis- 
sippi, and even before I left New England, some of 
my friends, partly in jest, and partly for the sake of 

* This excellent naturalist, I regret to say, died soon after- 
wards, in the prime of life, at New Orleans, in 1848. 



CHAP. XXIX.] STEAM-BOAT ACCIDENTS. 141 

inspiring me with due caution, in the choice of vessels 
and captains, had told me endless stories of the risks 
we should run. One of them presented to me a 
newspaper, containing a formidable array of last 
year's casualties. Fifty vessels had been snagged, 
twenty-seven sunk, sixteen had burst their boilers, 
fifteen had been run into by other vessels, thirteen 
destroyed by fire, ten wrecked, and seven cut through 
by ice. This enumeration was followed by an ac- 
count of the number of persons drowned or injured. 
Another friend called my attention to a form of ad- 
vertisement, not uncommon in the St. Louis papers, 
headed thus, " A fine opportunity of going below." 
This, he explained, " does not mean going to the bottom, 
as you might naturally conclude (although this is by 
no means an improbable result of your voyage), but 
it merely signifies * going down the river/ " Ano- 
ther offered this piece of advice, " When you are 
racing with an opposition steam-boat, or chasing her, 
and the other passengers are cheering the captain, 
who is sitting on the safety valve to keep it down 
with his weight, go as far as you can from the engine, 
and lose no time, especially if you hear the captain 
exclaim, * Fire up boys, put on the resin ! ' Should 
a servant call out, ' Those gentlemen who have not 
paid their passage will please to go to the ladies' 
cabin,' obey the summons without a moment's delay, 
for then an explosion may be apprehended." " Why 
to the ladies' cabin ? " said I. " Because it is the safe 
end of the boat, and they are getting anxious for the 
personal security of those who have not yet paid 
their dollars, being, of course, indifferent about the 



142 STEAM-BOAT ACCIDENTS. [CHAP. XXIX. 

rest. Therefore never pay in advance, for should 
you fall overboard during a race, and the watch cries 
out to the captain, ' A passenger overboard,' he will 
ask, ' Has he paid his passage ? ' and if he receives 
an answer in the affirmative, he will call out, ' Go 
ahead!'" 

I shall explain in the sequel why the danger of 
accidents, in the present state of the navigation, is 
by no means so great as statistical tables make it 
appear at a distance ; but certainly my first day's 
experience was not of a character to dispose me to 
regard the warnings I had received as idle or un- 
called for. After we had been seated for half an 
hour on the deck of the " Wave" steamer, Dr. Carpen- 
ter was recommended by a friend to go by preference 
in a rival boat, just ready to start for the Balize, 
which he said was safer. We accordingly went into 
her, and she sailed first. Eight hours afterwards, 
while we were waiting, as I thought, an unconscion- 
able time, at a landing, while a Creole proprietor, who 
was by no means inclined to be in a hurry, was embark- 
ing himself and some black servants, we saw the rival 
steamer come up very slowly. No sooner had she 
joined us, than all her passengers poured into our 
steamer, and told us they had been in the greatest 
alarm, their steam-pipe having burst ; but, most pro- 
videntially, they had all escaped without serious 
injury. If I had not already sailed about 1500 
miles in Southern steam-boats, since leaving South 
Carolina, without a mischance, I might have looked 
on this adventure as very ominous. 

The greater part of New Orleans would be annually 



CHAP. XXIX.] RIVEE FOGS. 143 

overflowed by the river, but for the "levee," an artificial 
embankment, eight or nine feet high, which protects 
the city. This levee became less and less elevated 
as we descended the stream. We saw the buildings 
of several sugar plantations just behind it, at a short 
distance from the edge of the bank. When we had 
gone about twenty miles, below the bend called the 
English turn, I was struck with the resemblance of 
the Mississippi to the Savannah, Alabama, and Alata- 
maha rivers, where they flow through a broad allu- 
vial plain, with no bluffs in sight. The swamps on 
both sides, although several feet lower than the river- 
banks, have the aspect, as before stated, of wooded 
eminences. 

The distance from New Orleans to the great pilot- 
station at the mouth of the river, called the Balize, is 
about 80 miles by land, and 110 by water. We had 
been told we should reach our destination before 
night ; but we were scarcely half way, when we cast 
anchor in a dense fog, followed in the course of the 
night, by much lightning and rain. We found the 
temperature of the water to be 46 Fahrenheit, while 
that of the air had varied, in the course of twenty- 
four hours, from 50 to 75. This difference between 
the temperature of the water and air, often amount- 
ing to 30 Fahrenheit, gives rise to the fogs which 
prevail at this season. The river flowing from the 
north, where there is now much ice and snow, is 
always much colder, and I am informed by pilots, 
that as far as the Mississippi water can be traced, by 
its colour, into the Gulf, it is commonly covered, in 
the spring, with dense fog, while the atmosphere is 



144 RIVER FOGS. [CHAP. XXIX. 

clear on each side. These fogs are generated in the 
same manner as ordinary clouds, by the mixture of 
two currents of air of different degrees of tempera- 
ture. The river cools the air in contact with its 
surface, and this colder layer of air mingling with the 
warmer layer immediately over it, causes the fog to 
begin to form close to the water. Hence it is fre- 
quently confined to the bed of the river, not spread- 
ing at all over the banks. The upper surface is often 
as well defined as if it were a bed of liquid, instead 
of vapour, and the cabin, roof, and funnels of a 
steamer may be seen moving along perfectly unob- 
scured, while the hull and lower parts are as com- 
pletely hidden as if buried beneath the turbid water 
on which it floats. The pilot, too, from the upper 
deck, can often see the shore and landmarks with 
perfect clearness, and steer his vessel with safety, 
while the passengers on the cabin deck can see no- 
thing beyond the sides of the boat. The fogs form 
sometimes whatever be the quarter from which the 
wind blows, but are more frequent when it is from 
the south, as the air is then the warmest. Pieces of 
ice are rarely floated down below Natchez, 350 miles 
above the Balize ; but, in some seasons, they have 
been known to reach the Gulf itself. 

Next morning we weighed anchor, and passed Fort 
Jackson, formerly Fort St. Philip, thirty -three miles 
above the Balize. At several points, where we stopped 
for passengers, Dr. Carpenter and I landed. The wood 
consisted of live oaks bearing bunches of misletoe, 
cypress hung with Spanish moss, elms, alders, and the 
red maple ; also a species of myrica, twenty feet high, 



CHAP. XXIX.] PUMICE ON MISSISSIPPI. 145 

and numerous wild vines, and other climbers, on the 
trees. At Bayou Liere, there was a dense growth 
of a fan-palm ( Chamcerops adansonia), from eight to 
thirteen feet high, and a log-cabin thatched with its 
leaves, affording good shelter from the heaviest rain. 
On the ground were numerous land-crabs (Gelasi- 
mus), called here fiddlers, which ran into their holes 
as we approached, and a few small lizards, and a frog 
(Rana pipicus), which, in the night, had so shrill and 
clear a note, that we heard it two miles off. The 
spring is so backward that few flowers are in bloom, 
and we congratulated ourselves on escaping all an- 
noyance from musquitos. At the water's edge I 
picked up several nuts of the Gary a aquatica, and 
many pieces of pumice as large as apples, which 
must have come from the Rocky Mountains, and are 
interesting, as reminding one of the fact, that vol- 
canic regions are drained by the western tributaries 
of the Mississippi. But I could not find a single 
empty land-shell, or helix, such as the Rhine and 
many other rivers bring down, and am told that none 
are met with buried in the recent deposits of the 
delta. 

The storm of the preceding night had driven many 
sea-gulls up the river, which now followed our 
steamer, darting down to the water to snatch up 
pieces of apple or meat, or whatever we threw to 
them. After passing Fort Jackson, all trees disap- 
peared, except a few low willows. We then entered 
that long promontory, or tongue of land, if such it can 
be called, which consists simply of the broad river, 
flowing between narrow banks, protruded for so many 

VOL. II. H 



146 WILLOWS ON EIVER BANK. [CHAP. XXIX. 

miles into the Gulf of Mexico. Each bank, includ- 
ing the swamps behind it, are about 200 or 300 yards 
wide, covered with dead reeds, among which we saw 
many tall, white cranes feeding, as in a flooded mea- 
dow, and as conspicuous as sheep. The landscape on 
either side was precisely similar, and most singular, 
consisting of blue sky, below which were the dark- 
green waters of the Gulf, lighted up by a brilliant 
sun ; then the narrow band of swamp, covered with 
dead reeds, and, in the foreground, a row of pale-green 
willows, scarcely reflected in the yellow turbid water 
of the river. Occasionally large merchant vessels, 
some three-masted, were towed up by steam- tugs, 
through the slack water, near the bank. How the 
river can thus go to sea as it were, and yet continue 
for centuries to preserve the same channel, in spite 
of storms and hurricanes, which have more than once 
in the last hundred years caused the waters of the 
Gulf to break over its banks, seems, at first, incom- 
prehensible, till we remember that we have here a 
powerful body of fresh water flowing in a valley 
more than a hundred feet deep, with vast mounds of 
mud and sand on each side, and that the sea imme- 
diately adjoining is comparatively shallow. 

The growth of willows on that side of the stream 
where the land is gaining on the water, is often so 
formal and regular, that they look like an artificial 
plantation. In the front row are young saplings just 
rising out of the ground, which is formed of silt, 
thrown down within the last two or three years. 
Behind them is an older growth from four to eight feet 
high. Still farther back is seen a third row twenty- 
five feet high, and sometimes in this manner five 



CHAP. XXIX.] THE BALIZE. 147 

tiers, each overtopping the other, showing the gradual 
formation of the bank, which inclines upwards, be- 
cause the soil first deposited has been continually 
raised during annual floods. While a gain of land is 
thus taking place on one side, the river is "cutting into 
and undermining the opposite bank, often at the rate 
of ten feet or more in a year. The most common 
willow is Salix niyra, but Dr. Carpenter tells me 
there is a rarer species (Salix longifolia) intermixed. 
I inquired how it happened that none of these trees 
were old, although some part of the banks on which 
they grew are known to be of considerable antiquity. 
My companion said, " that in marshy places the Salix 
nigra is not a long-lived tree, rarely lasting more 
than twenty-five or thirty years." 

At length, as we approached the Balize, even these 
willows ceased to adorn the margin of the river, 
which was then simply bounded by mounds of bare 
sand. Balize means beacon in Spanish. It ap- 
pears, that in 1744, the main passage or entrance of 
the river was at three small islands, which then ex- 
isted where this pilot station now stands. It con- 
tinued to be the principal mouth of the Mississippi 
for about a quarter of a century later. The present 
village, called the Balize, has a population of more 
than 450 souls, among whom there are fifty regularly 
appointed pilots, and many more who are aspirants 
to that office. The houses are built on piles driven 
into the mud-banks, and the greater part of them 
moored, like ships, to strong anchors, whenever a 
hurricane is apprehended. They have no fear of the 
river, which scarcely rises six inches during its 

n 2 



148 LIGHTHOUSE. [CHAP. XXIX. 

greatest floods ; but some winds make the Gulf rise 
six feet, as in the year 1812, and so fast has been 
the increase of the population of late, that there are 
scarcely boats enough, as one of the pilots confessed 
to me, to save the people, should the waters rise 
again to that elevation. They might, however, es- 
cape on drift timber, which abounds here, provided 
they had time to choose the more buoyant trees ; for 
we observed many large rafts of wood so water-logged 
that it could scarcely swim, and the slightest weight 
would sink it. 

Although the chimney of our steamer was not 
lofty, it stood higher than the houses ; but in order to 
obtain a wider prospect, I went up into the look-out, 
a wooden frame-work with a platform, where the 
pilots were watching for vessels, with their tele- 
scopes. From this elevation we saw, far to the south, 
the lighthouse, situated at what is now the principal 
entrance of the river. The pilots told us, that the 
old lighthouse, of solid brickwork, eighty-seven feet 
high, erected on "the south point," was destroyed 
by a hurricane in the winter of 1839. The keeper 
was saved, although he was in the building for forty- 
eight hours before it fell, and, during the whole time, 
it vibrated frightfully to and fro. Much of the low 
banks, then bounding the river, were swept away, 
but have since been restored. 

To the eastward all was sea ; turning to the north, 
or towards New Orleans and the delta, I could dis- 
cover no more signs of the existence of a continent 
than when looking southwards, or towards the light- 
house. In the west, Bird Island, covered with trees, 
was more conspicuous. An old pilot told us it 



CHAP. XXIX.] HOUSES ON PILES. 149 

was inhabited by large deer, and was " very high 
land." " How high above the sea?" said I. " Three 
or four feet," he replied ; and as if so startling an as- 
sertion required the confirmation of several witnesses, 
he appealed to the by-standers, who assented, saying, 
" It is all that, for it was only just covered during 
the great hurricane." And well may such an ele- 
vation command respect in a town where all the 
foundations of the houses are under water, and where 
the value of each site is measured by the number of 
inches or feet within which a shoal rises to the sur- 
face of the sea. 

It was a curious sight to behold seventy or more 
dwellings, erected on piles, among reeds half as high 
as the houses, and which often grew close to them, 
most of the buildings communicating with an out- 
house by a wooden bridge thrown over a swamp or 
pool of water, sometimes fresh and sometimes brack- 
ish. On one side of the main channel, which our 
steamer had entered, was built a long wooden plat- 
form, made of planks, resting on piles, which served 
for a promenade. There we saw the pilots' wives 
and daughters, and among them the belles of the 
place, well dressed, and accompanied by their pet 
dogs, taking their evening walk. 

March 1. Having engaged a boat, Dr. Car- 
penter and I set out on an excursion to examine the 
bayous or channels between the mud banks. The 
first stroke of the oars carried us into the midst of 
a dense crop of tall reeds. This plant (Arundo 
phraginitis), is an annual, and inhabits fresh-water 
swamps, yet we found many dead barnacles attached 

H 3 



150 REEDS, SHELLS, AND BIRDS. [CHAP. XXIX. 

to them, showing that in the course of the year, 
when the river is low, the salt water prevails here, so 
that these marine cirripeda have time to be developed 
from the embryo state, and to flourish for some 
months, till they are killed by the returning fresh 
water. We could only detect one shell inhabiting 
these mud banks, a species of Neritina. But I am 
told that the Gnathodon is found in the brackish 
water, a short distance beyond. It was also stated, 
that about eighteen miles beyond the south-west and 
north-west passes, or extreme mouths of the river, 
there are banks of sea-shells of various species. 
With the arundo was intermixed a tall rush or reed- 
mace (Typha), somewhat resembling the bulrush. 
We got out and walked on these banks, on which 
fresh water was standing, so cold and benumbing to 
the hands, that we had no fear of musquitos. At 
almost any other season these insects would have 
swarmed here, and tormented us greatly. Even the 
alligators were invisible, though some of them had 
been out a few days before. Many paths, recently 
trodden by racoons, were seen to traverse the reeds, 
and there were foot-prints of the civet or mink, and 
of wild cats and water-rats in abundance. We put 
up several white herons, and many snipes and curlews, 
and the boat-tailed grackle ( Quisqualus). 

At length returning to the boat, we soon reached a 
channel blocked up with drift wood in every stage of 
decay, some fresh and sound, but most of it rotten 
and water-logged. We walked for hundreds of yards 
over natural rafts of this timber, the quantity of 
which, they say, has sensibly diminished since the 



CHAP. XXIX.] CHARLEVOIX'S MAPS. 151 

steamers began to consume so much fuel, for it is now 
intercepted in large quantities before it gets to New- 
Orleans, and cut into logs for the steamers. 

We were desirous of obtaining accurate informa- 
tion from the pilots respecting the recent advance of 
land on the Gulf, hoping from such data to calculate 
the time when the mouths of the river were at New 
Orleans. But I soon found that materials for such 
a calculation are not to be procured. 

Dr. Carpenter had brought with him Charlevoix's 
maps of the river mouths or " passes," published 112 
years ago, and referring to the state of things about 
130 years ago. We were surprised to find how 
accurately this survey represents, for the most part, 
the number, shape, and form of the mud-banks and 
bayous, or channels, as they now exist around the 
Balize. The pilots, to whom we showed the charts, 
admitted that one might imagine them to have been 
constructed last year, were it not that bars had been 
thrown across the mouths of every bayou, because 
they are no longer scoured out as they used to be 
when the principal discharge of the Mississippi was 
at this point. We then went within a mile of the 
old Spanish building, called the Magazine, correctly 
laid down in Charlevoix's map, and now 600 yards 
nearer the sea than formerly, showing that the mud- 
banks have given way, or that the salt water has 
encroached in times when a smaller body of fresh 
water has been bringing down its sediment to this 
point. 

The south-west pass is now the principal entrance 
of the Mississippi, and till lately there was eighteen 



152 DIFFICULTY OF ESTIMATING [CHAP. XXIX. 

feet water in it, but the channel has grown shallower 
by two feet. When it is considered that a fleet of 
the largest men-of-war could sail for a thousand 
miles into the interior, were it not for the bars thrown 
across the entrance of each of the mouths or passes, 
one cannot wonder that efforts should have been 
made to deepen the main channel artificially. But 
no human undertaking seems more hopeless ; for, after 
a great expenditure of money in 1838 and 1839, and 
the excavation by means of powerful steam dredges 
of a deep passage, the river filled up the entire cavity 
with mud during a single flood. 

One of the chief pilots told us, that since 1839, or 
in six years, he had seen an advance of the prominent 
mouths of the river of more than a mile. But Linton, 
the oldest and most experienced of them, admitted 
that the three passes called the north-east, south-east, 
and south-west, had in the last twenty-four years 
only advanced one mile each. Even this fact would 
furnish no ground for estimating the general rate at 
which the delta advances, for on each of these narrow 
strips of land, or river-banks, the sea would make ex- 
tensive inroads whenever the main channel of dis- 
charge is altered and there is a local relaxation of the 
river's power. Every year, as soon as the flood 
season is over, the tide enters far up each channel, 
scouring out mud and sand, and sweeping away 
many a bar, formed during the period of inundation. 
Bringier, an experienced surveyor of New Orleans, 
told me, that on revisiting the mouths of the Missis- 
sippi after an interval of forty years, he was sur- 
prised to observe how stationary their leading features 



CHAP. XXIX.] ANNUAL INCREASE OF DELTA. 153 

had remained. Mr. Dunbar, also an engineer in 
great practice in Louisiana, assured me that on com- 
paring the soundings lately made by him with those 
laid down in the French maps of Sieur Diron, pub- 
lished in 1740, he found the changes to be quite incon- 
siderable. On questioning the pilots on the subject, 
they stated that the changes from year to year are 
great, but are no measure whatever of those worked 
out in a long period, for there seems to be a tendency 
in the action of the tides and river to restore the old 
soundings. 

Captain Graharne, also a government surveyor, on 
comparing the north-east pass with the charts made 
a century before, found it had not advanced more 
than a quarter of a mile, and that in the same interval 
the principal variations at the pass a Loutre had 
consisted in the filling up of some bayous. Even if 
we could assume that the progress of the whole delta 
in twenty-five years was as great as that assigned by 
Linton to one or two narrow channels and banks, 
it would have taken several thousand years for the 
river to advance from New Orleans to the Balize ; 
but when we take into our account the whole breadth 
of the delta, or that part of it which has advanced 
beyond the general coast-line, above 100 miles across, 
we must allow an enormous period of time for its 
accumulation. 

The popular belief in New Orleans, that the pro- 
gress of the banks near the mouths of the river has 
been very rapid, arises partly from the nature of the 
evidence given by witnesses in the law courts, in 
cases of insurance. When a ship is lost, the usual 

H 5 



154 TIDES AND CUEEENTS. [CHAP. XXIX. 

line of defence on the part of the pilots, whether for 
themselves or their friends, is to show that new sand- 
bars are forming, and shoals shifting their places so 
fast, that no blame attaches to any one for running a 
vessel aground. To exaggerate, rather than under- 
rate, the quantity of sediment newly deposited by 
the river, is the bias of each witness, although their 
statements may in the main be correct ; for in the 
contest annually carried on between the river and the 
sea, there is unquestionably a vast amount of de- 
struction and renovation of mud-banks and sand-bars. 
In these changes the action of the tide, and the 
power of the breakers during storms, and a strong 
marine current, all play their part. There seem to 
be well-authenticated accounts of anchors cast up 
from a depth of several fathoms near the mouths of 
the river, and heavy stones sunk sixteen feet deep, 
and found afterwards high and dry on shoals. The 
ballast also of several wrecked vessels, the submer- 
gence of which, in two or three fathoms water, had 
been ascertained, have in like manner been thrown 
up, above high water mark, on newly formed islands. 
All the pilots agree, that when the Mississippi is 
at its height, it pours several streams of fresh water, 
tinged with yellow sediment, twelve or more miles 
into the Gulf, beyond its mouths. These streams 
floating over the heavier salt water, spread out into 
broad superficial sheets or layers, which the keels of 
vessels plough through, turning up a furrow of clear 
blue water, forming a dark streak in the middle of 
the ship's wake. I infer, therefore, that both in the 
summer, when the swollen river is turbid and depo- 



CHAP. XXIX.] RETURN TO NEW ORLEANS. 155 

siting mud, and in the winter, when the sea is 
making reprisals on the delta, there is a large amount 
of fine sediment dispersed far and wide, and carried 
by currents to the deeper and more distant parts of 
the Gulf. To this dispersing power I shall recall the 
reader's attention in a future chapter, when discussing 
the probable antiquity of the delta. 

March 2. We returned to New Orleans in the 
same steamer. It is remarkable that for more than 150 
miles above the Balize, there is only one of those great 
bends in the course of the Mississippi, which are so 
general a character of its channel north of New Or- 
leans. The exception is the great sweep called the 
English Turn. Mr. Forshey imputes this difference 
in the shape of the bed of the river to the distinct cir- 
cumstances under which a stream is placed when it 
shapes out its course through a deposit raised above 
the level of the sea, or when it is forming its bed, as 
to the south of New Orleans, below the sea-level. 

Above the English Turn, and within a few miles of 
the metropolis, I landed on the famous battle-ground, 
where the English, in 1815, were defeated, and saw 
the swamp through which the weary soldiers were re- 
quired to drag their boats, on emerging from which, 
they were fired upon by the enemy, advantageously 
placed on the higher ground, or river-bank. The 
blunder of the British commander is sufficiently ob- 
vious even to one unskilled in military affairs. They 
are now strengthening the levee at this point, for the 
Mississippi is threatening to pour its resistless current 
through this battle-ground, as, in the delta of the 

H 6 



156 SUGAR-MILL. [CHAP. XXIX. 

Ganges, the Hoogly is fast sweeping away the cele- 
brated field of Plassy. 

At one of the landings on the left bank of the river, 
Dr, Carpenter went with me to see a large sugar-mill, 
in the management of which an Anglo-American 
proprietor had introduced all the latest improvements. 
There was machinery, worked by steam, for pressing 
the juice out of the sugar-canes, and large boilers and 
coolers, with ducts for the juice to flow down into 
enormous vats. 

We heard much of the injury done to the sugar 
plantations and gardens by the cocoa, or nut grass 
( Cyperus hydra), which I had seen springing up even 
in the streets of New Orleans, between the pavement 
stones. It increases by suckers as well as by seed ; 
but it is only of late years that it has ravaged 
Louisiana. If horses be brought from an estate 
where this plant is known to exist, their hoofs are 
carefully cleaned, lest the soil adhering to them should 
introduce some fibres or tubers of this scourge. 

Although impatient to return to the city, we could 
not help being amused when we learnt that our boat 
and all its passengers were to be detained till some 
hogsheads of sugar were put on board, some of the 
hoops of which had got loose. A cooper had been 
sent for, who was to hammer them on. " You may 
therefore go over the sugar-mill at your leisure." I 
observed that all whose native tongue was English, 
were indignant at the small value which the captain 
seemed to set on their time ; but the Creole majority, 
who spoke French, were in excellent humour. A 
party of them was always playing whist in the cabin, 



CHAP. XXIX.] FRENCH AND ANGLO-AMERICANS. 157 

and the rest looking on. When summoned to dis- 
embark at their respective landings, they were in no 
haste to leave us, wishing rather to finish the rubber. 
The contrast of the two races was truly diverting, 
just what I had seen in Canada. Whenever we were 
signalled by a negro, and told to halt "till Master 
was ready," I was sure to hear some anecdote from 
an Anglo-Saxon passenger in disparagement of the 
Creoles. " North of New Orleans," said one of my 
companions, " the American captains are beginning 
to discipline the French proprietors into more punctual 
habits. Last summer, a senator of Louisiana having 
forgotten his great-coat, sent back his black servant 
to bring it from his villa, expecting a first-rate 
steamer, with several hundred people on board, to 
wait ten or fifteen minutes for him. When, to his 
surprise, the boat started, he took the captain to task 
in great wrath, threatening never to enter his vessel 
again." 

My attention was next called to the old-fashioned 
make of the French ploughs. " On this river, as on the 
St. Lawrence," said an American, " the French had 
a fair start of us by more than a century. They ob- 
tained possession of all the richest lands, yet are now 
fairly distanced in the race. When they get into 
debt, and sell a farm on the highest land next the 
levee, they do not migrate to a new region farther 
west, but fall back somewhere into the low grounds 
near the swamp. There they retain all their an- 
tiquated usages, seeming to hate innovation. To 
this day they remain rooted in those parts of Louis- 
iana where the mother country first planted her 



158 FRENCH AND ANGLO-AMERICANS. [CHAP. XXIX. 

two colonies two centuries ago, and they have never 
swarmed off, or founded a single new settlement. 
They never set up a steam-engine for their sugar- 
mills, have taken no part in the improvement of steam 
navigation, and when a railway was proposed in 
Opelousas, they opposed it, because they feared it 
would ' let the Yankees in upon them.' When a rich 
proprietor was asked why he did not send his boy to 
college, he replied, e Because it would cost me 450 
dollars a year, and I shall be able to leave my son 
three more negroes when I die, by not incurring that 
expense.' " Dr. Carpenter informed me, that the 
Legislature of Louisiana granted, in 1834, a charter 
for a medical college in the Second Municipality, 
which now, in the year 1846, numbers one hundred 
students, and is about to become the medical depart- 
ment of a new university. The Creoles were so far 
stimulated by this example, as to apply also for a 
charter for a French College in the First Munici- 
pality. It was granted in the same year, but has 
remained a dead letter to this day. 

One of the passengers had been complaining to 
me, that a Creole always voted for a Creole candidate 
at an election, however much he differed from him 
in political opinions, rather than support an Anglo- 
Saxon of his own party. I could not help saying 
that I should be tempted to do the same, if I were 
of French origin, and heard my race as much run 
down as I had done since I left the Balize. 

A large portion of the first French settlers in 
Louisiana came from Canada, and I have no doubt 
Gayarre is right in affirming that they have remained 



CHAP. XXIX.] FRENCH AND ANGLO-AMEKICANS. 159 

comparatively stationary, because they carried out 
with them, from the mother country, despotic maxims 
of government, coupled with extreme intolerance in 
their religious opinions. The bigotry which checked 
the growth of the infant colony was signally dis- 
played, when Louis XIY. refused to permit 400 
Huguenot families, who .had fled to South Carolina, 
after the revocation of the edict of Nantes, to be 
incorporated among the new settlers on the Missis- 
sippi. * 

Notwithstanding the marked inclination of the 
Anglo-Saxons to seek no other cause than that of 
race to account for the alleged stationary condition 
of the Creoles, I was glad to find that one of the 
most intelligent citizens of New Orleans took a more 
hopeful and less fatalist view of the matter. " I ob- 
serve," he said, "that those French emigrants who 
have come out to us lately, especially the Parisians, 
are pushing their way in the world with as much 
energy as any of our race ; so I conclude that the 
first settlers in Canada and Louisiana quitted Eu- 
rope too soon, before the great revolution of 1792 
had turned the Frenchman into a progressive being." 

Among the Creoles with whom I came in contact, 
I saw many whose manners were most polite and 
agreeable, and I felt as I had done towards the 
Canadian es habitants," that I should have had more 
pleasure in associating with them than with a large 
portion of their Anglo-American rivals, who, from 
a greater readiness to welcome new ideas, are more 

* Gayarre, Histoire de la Louisiane, torn. i. p. 69. 



160 NEGROES IN LOUISIANA. [CHAP. XXIX. 

likely to improve, and will probably outstrip them in 
knowledge and power. 

When we sat down to dinner in the cabin, one 
of the Creoles, of very genteel "appearance, was so 
dark that I afterwards asked an American, out of 
curiosity, whether he thought my neighbour at table 
had a dash of negro blood in his veins. He said he 
had been thinking so, and it had made him feel very 
uncomfortable during dinner. I was so unprepared 
for this manifestation of anti-negro feeling, that I 
had difficulty in keeping my countenance. The same 
messmate then told me that the slaves had lately 
risen on an estate we were just passing, on the right 
bank of the river, below New Orleans, but had been 
quickly put down. He said that the treatment of 
them had greatly improved within the last eight 
years, keeping pace steadily with the improved 
civilisation of the whites. The Creoles, he said, fed 
their negroes well, but usually gave them no beds, 
but blankets only to lie down upon. They were 
kind in their feelings towards them ; but, owing to 
their improvident habits, they secured no regular 
medical attendance, and lost more black children 
than the American planters. 

I afterwards remarked that the growth of New 
Orleans seemed to show that a large city may in- 
crease and flourish in a Slave State ; but Dr. Car- 
penter and Mr. Wilde both observed, that the white 
race has been superseding the negroes. Ten years 
ago, say they, all the draymen of New Orleans, a 
numerous class, and the cabmen, were coloured. Now, 
they are nearly all white. The servants at the great 



CHAP. XXIX.] NEGROES IN LOUISIANA. 161 

hotels were formerly of the African, now they are of 
the European race. Nowhere is the jealousy felt by 
the Irish towards the negroes more apparent. Ac- 
cording to some estimates,, in a permanently resident 
population not much exceeding 80,000, there are 
only 22,000 coloured persons, and a large proportion 
of these are free. 

Over a door in the principal street of New Orleans 
we read the inscription, " Negroes on sale here." It 
is natural that Southerners should not be aware how 
much a foreigner is shocked at this public mode of 
treating a large part of the population as mere 
chattels. 

The following is an advertisement copied verbatim 
from a Natchez paper : 

"NINETY NEGROES TOR SALE. 

" I have about ninety Negroes, just arrived from 
Richmond, Virginia, consisting of field hands, house 
servants, carriage drivers, two sempstresses, several 
very fine cooks (females), and one very fine neat 
cook (male), one blacksmith, one carpenter, and some 
excellent Mules and excellent Waggons and Harness, 
and one very fine Riding Horse all of which I will 
sell at the most reasonable prices. I have made ar- 
rangements in Richmond, Ya., to have regular ship- 
ments every month, and intend to keep a good stock 
on hand of every description of servants during the 
season. 

" Natchez, October 16-tf JOHN D. JAMES." 

In a St. Louis paper, I read, in the narrative of a 



162 NEGROES IN LOUISIANA. [CHAP. XXIX. 

steam-boat collision, the following passage : - " We 
learn that the passengers, with few exceptions, lost 
all their effects ; one gentleman in particular lost 
nine negroes (who were on deck) and fourteen 
horses." 

Among the laws recently enacted in Louisiana, I 
was glad to see one to prevent persons of colour 
exiled from other States, or transported for some 
offence, from becoming citizens. In spite of such 
statutes the negro-exporting portions of the Union 
will always make the newer States play in some de- 
gree the part of penal settlements. 

Free blacks are allowed to be witnesses in the 
courts here, in cases where white men are concerned, 
a privilege they do not enjoy in some free States, as 
in Indiana; but they do not allow free blacks to 
come and settle here, and say they have been com- 
pelled to adopt this precaution by the Abolitionists. 

An intelligent Louisianian said to me, " Were we 
to emancipate our negroes as suddenly as your Go- 
vernment did the West Indians, they would be a 
doomed race ; but there can be no doubt that white 
labour is more profitable even in this climate." 
et Then, why do you not encourage it?" I asked. 
" It must be the work of time," he replied ; " the 
prejudices of owners have to be overcome, and the 
sugar and cotton crop is easily lost, if not taken in 
at once when ripe ; the canes being damaged by a 
slight frost, and the cotton requiring to be picked 
dry as soon as mature, and being ruined by rain. 
Very lately a planter, five miles below New Orleans, 
having resolved to dispense with slave labour, hired 



CHAP. XXIX.] NEGROES IN LOUISIANA. 163 

one hundred Irish and German emigrants at very high 
wages. In the middle of the harvest they all struck 
for double pay. No others were to be had, and it 
was impossible to purchase slaves in a few days. , In 
that short time he lost produce to the value of ten 
thousand dollars." 

A rich merchant of Pennsylvania, who was boarding 
at the St. Louis Hotel, showed me a letter he had 
just received from Philadelphia, in which his corre- 
spondent expressed a hope that his feelings had not 
often been shocked by the sufferings of the slaves. 
" Doubtless," said the writer, " you must often wit- 
ness great horrors." The Philadelphian then told 
me, that after residing here several years, and 
having a strong feeling of the evils as well as im- 
policy of slavery, he had never been forced to see 
nor hear of any castigation of a slave in any esta- 
blishment with which he had intercourse. <( Once," he 
added, " in New Jersey (a free State) he remembered 
having seen a free negro child whipped by its master." 
The tale of suffering to which his Pennsylvanian cor- 
respondent particularly alluded, was not authentic, or, 
at least, grossly exaggerated. It had been copied 
from the Abolitionist papers of the North into the 
Southern papers, sometimes with and sometimes with- 
out comment ; for such libels are hailed with pleasure 
by the Perpetualists as irritating the feeling of that 
class of slave-owners who are most anxious to advance 
the welfare and education of the negroes. 

We ascertained that Miss Martineau's story of 
Madame Lalaurie's cruelty to her slaves was per- 
fectly correct. Instances of such savage conduct are 



164 NEGROES IN LOUISIANA. [CHAP. XXIX. 

rare, as was indeed sufficiently proved by the indig- 
nation which it excited in the whole city. A New 
England lady settled here told me, she had promised 
to set free her two female coloured servants at her 
death. I asked if she had no fear of their poisoning 
her. " On the contrary," she replied, " they would 
be in despair were I to die." 

One of the families which we visited at New Or- 
leans was plunged in grief by the death of a little 
negro girl, suddenly carried off by a brain fever, in 
the house. She was the daughter of a domestic 
servant, and the sorrow for her loss was such as 
might have been felt for a relation. 



CHAP. XXX.] NEW ORLEANS TO PORT HUDSON. 165 



CHAP. XXX. 

Voyage from New Orleans to Port Hudson. The Coast, Villas 
and Gardens. Cotton Steamers. Flat Boats. Crevasses 
and Inundations. Decrease of Steam-Boat Accidents. 
Snag-Boat. Musquitos. Natural Rafts. Bartram on 
buried Trees at Port Hudson. Dr. Carpenter's Observations. 
Landslip described. Ancient Subsidence in the Delta fol- 
lowed by an upward Movement, deducible from the buried 
Forest at Port Hudson. 

March 10. 1846. ON leaving New Orleans, I 
made arrangements for stopping to examine the bluff 
at Port Hudson, 160 miles up the river, where I was 
to land in the night, from the Rainbow steamer, 
while my wife started in another boat, the Magnolia, 
to go direct to the more distant port of Natchez. If a 
lady is recommended to the captain of one of these 
vessels she feels herself under good protection, and 
needs no other escort ; but Mr. Wilde introduced my 

wife to Judge , who kindly undertook to take 

charge of her, and see her to the hotel at Natchez. 
The Rainbow ascended the river at the rate of eleven 
miles an hour, keeping near the bank, where the 
force of the current was broken by eddies, or where 
the backwater was sometimes running in our favour. 
Occasionally her speed was suddenly checked, when 
it became necessary to cross the stream on reaching 
a point where the current was setting with its full 



166 THE COAST. [CHAP. XXX. 

force against the bank along which we had been 
sailing. In spite of such delays, the rate of going up 
is only one-third less than going down the stream. 
The recent introduction of separate engines to work 
each of the wheels greatly economises the time spent 
in the landing of passengers. The boat may be turned 
round or kept stationary with more facility, when 
each wheel can be moved in an opposite direction. 
In this part of the Mississippi, and at this season, 
the points where passengers can be set ashore are very 
numerous, the water being often forty feet deep close 
to the banks. But there are certain regular places of 
disembarkation, the approach to which is announced 
by ringing a large bell. 

A great proportion of the trees are still leafless, 
the willows, cypresses, and red maples being no more 
advanced than I had seen them at Mobile in the third 
week of February. The gardens continue to be gay 
with the blossoms of the peach and plum-trees. As 
our vessel wound its way round one great bend after 
another, we often saw directly before us the dome 
of the St. Charles and the tower of St. Patrick's, 
and were sailing towards them after I thought we 
had already taken a last look at them far astern. In 
the first seven hours we made sixty miles, including 
stoppages. We were passing along what is called 
"the coast," or that part of the Mississippi which 
is protected by a levee above the metropolis. A great 
many handsome country-houses, belonging to the pro- 
prietors of sugar plantations, give a cultivated aspect 
to this region, and the scenery is enlivened by a pro- 
digious number of schooners and large steamers sail- 



CHAP. XXX.] FLAT BOATS. 167 

ing down from the Ohio and Red Kivers, heavily laden 
with cotton. This cotton has already been much 
compressed when made up into bales ; but it under- 
goes, at New Orleans, still greater pressure, by steam 
power, to diminish its bulk before embarkation for 
Liverpool. 

The captain calculated, that within the first seven 
hours after we left the wharf, in the Second Munici- 
pality, we had passed no less than ten thousand bales 
going down the river, each bale worth thirty-five 
dollars at present prices, and the value of the 
whole, therefore, amounting to 350,000 dollars, or 
73,500Z. sterling. All this merchandise would reach 
the great emporium within twenty hours of the time 
of our passing it. Before we lost sight of the city, 
we saw a large flat boat drifting down in the middle 
of the current, steered by means of a large oar at the 
stern. It was laden with farm produce, and had come 
about two thousand miles, from near Pitts burg, on 
the Ohio. I had first observed this kind of craft on 
my way to the Balize, meeting near Fort Jackson a 
boat without a single inmate, thirty-five feet long, 
and built of stout planks, with a good roof. It was 
drifting along on its way to the Gulf of Mexico, the 
owner having abandoned it after selling his corn and 
other stores at the great city. He himself had pro- 
bably returned to the North in a steamer ; having 
found the substantial floating mansion, in which he 
had lived for several weeks or months, quite un- 
saleable, although containing so much good timber 
shaped into planks. It is the duty of the wharfinger 
at New Orleans to see that the river is not blocked 



168 FLAT BOATS. [CHAP. XXX. 

up with such incumbrances, and to set them adrift. 
After wandering for several hundred miles in the 
Gulf, they are sometimes cast ashore at Pensacola. 

Soon after wards, when we were taking in wood at 
a landing, I entered another of these flat boats, just 
arrived there, and discovered that it was a shop, con- 
taining all kinds of grocery and other provisions, tea, 
sugar, lard, cheese, flour, beef, and whiskey. It was 
furnished with a chimney, and I was surprised to see 
a large family of inmates in two spacious cabins, for 
no one would suspect these boats to be so roomy below 
water, as they are usually sunk deep in the river by 
a heavy freight. They had a fiddle on board, and 
were preparing to get up a dance for the negroes. A 
fellow-traveller told me that these pedlars are com- 
monly called chicken-thieves, and, the day after they 
move off, the planters not unfrequently miss many of 
their fowls. 

Pointing 'to an old levee with a higher embank- 
ment newly made behind it, the captain told me, 
that a breach had been made there in 1844, through 
which the Mississippi burst, inundating the low cul- 
tivated lands between the highest part of the bank 
and the swamp. In this manner, thousands of valu- 
able acres were injured. He had seen the water rush 
through the opening at the rate of ten miles an hour, 
sucking in several flat boats, and carrying them over 
a watery waste into a dense swamp forest. Here the 
voyagers might remain entangled among the trees 
unheard of and unheeded till they were starved, if 
canoes were not sent to traverse the swamps in every 
direction in the hope of rescuing such wanderers 



CHAP. XXX.] CREVASSES AND INUNDATIONS. 169 

from destruction. When we consider how many 
hair-breadth escapes these flat boats have experi- 
enced, how often they have been nearly run down 
in the night, or even in the day, during dense fogs, 
and sent to the bottom by collision with a huge 
steamer, it is strange to reflect, that at length, when 
their owners have caught sight of the towers of 
New Orleans in the distance, they should be hurried 
into a wilderness, and perish there. 

I was shown the entrance of what is called the 
Carthage crevasse, formed in May, 1840, and open 
for eight weeks, during which time, it attained a 
breadth of eighty feet. Its waters were discharged 
into Lake Pontchartrain, when nothing was visible 
between that great lagoon and the Mississippi but 
the tops of tall cypress trees growing in the morass, 
and a long, narrow, black stripe of earth, being the 
top of the levee, which marked the course of the 
river. 

The reader may naturally ask why the Mississippi, 
when it has once burst through its bank, and taken 
this shorter cut to the sea, does not continue in 
the same course, reaching the salt water in a few 
miles instead of flowing two hundred miles before it 
empties itself into the Gulf. I may remark in re- 
ply, that the great river does not run, as might be 
inferred from the description of some of the old 
geographers, on the top of a ridge in a level plain, 
but in a valley from one hundred to two hundred 
and fifty feet deep. 

Thus a b c may represent the cavity in which the 
river flows, the artificial levees at the top of the banks 

VOL. II. I 



170 ARTIFICIAL LEVEES. [CHAP. XXX. 

being seen at a and b. The banks are higher than 

the bottom of the swamps, f g and d e ; because, 

Fig. 9. 




Section of channel, bank, levees (a and b), and swamps of Mississippi 

River. 

when the river overflows, the coarser part of the sedi- 
ment is deposited at a and b, where the speed of the 
current is first checked. It usually runs there with 
a gentle current among herbage, reeds, and shrubs ; 
and is nearly filtered of its earthy ingredients before 
it arrives at the swamps. It is probable that the 
Mississippi flows to the nearest point of the Gulf, 
where there is a sufficient depth or capacity in the 
bed of the sea to receive its vast burden of water and 
mud ; and if it went to Lake Pontchartraija, it would 
have to excavate a new valley like a b c, many times 
deeper than the bottom of that lagoon. 

The levee raised to protect the low grounds from 
inundation, was at first, when we left New Orleans, 
only four feet high, so as not to impede our view of 
the country from the deck ; but as we ascended, both 
the natural bank and the levee became higher and 
higher, and by the time we had sailed up sixty-five 
miles, I could only just see the tops of tall trees in 
the swamps. Even these were only discernible from 
the roof of the cabin, or what is called the hurricane 
deck, when we had gone 100 miles from New 
Orleans. 



CHAP. XXX.] SNAG-BOATS. 171 

The large waves raised by the rapid movement of 
several hundred steamers, causes the undermining 
and waste of the banks to proceed at a more rapid 
rate than formerly. The roots also of trees growing 
at the edge of the stream, were very effective for- 
merly in holding the soil together, before so much 
timber had been cleared away. Now the banks 
offer less resistance to the wasting action of the 
stream. 

The quantity of drift wood floated down the current 
has not diminished sensibly within the last twenty 
years, but nearly all of it is now intercepted in the 
last forty miles above New Orleans, and split up 
into logs by the proprietors to supply the furnaces 
of steam-boats, which are thus freeing the river 
of the heavy masses against which they used formerly 
to bump in the night, or round which they were 
forced to steer in the day. There has also been 
a marked decrease, of late years, in the number of 
snags. The trunks of uprooted trees, so called, get 
fixed in the mud, having sunk with their heavier 
end to the bottom, and remain slanting down the 
stream, so as to pierce through the bows of vessels 
sailing up. A government report just published, 
shows that two snag-boats, each having a crew of 
twenty men, one of them drawing four feet, and the 
other two feet water, have extracted 700 snags in 
four weeks out of the Missouri, and others have been 
at work on the Mississippi. When it is remem- 
bered that some of the most dangerous of these snags 
have been known to continue planted for twenty years 
in the same spot (so slowly does wood decay under 

I 2 



172 DECREASE OF [CHAP. XXX. 

water), it may readily be conceived how much this 
formidable source of danger has lessened in the last 
few years. At the season when the river is lowest, 
grappling irons are firmly fixed to these snags, and 
the whole force of the engines in the snag-boat is 
exerted to draw them out of the mud ; they are 
then cut into several pieces, and left to float down 
the stream, but part of them being water-logged, sink 
at once to the bottom. 

Several travellers assure me, that serious accidents 
are not more common now on the Mississippi and its 
tributaries, when there are 800 steamers afloat, than 
twenty years ago, when the number of steamers was 
less than fifty. The increased security arises, chiefly, 
from the greater skill and sobriety of the captains and 
engineers, who rarely run races as formerly, and who 
usually cast anchor during fogs and in dark nights. 
Such precautions have, no doubt, become more and 
more imperative, in proportion as the steamers have 
multiplied. On the wide Atlantic, the chances of 
collision in a fog may be slight, but to sail in so 
narrow a channel as that of a river, at the rate of ten 
miles an hour, unable to see a ship's length a-head, 
with the risk of meeting, every moment, other 
steamers coming down at the rate of fifteen miles 
an hour, implies such recklessness, that one cannot 
wonder that navigators on the western waters have 
earned the character of setting small value on their 
own and other's lives. Formerly, the most frequent 
cause of explosions was a deficiency of water in the 
boiler ; one of the great improvements adopted, within 
the last five years, for preventing this mischief, is the 



CHAP. XXX.] STEAM-BOAT ACCIDENTS. 173 

addition of a separate steam apparatus for pumping 
up water and securing a regular supply by machinery, 
instead of trusting to the constant watchfulness of 
the engineers. On the whole, it seems to be more 
dangerous to travel by land, in a new country, than 
by river steamers, and some who have survived re- 
peated journeyings in stage-coaches, show us many 
scars. The judge who escorted my wife to Natchez, 
informed her that he had been upset no less than 
thirteen times. 

On the left bank, about sixty miles above New 
Orleans, stands Jefferson College; a schoolmaster 
from the North, speaking to me of its history, im- 
puted its want of success to the insubordination of 
the youths, the inability of Southern planters to 
govern their children themselves, and their unwil- 
lingness to delegate the necessary authority to the 
masters of universities or schools. " But they are 
growing wiser," he said, " and vigorous efforts are 
making to improve the discipline in the university 
of Charlottesville, in Virginia, which has hitherto 
been too lax." 

We soon afterwards passed a convent on the same 
bank, and I heard praise bestowed on the " Sisters 
of Charity," for their management of a hospital. 

At St. Thomas's Point, about seventy-five miles 
above New Orleans, we passed a fine plantation, 
which formerly belonged to Mr. Preston, of South 
Carolina, a distinguished member of Congress, whose 
acquaintance I made in 1842. There are, I am 
told, nearly 1000 negroes here, and I am astonished 
at the large proportion of the coloured race settled 

I 3 



174 THUNDER-SHOWEK. [CHAP. XXX. 

everywhere on the land bordering the river. The 
relative value of coloured and white labour was here, 
as elsewhere, a favourite theme of conversation, when 
there happened to be passengers on board from the 
Northern States. The task of three negroes, they 
say, in Louisiana, is to cut and bind up two cords of 
wood in a day, whereas, a single white man in the 
State of New York, prepares three cords daily. In 
packing cotton, the negroes are expected to perform 
a third less work than a white labourer. 

In the afternoon we were overtaken by a heavy 
thunder-shower, the water pouring off the eaves of 
our cabin roof, in copious streams, into the river, 
through numerous spouts or tin pipes. When the 
rain abated, I saw a fog slowly stealing over parts of 
the stream, for the water was much colder than the 
air. For some hours we were unable to proceed, and 
the captain informed me, that we should remain 
prisoners until the temperature of the Mississippi and 
that of the atmosphere were more nearly equalised. 
This, he hoped, would happen in one of two ways, 
either by a renewal of rain, which would warm the 
river, or by the wind veering round from south to 
west, which would cool the air. The latter change 
soon occurred, and we were instantly released. 

I was congratulated by some Northerners at 
having escaped the musquitos. The captain said, 
u that they who are acclimatised, suffer no longer 
from the bites, or scarcely at all, and even the young 
children of Creoles are proof against them, although 
the face and neck of a new settler, whether young or 
old, swell up frightfully. Yet the wild cattle and 



CHAP. XXX.] MUSQUITOS. 175 

deer have not acquired any hereditary immunity 
from this torment, and, to escape it, are seen standing 
in the lakes with their heads only above water." 
Some passengers assured me, " that when people have 
recovered from the yellow fever, the skin, although 
in other respects as sensitive as ever, is no longer 
affected by a musquito bite, or, if at all, in a very 
slight degree ;" and they added, " that last year, 
1845, both the yellow fever and the musquitos were 
in abeyance, although the heat of the season was 
intense." 

After we had sailed up the river eighty miles, I 
was amused by the sight of the insignificant village 
of Donaldsonville, the future glories of which I 
had heard so eloquently depicted.* Its position, 
however, is doubtless important ; for here the right 
bank is intersected by that arm of the Mississippi, 
called Bayou La Fourche. This arm has much the ap- 
pearance of a canal, and by it, I am told, our steamer, 
although it draws no less than ten feet water, might sail 
into the Gulf of Mexico, oiMra verse a large part of that 
wonderful inland navigation in the delta which contri- 
butes so largely to the wealth of Louisiana. A curious 
description was given me, by one of my fellow tra- 
vellers, of that same low country, especially the region 
called Attakapas. It contains, he said, wide " quaking 
prairies," where cattle are pastured, and where you 
may fancy yourself far inland. Yet, if vou pierce 
anywhere through the turf to the depth of two feet, 
you find sea-fish swimming about, which make their 

* Ante, p. 123. 
i 4 



176 NATURAL RAFTS. [CHAP. XXX. 

way in search of food under the superficial sward, 
from the Gulf of Mexico, through subterranean watery 
channels. 

Notwithstanding the quantity of sediment in the 
Mississippi,, they tell me that its waters are inhabited 
by abundance of shad and herring, and in several 
places, when I asked the fishermen what they were 
catching, they answered, " Sardines." 

In the course of the first day we saw the Bayou 
Plaquemine on the right, and the Iberville river on the 
left bank of the Mississippi, the two arms next above 
that of La Fourche. One of those natural rafts of 
floating trees which occasionally bridge over the 
Western rivers for many years in succession, be- 
coming covered over with soil, shrubs, and trees, 
blocked up till lately the Bayou Plaquemine. The 
obstacle was at length removed at the expense of the 
State, and the rush of water through the newly 
cleared channel was so tremendous, that several en- 
gineers entertained apprehensions, lest the whole of 
the Mississippi should take its course by this channel 
to the sea, deserting New Orleans. Mr. Forshey 
assured me there was no real ground for such fears, 
because the Mississippi, as before hinted*, takes at 
present the shortest cut to that part of the Gulf 
where it can find a basin deep and capacious enough 
to receive it. 

During the night we passed Baton Rouge, the 

first point above New Orleans where any land higher 

and older than the alluvial plain comes up to the 

bank to constitute what is termed a bluff. The cliff 

* Ante, p. 170. 



CHAP. XXX.] BURIED TREES, PORT HUDSON. 177 

there is only a few feet high. The next bluff is at 
Port Hudson, 25 miles higher up the river, and 165 
miles above New Orleans. I had been urged by 
Dr. Carpenter to examine the geology of this bluff, 
which I had also wished to do, because Bartram, in 
his travels in 1777, discovered there the existence of 
a fossil forest at the base of the tall cliff, and had 
commented with his usual sagacity on the magnitude 
of the geographical changes implied by its structure. 
The following are his words, which deserve the more 
attention, because the particular portion of the cliff 
described by him, has long ago been undermined and 
swept away by the Mississippi. " Next morning," 
says Bartram, " we set off again on our return home, 
and called by the way at the cliffs, which is a per- 
pendicular bank or bluff, rising up out of the river 
near one hundred feet above the present surface of 
the water, whose active current sweeps along by it. 
From eight or nine feet below the loamy vegetative 
mould at top, to within four or five feet of the water, 
these cliffs present to view strata of clay, marl, and 
chalk of all colours, as brown, red, yellow, white, 
blue, and purple ; there are separate strata of these 
various colours, as well as mixed or parti-coloured : 
the lowest stratum next the water is exactly of the 
same black mud, or rich soil, as the adjacent low 
cypress swamps above and below the bluff; and here, 
in the cliffs, we see vast stumps of cypress and other 
trees which, at this day, grow in these low, wet 
swamps, and which range on a level with them. 
These stumps are sound, stand upright, and seem to 
be rotted off about two or three feet above the spread 

I 5 



178 BURIED TREES. [CHAP. XXX. 

of their roots ; their trunks, limbs, &c. lie in all 
directions about them. But when these swampy 
forests were growing, and by what cause they were 
cut off and overwhelmed by the various strata of 
earth, which now rise near one hundred feet above, 
at the brink of the cliffs, and two or three times that 
height, but a few hundred yards back, are inquiries 
perhaps not easily answered. The swelling heights, 
rising gradually over and beyond this precipice, are 
now adorned with high forests of stately Magnolia, 
Liquidambar, Fagus, Quercus, Laurus, Morus, Ju- 
glans, Tilia, Halesia, j^Esculus, Callicarpa, Lirio- 
dendron" &c.* 

Dr. Carpenter, in 1838, or sixty-one years after 
Bartram, made a careful investigation of this same 
bluff, having ascertained that in the interval the river 
had been continually wearing it away at such a rate 
as to expose to view a section several hundred feet 
to the eastward of that seen by his predecessor. 
I shall first give a brief abstract of Dr. Carpenter's 
observations, published in Silliman's Journal, f 

" About the level of low water, at the bottom of 
the bluff, a bed of vegetable matter is exposed, con- 
sisting of sticks, leaves, and fruits, arranged in thin 
horizontal lamina, with very thin layers of clay in- 
terposed. Among the fruits were observed the nuts 
of the swamp hickory (Juglans aquatica) very abun- 
dant, the burr-like pericarp of the sweet gum (Li- 
quidambar styraciflua), and walnuts, the fruit of 

* Bartram, " Travels in North America," p. 433. 
f Yol.xxxvi. p. 118. 



CHAP. XXX.] BLUFFS OF PORT HUDSON. 179 

* 

Juylans nigra. The logs lying horizontally are those 
of the cypress ( Cupressus thyoides\ swamp hickory, 
a species of cotton wood (Populus), and other trees 
peculiar to the low swamps of Louisiana. Besides 
these there were a great number of erect stumps of 
the large deciduous cypress (Taxodium distichum) 
sending their roots deep into the clay beneath. This 
buried forest is covered by a bed of clay, twelve feet 
thick, and is followed by another superimposed bed of 
vegetable matter, four feet thick, containing logs and 
branches, half turned into lignite, and erect stumps, 
among which there are none of the large cypresses, 
as in the lower bed. Among the logs, the water- 
oak ( Quercus aquatica) was recognisable, and a pine 
with a great deal of bark, and the strobiles of the 
Pinus Tceda. 

" This upper forest points to the former existence, 
on the spot, of one of those swamps, occurring at 
higher levels, in which the Cupressus disticha ( Tax- 
odium) does not grow. Above the upper layer of 
erect stumps are various beds of clay, in all more 
than fifty feet thick, with two thin layers of vege- 
table matter intercalated ; and above the whole more 
than twenty feet of sand, the lower part of which 
included siliceous pebbles derived from some ancient 
rocks, and containing the marks of encrinites and 
corals {Favosites)" &c. 

Dr. Carpenter, when he published this account in 
1838, thought he had detected the distinct marks of 
the axe* on some of the logs accompanying the 

* Silliman, ibid. p. 119. 
i 6 



180 BURIED TREES. [CHAP. XXX. 

-9. 

buried stumps; but he informed me, in 1846, that he 
was mistaken, and that the apparent notches were 
caused by the gaping open of the bituminised wood, 
probably after shrinking and drying, of the truth of 
which I was myself convinced, after seeing the speci- 
mens. That the lowest bed had originally been a 
real cypress swamp, was proved beyond all doubt by 
the stumps being surrounded by those peculiar knobs 
or excrescences called cypress knees, which this tree 
throws out from its base, when it grows in a sub- 
merged soil. These knees sometimes rise up through 
the water from a depth of six or. eight feet, and are 
supposed to supply the roots with air, as they are 
never formed when the cypress grows on dry ground. 
At the time of my visit, the river was unfortu- 
nately too high to enable me to see the lowest de- 
posit containing the memorials of this ancient forest, 
the geological interest of which is much enhanced by 
its having been seen by Bartram, and again by Car- 
penter, extending horizontally over a considerable 
area. I learnt from several residents at Port Hud- 
son, and from Captain Sellick, who commanded the 
Rainbow, that last season, when the water was low, 
the stumps of the buried trees were as conspicuous 
as ever at the base of the cliff, which has been much 
undermined by the river since the year 1838, when 
Dr. Carpenter explored it. The fossil forest was 
12 feet under water when I landed, but at higher 
levels I saw the trunks of two trees buried in a ver- 
tical position at different levels, each of them about 
2J- feet high. I estimated the height of the entire 
cliff to be about 75 feet, consisting in part of stiff 



CHAP. XXX.] BLUFFS OF PORT HUDSON. 181 

unctuous clay, and partly of loam, but with no chalk, 
as stated by Bartram. A small streamlet, artificially 
led to the top of the bluff, had, within the last four 
years, cut out a ravine no less than sixty feet deep 
through the upper loamy beds. In the sections thus 
laid open, I saw precisely such deposits as a river 
would form in its bed, or in the swamps which it had 
occasionally flooded. Near the bottom was a layer 
of leaves, resembling those of the bay, with numerous 
roots of trees and wood in a fresher state than I ever 
saw them in any tertiary formation. Taking a canoe, I 
afterwards proceeded to examine that part of the 
cliff which extends about a mile down the river's left 
bank, immediately below Port Hudson, where it is 
between seventy and eighty feet high. The deposits 
laid open to view were divisible into three groups, the 
topmost consisting of brown clay, the middle of 
whitish siliceous sand, and the lower of green clay. 
I found some men digging the middle or sandy stratum 
for making bricks, and they had just come upon a 
prostrate buried tree, black and carbonized, but not 
turned into lignite. I counted in it 220 rings of 
annual growth. Near it I found two other smaller 
fossil trunks, all lying as if they had been drift wood 
carried down by a river and buried in sand. One 
of the men pointed out to me that the structure of 
the wood showed distinctly that they belonged to 
three different species, one being oak, another hickory, 
and the third sassafras. Their texture seemed cer- 
tainly that of distinct genera of trees, but for the 
accuracy of my informant's determination I cannot 
vouch. At this point they told me the bluff has, in 



182 LANDSLIP. [CHAP. XXX. 

the course of the last eight years, lost ground no less 
than 200 feet by the encroachment of the river. 

To prove that the present site of the buried forest 
before alluded to, must be far from the point where 
Bartram or even Carpenter saw it, an account was 
given me by the residents here, of several recent land- 
slips near Port Hudson; one in particular, a few years 
ago, when by the caving in of the bank, three acres 
of ground, fifty or sixty feet high, composed of clay 
and sand, and covered by a forest, sank down bodily 
into the river, and were then gradually washed away. 
One of the eye-witnesses related to me that the trees 
were at first seen to tremble, then large rents began 
to open in the soil deeper and deeper, after which 
the movement was such that the boughs of the trees 
lashed each other, and acorns and beech nuts were 
showered down like hail. A herd of pigs was so 
intent in devouring these, that they allowed them- 
selves to be carried down vertically fifty feet, the 
subsidence occupying about five minutes. The outer 
edge of the bluff, with some of the swine, fell into the 
river, but these swam to the sunk part of the bluff, 
and joined their companions. The owners watched 
them anxiously till dusk, unable to go to their rescue ; 
but at length, to their surprise, they saw a leader, 
followed by all the rest, wind his way along narrow 
ledges on the face of the precipice, from which the 
fallen mass had been detached, and climb up to the 
top. Next morning, to their no less astonishment, 
they found the herd feeding again on the same peri- 
lous ground, and saw them again return by the same 
path at night. 



CHAP. XXX.] ANCIENT SUBSIDENCE OF DELTA. 183 

I have dwelt at some length on the geological 
phenomena disclosed in the interesting sections of 
these bluffs, because I agree with Bartram and Car- 
penter, that they display a series of deposits similar 
to the modern formations of the alluvial plain and 
delta of the Mississippi. They lead us, therefore, to 
the important conclusion, that there have been changes 
in the relative level of land and sea since the esta- 
blishment, in this part of the continent, of a geogra- 
phical state of things approximating to that now 
prevailing. Then, as now, there were swamps in 
which the deciduous cypress and other trees grew, 
and became buried in mud, without any intermixture 
of sand or pebbles. At that remote period, also, 
drift wood was brought down from the upper country, 
and enclosed in sandy strata. Although I could not 
ascertain the exact height above the level of the sea, 
of the fossil cypress swamp at Port Hudson, I pre- 
sume it is less than thirty feet ; and in order to 
explain the superposition of 150 feet of freshwater 
sediment, we must imagine the gradual subsidence of 
fluviatile strata to a depth far below the level of 
the sea, followed by an upward movement to as 
great an amount. The depression must have taken 
place so slowly as to allow the river to raise the 
surface by sedimentary deposition continually, and 
never permit the sea to encroach and cover the 
area. It is quite conceivable, for example, that 
the present delta and alluvial plain should sink 150 
feet without the salt water coming up even to 
New Orleans, provided the land went down only a 
few feet or inches in a century, and provided the 



184 ANCIENT SUBSIDENCE OF DELTA. [CHAP. XXX. 

ground was raised vertically to the same amount by 
fluviatile mud, sand, or vegetable matter. But if the 
land should go down even ten or twelve feet at 
once, the whole delta would be submerged beneath 
the sea. Were the downward movement here sup- 
posed to be followed by an upheaval to the extent of 
about 150 feet, and should the river then cut a chan- 
nel through the upraised mass, we might expect to 
see the modern formation exhibit appearances similar 
to those of high antiquity above described at Port 
Hudson. 

I shall endeavour, in the sequel, to show that oscil- 
lations of level, like those here assumed to account 
for the phenomena at Port Hudson, will explain 
other appearances, observable, not only in cliffs 
bounding the valley of the Mississippi, but in ancient 
alluvial terraces bordering the Ohio, and other tribu- 
taries of the great river. 



CHAP. XXXL] FONTANIA. 185 



CHAP. XXXI. 

Fontania near Port Hudson. Lake Solitude. Floating Island. 
Bony Pike. Story of the Devil's Swamp. Embarking by 
Night in Steam-Boat. Literary Clerk. Old Levees under- 
mined. Succession of upright buried Trees in Bank. Rac- 
courci cut off. Bar at Mouth of Red River. Shelly Fresh- 
water Loam of Natchez. Recent Ravines in Table-Land. 
Bones of extinct Quadrupeds. Human Fossil Bone. Ques- 
tion of supposed co-existence of Man with extinct Mammalia 
discussed. Tornado at Natchez. Society, Country-Houses 
and Gardens. Landslips. Indian Antiquities. 

AFTER I had examined the bluff below Port Hud- 
son, I went down the river in my boat to Fontania, 
a few miles to the south, to pay a visit to Mr. 
Faulkner, a proprietor to whom Dr. Carpenter had 
given me a letter of introduction. He received me 
with great politeness, and, at my request, accom- 
panied me at once to see a crescent-shaped sheet of 
water on his estate, called Lake Solitude, evidently 
an ancient bed of the Mississippi now deserted. It 
is one of the few examples of old channels which 
occur to the east of the great river, the general ten- 
dency of which is always to move from west to east. 
Of this eastward movement there is a striking monu- 
ment on the other side of the Mississippi immediately 
opposite Port Hudson, called Fausse Riviere, a sheet 
of water of the usual horse-shoe form. One of my 



186 LAKE SOLITUDE. [CHAP. XXXI. 

fellow passengers in the Rainbow had urged me to 
visit Lake Solitude, " because," said he, " there is a 
floating island in it, well wooded, on which a friend 
of mine once landed from a canoe, when, to his sur- 
prise, it began to sink with his weight. In great 
alarm he climbed a cypress tree, which also began 
immediately to go down with him as fast as he as- 
cended. He mounted higher and higher into its 
boughs, until at length it ceased to subside, and, 
looking round, he saw in every direction, for a dis- 
tance of fifty yards, the whole wood in motion." I 
wished much to know what foundation there could 
be for so marvellous a tale. It appears that there 
is always a bayou or channel, connecting, during 
floods, each deserted bend or lake with the main 
river, through which large floating logs may pass. 
These often form rafts, and become covered with 
soil supporting shrubs and trees. At first such 
green islands are blown from one part of the lake to 
another by the winds, but the deciduous cypress, if it 
springs up in such a soil, sends down strong roots, 
many feet or yards long, so as to cast anchor in the 
muddy bottom, rendering the island stationary. 

Lake Solitude, situated in lat. 31 N. is two miles 
and a half in circuit, and is most appropriately named, 
being a retired sheet of water, its borders overhung 
by the swamp willow, now just coming into leaf, and 
skirted by the tall cypress, from which long streamers 
of Spanish moss are hanging. On the east it is bounded 
by high ground, a prolongation of the bluff at Port 
Hudson, on which the hickory, the oak, and many 
splendid magnolias, with the beech, walnut, tulip 



CHAP. XXXI.] BONY PIKE. 187 

tree, and holly, and a variety of beautiful shrubs are 
seen. The surface of the lake (except near the shore, 
where it is covered with the water lily) faithfully re- 
flects the trees and sky, presenting, in this respect, 
a marked contrast to the yellow waters of the Mis- 
sissippi. It is inhabited by hundreds of alligators and 
countless fish, and so many birds were swimming on 
it, or flying over it, that it seemed as if all the wild 
creatures which the steamers had scared away from 
the main river had taken refuge here. Several alli- 
gators were lying motionless, with their noses just 
above the surface of the water, resembling black logs. 
About fourteen years ago, some of them were not 
unfrequently seen here measuring fifteen feet in 
length, but they now rarely exceed eight feet. I 
observed a large gar-fish, or bony pike, called the 
alligator gar (Lepidosteus), leap nearly out of the 
water in pursuit of its prey. Its hard shining scales 
are so strong and difficult to pierce, that it can 
scarcely be shot. It can live longer out of water than 
any other fish of this country, having a large cellular 
swimming bladder, which is said almost to serve the 
purpose of a real lung. One of them has been known 
to seize the nostrils of a mule who was drinking, and 
only to be shaken off on dry ground, when its whole 
body had been dragged into the air. 

On the boughs of the willows were perched seve- 
ral white cranes, while herons, cormorants, and water- 
rails were swimming on the lake, their various notes 
adding to the wildness of the scene. Shriller than 
all, as the evening came on, we heard the voice of 
the large bull-frog. 



188 THE DEVIL'S SWAMP. [CHAP. xxxi. 

As we went back to the house, over the high 
ground, we saw three kinds of squirrels and many 
birds. So skilful was my companion with his rifle, 
that he brought down every bird which came within 
shot owls, rice-birds, woodpeckers, and jays that 
I might examine their plumage. I admired a beauti- 
ful cluster of the flowers and fruit of the red maple, 
about twenty feet above our heads. He offered to 
pick them for me, and, without delay, took aim so 
dexterously, as to sever the stem from the bough 
just below the blossom, without seeming to have in- 
jured the flower by a single shot. In the course of 
our walk, I observed several shrubs, almost hidden 
by the luxuriant growth of that most elegant of 
climbers, the yellow jessamine ( Gelsemium nitidum), 
with its fragrant blossoms. 

From these heights south of Port Hudson, we had 
a grand view of the great plain of the Mississippi, 
far to the south and west, an endless labyrinth of 
uninhabited swamps, covered with a variety of tim- 
ber, and threaded with bayous, one resembling ano- 
ther so exactly, that many a stranger, who has 
entered them in a canoe, has wandered for days 
without being able to extricate himself from their 
woody mazes. Among these morasses, one called 
the Devil's Swamp was in sight, and I found a 
curious account of the origin of its name in a MS. 
dated 1776, of Caleb Carpenter, a relation of my 
New Orleans friend. 

A German emigrant having settled near the bank 
of the Mississippi, in 1776, felled, with great labour, 
some lofty cypresses ; but, happening one day to make 



CHAP. XXXI.] THE DEVIL'S SWAMP. 189 

a false turn in his canoe, entered, by mistake, a 
neighbouring bayou. Every feature was so exactly 
like the scene where he had been toiling for weeks, 
that he could not question the identity of the spot. 
He saw all the same bends, both in the larger and 
smaller channels. He made out distinctly the same 
trees, among others the very individual cypresses 
which he had cut down. There they stood, erect 
and entire, without retaining one mark of his axe. 
He concluded that some evil spirit had, in a single 
night, undone all the labour of many weeks ; and, 
seized with superstitious terror, he fled from the 
enchanted wood, never to return. 

In order that I might not spend an indefinite 
time on the Mississippi, I determined to be prepared 
for a start in the first chance steamer which might be 
bound for Natchez, 140 miles distant, whenever an 
opportunity should offer, whether by day or night. 
I was told by my host that a trusty black ser- 
vant had been already appointed to look out for a 
steamer, which was to convey some farm produce to 
a proprietor far off on the Red River. He proposed, 
therefore, to give orders to this negro to wake me if 
any boat bound for Natchez should appear in sight 
before morning. Accordingly, about an hour after 
midnight, I was roused from my slumbers, and went 
down over a sloping lawn to the steam -boat landing 
on the river's bank. The sky was clear, and it was 
bright moonlight, and the distant cries of the owls, 
and other night-birds around Lake Solitude, were 
distinctly heard, mingled with the chirping of myriads 
of frogs. On the low bank my watchman had 



190 LITERARY CLERK. [CHAP. XXXI. 

lighted a signal fire, and I heard the puffing of a 
steamer in the distance ascending the stream. She 
soon neared us, and, on being hailed, answered, " La 
Belle Creole, bound for Bayou Sara." This port was 
far short of my destination, and when we shouted 
" Natchez," the captain first asked if we had any wood 
to sell, and on learning there was none, sailed away. 
I returned to the house, and took another nap of 
several hours, when I received a second summons from 
my faithful sentinel. The scene was entirely changed ; 
it was nearly day-break, and the fogs rising from the 
marshes had begun to cover the river. I was in 
despair, fearing that our signal fire would not be dis- 
cerned through the mist. Soon, however, we heard 
the loud gasping of the two steam-pipes sounding 
nearer and nearer, and a large steamer coming sud- 
denly close to the landing, was announced as "the 
Talma of Cincinnati." In a few minutes I was cross- 
ing the narrow plank which led from the steep bank to 
the vessel, which was actually in motion as I walked 
over it, so that I was glad to find myself safe on 
deck. They told me I must register my name at the 
office. The clerk asked me if I was the author of a 
work on geology, and being answered in the affirma- 
tive, wished to know if I was acquainted with 
Mr. Macaulay. On my saying yes, he took out a 
late number of the Edinburgh Review, and begged 
me to tell him whether the article on Addison was 
written by my friend, for he had been discussing this 
matter with a passenger that evening. When I had 
confirmed this opinion he thanked me, expressing 
much regret that he should not see me again, since I 



CHAP. XXXI.] OLD LEVEES. 191 

was to land next day at Natchez before he should be 
up. This conversation lasted but a few minutes, and 
in as many more I was in a good berth under a 
musquito net, listening to a huge bell tolling in the 
fog, to warn every flat-boat to get out of the way, on 
peril of being sent instantly to the bottom. In spite 
of this din, and that of the steam funnels and ma- 
chinery, I soon fell asleep for the third time. 

When I came on deck next day, all hands were at 
work, taking in wood at a landing below Bayou 
Sara, where I saw on the top of the river bank, now 
sixteen feet high, several striking memorials of the 
ravages of former inundations. Besides the newest 
levee, there was one which had given way previously 
to the great flood of 1844, and a still older one, which, 
although once parallel, was now cut off abruptly, and 
at right angles to the present course of the river. 
They reminded me of the remnant of an oval en- 
trenchment at the edge of the cliff near Newhaven 
in Sussex, and of those paths leading directly to the 
brink of precipices overhanging the sea in many 
maritime counties in England. Farther on, at 
another wooding station, in Adams county, Missis- 
sippi, I observed a bank eighteen feet in perpendicu- 
lar height, and said to be forty-five feet high when 
the water is at its lowest. It was composed of sand, 
or sandy loam, indicating a comparatively rapid de- 
position. In such loam, no erect stumps and trunks 
of trees are met with, the sediment having accumu- 
lated on the margin of the river in a few years too 
fast to allow large trees to grow there. But in 
other places, where the bank consisted of fine, stiff clay, 



192 UPRIGHT BUKIED TKEES. [CHAP. XXXI. 

I saw here and there the buried stools of cypresses, 
and other trees, in an upright position, with their 
roots attached, sometimes repeated at several different 
levels in the face of the same bank. I first remarked 
one of these at a point forty-five miles above New 
Orleans, and they increased in number as we as- 
cended. When first told of this phenomenon, before 
visiting the Mississippi, it appeared to me very diffi- 
cult of explanation. I soon, however, discovered 
that the great river, in its windings, often intersects 
the swamps or cypress basins which had been pre- 
viously filled up with fine mud or vegetable matter, 
at various distances from the former river-channel. 

Suppose an ancient bed of the Mississippi, or some 
low part of the plain, to become fit for the growth of 
cypress, yet to be occasionally flooded, so that the 
soil is slowly raised by fine mud, drift wood, or 
vegetable matter like peat. As the cypress ( Taxodium 
distichum) often attains to the age of three or four 
centuries, and, according to many accounts, occasion- 
ally in Louisiana to that of two thousand years, it is 
clear that the bottoms of the oldest trees will often 
be enveloped in soil several feet deep, before they 
die, and rot down to the point where they have been 
covered up with mud. In the mean time other trees 
will have begun to grow on adjoining spots, at dif- 
ferent and considerably higher levels, and eventually 
some of these will take root in soil deposited directly 
over the stump or decayed trunk of some of the first 
or oldest series of cypresses. They who have studied 
the delta affirm that such successive growths of trees 
are repeated through a perpendicular height of twenty- 



CHAP. XXXI.] RACCOURCI CUT-OFF. 193 

five feet without any change occurring in the level of 
the land.* 

Proceeding up the river, we soon passed Bayou 
Sara on our right hand, and came to the isthmus 
called the Raccourci cut-off, across which a trench 
nine feet deep has been dug, in the hope that the 
Mississippi would sweep out a deep channel. This 
" cut-off," should it ever become the main channel, 
would enable a steamer to reach, in one mile, a point, 
to gain which costs now a circuit of twenty -six miles, 
and two and a half hours. Unfortunately, when 
they cleared the forest in this spot, the soil of the 
new canal was found to consist of a stiff blue clay, 
strengthened by innumerable roots of trees, and, in 
the flood of 1845, the surplus waters of the Missis- 
sippi poured through the cut with great velocity, yet 
failed to deepen it materially. By shortening the 
channel twenty-five miles, the fall of the river would 
be augmented, and the engineer flattered himself 
that the effect might extend as far up as the mouth 
of the Red River. By accelerating the current there 
it was hoped that a deeper passage might be kept 
open in the sand-bar, which now blocks up the navi- 
gation of that important tributary for the greater 
part of the year. 

Some experienced pilots assured me, that the sup- 
posed shortening of the channel of the Mississippi, 
between its junction with the Ohio and New Orleans, 
was, in a great degree, a delusion. Instead of the 

* See Dickeson and Brown, Silliman's Journal, Second 
Series, vol. v. p. 17. Jan. 1848. 
VOL. II. K 



194 FRESHWATER LOAM [CHAP. XXXI. 

boasted gain of fifty miles, they say that not a third 
of this distance has been realised. Immediately after 
the completion of a new cut-off, the Mississippi 
begins to restore the natural curvature of its channel 
by eating away one bank and throwing out a sand- 
bar on the opposite side. 

Another fifty miles brought us to the mouth of 
the Red River, where I saw the formidable bar, 
before alluded to, covered, for the most part, by a 
growth of young willows and cotton- wood (Populus 
angulata). After leaving the mouth of Red River, 
we passed two bluffs on the left or eastern bank, one 
that of Fort Adams, a very picturesque line of pre- 
cipices, the other called Ellis's Cliffs. In both I 
observed a predominance of white sand, similar to 
that seen in part of the bluff at Port Hudson. 

At Natchez (where I rejoined my wife), there is 
a fine range of bluffs, several miles long, and more 
than 200 feet in perpendicular height, the base of 
which is washed by the river. The lower strata, 
laid open to view, consist of gravel and sand, desti- 
tute of organic remains, except some woo/1 and silici- 
fied corals, and other fossils, which have been derived 
from older rocks ; while the upper sixty feet are com- 
posed of yellow loam, presenting, as it wastes away, 
a vertical face towards the river. From the surface 
of this clayey precipice are seen, projecting in relief, 
the whitened and perfect shells of land-snails, of the 
genera Helix, Helicina, Pupa, Cyclostoma, Achatina, 
and Succinea. These shells, of which we collected 
twenty species, are all specifically identical with 
those now inhabiting the valley of the Mississippi. 



CHAP. XXXI.] OF NATCHEZ. , 195 

The resemblance of this loam to that fluviatile 
silt of the valley of the Rhine, between Cologne and 
Basle, which is generally called "loess" and " lehm" 
in Alsace, is most perfect. In both countries the 
genera of shells are the same, and as, in the ancient 
alluvium of the Rhine, the loam sometimes passes 
into a lacustrine deposit containing shells of the 
genera Lymnea, Planorbis, and Cyclas, so I found 
at Washington, about seven miles inland, or east- 
ward from Natchez, a similar passage of the Ame- 
rican loam into a deposit evidently formed in a pond 
or lake. It consisted of marl containing shells of 
Lymnea., Planorbis, Paludina, Physa, and Cyclas, 
specifically agreeing with testacea now inhabiting 
the United States. With the land-shells before 
mentioned are found, at different depths in the 
loam, the remains of the mastodon ; and in clay, im- 
mediately under the loam, and above the sand and 
gravel, entire skeletons have been met with of the 
megalonyx, associated with the bones of the horse, 
bear, stag, ox, and other quadrupeds, for the most 
part, if not all, of extinct species. This great loamy 
formation, with terrestrial and fresh-water shells, 
extends horizontally for about twelve miles inland, 
or eastward from the river, forming a platform about 
200 feet high above the great plain of the Mississippi. 
In consequence, however, of the incoherent and de- 
structible nature of the sandy clay, every streamlet 
flowing over what must originally have been a level 
table -land, has cut out for itself, in its way to the 
Mississippi, a deep gully or ravine. This excavating 
process has, of late years, proceeded with accelerated 

K 2 



196 KAVINES IN TABLE-LAND. [CHAP. XXXL 

speed, especially in the course of the last thirty or 
thirty-five years. Some attribute the increased 
erosive action to partial clearings of the native forest, 
a cause of which the power has been remarkably 
displayed, as before stated, within the last twenty 
years, in Georgia.* Others refer the change mainly 
to the effects of the great earthquake of New Madrid, 
in 1811 12, by which this region was much fis- 
sured, ponds being dried up and many landslips 
caused. 

In company with Dr. Dickeson and Colonel Wailes, 
I visited a narrow valley, hollowed out through the 
shelly loam recently named " the Mammoth ravine," 
from the fossils found there. Colonel Wiley, a pro- 
prietor of that part of the State of Mississippi, who 
knew the country well before the year 1812, assured 
me that this ravine, although now seven miles long, 
and in some parts sixty feet deep, with its numerous 
ramifications, has been entirely formed since the earth- 
quake. He himself had ploughed some of the land 
exactly over one spot which the gully now traverses. 

A considerable sensation was recently caused in 
the public mind, both in America and Europe, by 
the announcement of the discovery of a fossil human 
bone, so associated with the remains of extinct qua- 
drupeds, in " the Mammoth ravine," as to prove that 
man must have co-existed with the megalonyx and 
its contemporaries. Dr. Dickeson showed me the 
bone in question, admitted by all anatomists to be 
part of a human pelvis, and being a fragment of 

* See ante, p. 25. 



CHAP. XXXI.] FOSSIL HUMAN BONE. 197 

the os innominatum. He felt persuaded that it had 
been taken out of the clay underlying the loam, 
in the ravine above alluded to, about six miles from 
Natchez. I examined the perpendicular cliffs, which 
bound a part of this water-course, where the loam, 
unsolidified as it is, retains its vertically, and found 
land-shells in great numbers at the depth of about 
thirty feet from the top. I was informed that the 
fossil remains of the mammoth (a name commonly 
applied in the United States to the mastodon) had 
been obtained, together with the bones of some 
other extinct mammalia, from below these shells 
in the undermined cliff. I could not ascertain, 
however, that the human pelvis had been actually 
dug out in the presence of a geologist, or any prac- 
tised observer, and its position unequivocally ascer- 
tained. Like most of the other fossils, it was, I 
believe, picked up in the bed of the stream, which 
would simply imply that it had been washed out of 
the cliffs. But the evidence of the antiquity of the 
bone depends entirely on the part of the precipice 
from which it was derived. It was stained black, as 
if buried in a peaty or vegetable soil, and may have 
been dislodged from some old Indian grave near the 
top, in which case it may only have been five, ten, or 
twenty centuries old ; whereas, if it was really found 
in situ at the base of the precipice, its age would 
more probably exceed 100,000 years, as I shall en- 
deavour to show in a subsequent chapter. Such a 
position, in fact, if well authenticated, would prove 
that man had lived in North America before the 
last great revolution in the physical geography of 

K3 



198 TORNADO AT NATCHEZ. [CHAP. XXXI. 

this continent had been accomplished ; in other words, 
that our race was more ancient than the modern 
valley, alluvial plain, and delta of the Mississippi, 
nay, what is more, was antecedent to the bluffs of 
Port Hudson and Natchez, already described. Now 
that elevated freshwater formation, as I shall by and 
by endeavour to show, is the remnant of a river- 
plain and delta of extremely high antiquity ; and it 
would follow, if the human race was equally ancient, 
that it co-existed with one group of terrestrial mam- 
malia, and, having survived its extinction, had seen 
another group of quadrupeds succeed and replace it. 

In our excursion through the forest, from Wash- 
ington to the Mammoth ravine, I crossed the path 
of the last tornado, which occurred May 17. 1840, 
one of three which have devastated this region since 
the year 1809. They all came from Texas, moving 
along from south-west to north-east, and laid waste 
a long strip of country, about a mile wide. The 
courses of each of the three whirlwinds were within a 
few miles of the other, and the last threw down many 
houses at Natchez, unroofed others, and levelled to 
the ground a railway terminus, causing the abandon- 
ment of a scheme for a rapid communication between 
Natchez, Vicksburg, and the State of Tennessee. 
On each side of the path of the tornado the land 
was finely timbered ; but where its force had been 
expended, old trees lay uprooted, and a growth of 
young wood was rising. Many large trunks had 
been broken off ten or twelve feet above the ground, 
and portions of the solid wood, torn and twisted into 
shreds, were still waving in the air. 



CHAP. XXXL] COUNTRY-HOUSES. 199 

This tornado checked the progress of Natchez, as 
did the removal of the seat of Legislature to Jack- 
son ; but it has suffered still more, since steam navi- 
gation has been so much improved, by the all- 
absorbing importance acquired by New Orleans as 
the great emporium of the whole trade of the Missis- 
sippi. There are, however, so few bluffs on the 
great river, so few places where the channel will 
remain constant for ages to the same spot, that I 
cannot doubt that this city must, in time, become 
large and prosperous. 

It augurs favourably of the future prospects of 
civilisation in America, that here, as elsewhere, we 
found the society most agreeable in places which 
have been the longest settled. If the political 
opinions and notions of honour cherished by the 
majority of the citizens at Natchez, had had their 
due weight in the legislation of the State, the fair 
fame of Mississippi, and her credit, would have stood 
as high as that of any other Southern State. Many 
of the country-houses in the neighbourhood are ele- 
gant, and some of the gardens belonging to them laid 
out in the English, others in the French style, In the 
latter are seen terraces, with statues and cut ever- 
greens, straight walks with borders of flowers, termi- 
nated by views into the wild forest, the charms of 
both being heightened by contrast. Some of the 
hedges are made of that beautiful North American 
plant, the Gardenia, miscalled in England the Cape 
jessamine, others of the Cherokee rose, with its 
bright and shining leaves. It had already put forth 

K 4 



200 LANDSLIPS. [CHAP. XXXI. 

some of its white flowers, which a month later would 
be in full blow. The woods here, when all the trees 
are in full foliage, and the tall magnolias in blossom, 
must be truly beautiful. But so intense is the heat, 
and such the danger of ague and the torment of 
musquitos, that, at that season, they who can afford 
to move, fly to some higher or more northern retreat. 

On the steep slope of the bluffs at Natchez, below 
the vertical face of shelly loam, the Judas-tree, or 
red- bud (Cercis canadeiisis\ was now in full flower, 
displaying a blaze of pink blossoms before it has put 
forth any leaves. I saw four landslips on these 
bluffs which have occurred within the last ten years, 
for the springs which burst from the sand undermine 
the clayey loam. They are instructive, as showing 
how the bluffs give way as the Mississippi gradually 
extends its course eastwards. There is one hollow of 
ancient date, caused by a similar undermining, called 
the Devil's Punch-bowl, a picturesque, crater-shaped 
basin, of about 300 yards diameter at the top, and 
100 yards at the bottom, where cypresses and gum- 
trees are growing. At the top are seen the cotton- 
wood, the maple, and the magnolia, mixed with pines. 

The name of Natchez has been derived from an In- 
dian tribe, and on the highest part of the bluff, on an 
eminence called St. Rosalie, are some Indian mounds, 
from which Dr. Dickeson has obtained some curious 
remains of pottery, showing that some of the abori- 
ginal inhabitants of the great valley had made much 
greater progress in the arts than their descendants 
whom the Europeans drove out. One morning, close 



CHAP. XXXI.] INDIAN ANTIQUITIES. 201 

to the spot where these antiquities were dug up, we 
saw a wild-looking group of Indians, whose aspect 
gave no token that their contact with Europeans had 
tended to revive the spirit of improvement which 
must once have animated some of their predecessors 
in this region. 



K 5 



202 NATCHEZ TO VIDALIA. [CHAP. XXXII. 



CHAP. XXXII. 

Natchez. Vidalia and Lake Concordia. Hybernation of 
Alligator. Bonfire on Floating Raft Grand Gulf. 
Magnolia Steamer. Vicksburg to Jackson (Mississippi) by 
Railway. Fossils on Pearl River. Ordinary at Jackson. 
Story of 'Transfer of 'State-House from Natchez. Vote by Bal- 
lot. Popular Election of Judges. Voyage from Vicksburg 
to Memphis. Monotony of River Scenery. Squall of Wind. 
Actors on Board. Negro mistaken for White. Man- 
ners in the Backwoods. Inquisitiveness. Spoilt Children. 
Equality and Levelling. Silence of English Newspapers on 
Oregon Question. 

March 15. 1846. FROM Natchez we crossed the 
river, by the ferry, to Vidalia, situated on the low 
river plain, on a level with the base of the bluffs be- 
fore described. We were accompanied by Mr. Davis, 
a large proprietor, who took us to see his negro- 
houses, all neatly built and well whitewashed. Even 
in this cursory view we could perceive how much the 
comfort and bodily wants of the slaves had been 
attended to. We had now left the country where 
sugar and cotton are the staple products, and had 
just entered the region where cotton and Indian corn 
are cultivated together. Here, as in Louisiana, the 
negroes constitute half, and sometimes more than half, 
the population on the borders of the Mississippi. 
At Vidalia we were joined by Mr. Forshey, the 



CHAP. XXXII.] LAKE CONCORDIA. 203 

engineer, who went with us to Lake Concordia, a 
fine example of an old bend of the Mississippi, re- 
cently detached and converted into a crescent-shaped 
lake, surrounded by wood. It is a fine sheet of water, 
fifteen miles long, if measured by a curved line drawn 
through the middle. The old levee, or embankment, 
is still seen ; but it is no longer necessary to keep it 
in repair, for, a few years ago, the channel which once 
connected this bend with the main river was silted 
up. Opposite Natchez the depth of the Mississippi 
varies from 100 feet to 150 feet, but Lake Con- 
cordia has nowhere a greater depth than 40 feet. 
There are thirteen similar lakes between the 
mouth of the Arkansas and Baton Rouge, all near 
the Mississippi, and produced by cut-offs ; and so 
numerous are the channels which communicate from 
one to the other, that a canoe may pass, during the 
flood season, from Lake Concordia, and reach the Gulf 
of Mexico without once entering the Mississippi. 
We were shown a cypress tree on the borders of this 
deserted river bend, from under the roots of which, 
a few days before the time of our visit, a she alligator 
had come out on a warm day, the place of her hybern- 
ation appearing to be half in the mud and half in 
the water. She brought out with her two broods, 
one born in the preceding summer, which were six 
inches long, and the others, an older set, about a foot 
long. When Mr. Forshey approached them, the 
young ones yelped like puppies, and the old one 
hissed. On the shore of the lake we caught a tortoise, 
called here the snapping-turtle, and found that all its 
feet had been bitten off, devoured, our companions 

K 6 



204 LAKE CONCORDIA. [CHAP. XXXII. 

supposed, by predaceous fish. The freshwater shells, 
of which we obtained specimens from the lake, belong 
to the genera Lymnea, Planorbis, Paludina, Ancliy- 
lotus, Physa, Cyclas 9 and Unio. We put up flights of 
water-fowl of various species, chiefly wild ducks, 
which were swimming about. On the top of a pole, 
driven into the mud near the margin of the lake, was 
perched a kingfisher, and two cormorants were wheel- 
ing round it, one with a fish in its mouth, which the 
other was trying to snatch away. The water, al- 
though much clearer than the Mississippi, was not 
transparent, for it had communicated, during the late 
inundations, with the great river. In this manner 
sediment is annually introduced into such basins, and 
in the course of ages Lake Concordia may become so 
shallow as to support a forest of swamp timber. 
Some modern concretions of clay and lime, and of 
clay containing iron, which I picked up from the 
mud of the Mississippi bordering this lake, were so 
like those associated with the ancient buried forest 
at Port Hudson, and the shelly loam of Natchez, as 
to confirm me in the opinion before expressed, that 
the cliffs there, although of very high antiquity, cor- 
respond in origin with the recent fluviatile formations 
of the alluvial plain. 

March 17. We established ourselves in the wharf- 
boat at Natchez, prepared for a start in the first 
steamer which would take us to Grand Gulf, fifty 
miles higher up. We amused ourselves by watching 
a party of young negro boys, who collected the drift 
wood which bordered the river, and, having tied it 
together into a raft, heaped some dead branches of 



CHAP. XXXII.] BONFIKE ON FLOATING KAFT. 205 

trees upon it, placing a layer of shavings under the 
pile. Having set it on fire, they pushed it off from 
the shore, and exulted as they saw the floating bon- 
fire, in the dusk of the evening, throwing a glaring 
light on the bluffs, town, and shipping. The raft 
was carried round and round in the great eddies near 
the bank, and the urchins shouted when their love of 
mischief was gratified by seeing the alarm of the 
boatmen, each of whom was observing the wandering 
fire with some anxiety, lest it should come too near 
his own craft. In the cabin of the wharf-boat we 
found no furniture, but were supplied with two chairs, 
which, like the walls and ceiling, were of unpainted 
wood. As it grew dark, they brought in a table and 
a single candle. We were not sorry when the 
Peytona was announced, and we were ushered into 
a splendid saloon, 150 feet long, lighted by two 
large chandeliers suspended from the ceiling, and 
supplied with brilliant gas manufactured on board. 
The mattrasses of our beds were elastic, made of 
India rubber, no unmeaning luxury, for we were 
awakened before morning by the bumping of the 
boat against one floating log after another, and, in 
spite of the frequent stoppage of the engine, no small 
damage was done to the paddle-wheels, which got 
entangled with the drift timber. We reached Grand 
Gulf when morning had scarcely dawned, and found 
the floor of the saloon covered with the sleeping 
coloured servants, over whom we had to step. The 
river had risen twenty-five feet in two days, and 
was more turbid than we had yet seen it. 

The bluff at Grand Gulf is about 180 feet high, 



206 GRAND GULF. [CHAP. XXXII. 

the uppermost 60 feet, composed, as at Natchez, of 
yellow loam or loess, beneath which was white 
quartzose sand, partially concreted into solid sand- 
stone, which is quarried here for building. From 
the summit the river-plain to the westward seemed 
as level, blue, and boundless as the ocean. As we 
had now travelled two degrees of latitude northward, 
the spring was not more advanced than when we left 
New Orleans, but the woods crowning the bluffs are 
beautiful from the variety of trees, many of them 
evergreens, and we were charmed with the melody of 
the mocking-birds, and the warm sun brought out 
many large and brilliantly coloured butterflies, and 
more insects of other kinds than I had yet seen in the 
south. Among these were a beetle (Phaneus carni* 
fex\ with green and gold wing-cases, and a horn on 
the thorax. The name of bug is given to all beetles 
(Coleoptera) here, and does not seem to awaken the 
same unpleasant associations as it suggests to English 
ears. Even the elegant fire-fly is called a lightning- 
bug, and ladies who have diamond beetles set in 
brooches, ask you to admire their beautiful bugs. 
The Londoners, by way of compensation, miscall the 
cockroach a black beetle. 

From Grand Gulf, we embarked in the Magnolia, 
which had brought my wife to Natchez, and, having 
since made a trip to St. Louis and New Orleans, 
was on its return up the river. It is a new boat, 
and, among other improvements, has a separate sleep- 
ing cabin for the coloured servants. The furniture 
in the principal saloon is of fine Utrecht velvet, 
and the hanging lustres for gas very brilliant : the 



CHAP. XXXII.] MAGNOLIA STEAMER. 207 

beds excellent; but the powerful vibration caused by 
the machinery far from agreeable. Our state room 
contained a chest of drawers, and cupboards for 
hanging up ladies' dresses. Ample time was al- 
lowed for dinner, and we thought the fare only too 
sumptuous. The repast began with turtle soup, and 
two kinds of fish; then followed a variety of made 
dishes, admirably cooked, and then a course of cocoa- 
nut pies, jellies, preserved bananas, oranges, grapes, 
and ice-creams, concluding with coffee. The claret 
was excellent, and it may seem strange, at first, that 
they who indulge in such luxuries, can drink freely 
of the opaque, unfiltered water of the Mississippi. 
But this fluid has, at least, the merit of being cool 
on a hot day, and is believed to be very wholesome. 
We found it pleasant to the taste, however untempt- 
ing to the sight. Few of the praises bestowed by 
Denham on the Thames can be lavished on the 
Mississippi ; for, though deep, it is not clear, nor is it 
" without o'erflowing, full." Yet, in spite of the oc- 
casional undermining of forests on its banks, it may 
be truly characterised as " strong, without rage ;" 
absorbing, as it does, in its course, one great tri- 
butary after another, several of them scarcely inferior 
in width to itself, without widening its channel, and 
in this manner carrying down noiselessly to the sea 
its vast column of water and solid matter, while 
the greater part of its alluvial plain is left undis- 
turbed. 

A settler at Natchez told us he had lived on the 
great river long enough to admire it, for the ease 
with which it performs its mighty work ; and to fear 



208 VICKSBURG TO JACKSON. [CHAP. XXXII. 

it, so often had he witnessed the wreck of vessels 
and the loss of lives. " If you fall overboard," he 
said, "in the middle of the Atlantic, you may rise 
again and be saved ; but here you are sucked down 
by an eddy, and the waters, closing over you, are so 
turbid, that you are never seen again." 

March 19. At Vicksburg, where we next landed, 
I found the bluffs, forming the eastern boundary 
of the great plain, similar, in their upper part, to 
those of Natchez ; but beneath the freshwater loam 
and sand were seen, at the base of the cliffs, a marine 
tertiary deposit, of the Eocene period, in which we col- 
lected many shells and corals. (See fig. 10. p. 257 ; 
and 3. fig. 11. p. 262.) 

Leaving my wife to rest at the hotel, I made 
a rapid trip by railway, fifty-five miles eastward, 
to Jackson, the capital of the State of Missis- 
sippi. For the first ten miles, the cars traversed 
a table-land, corresponding in height with the sum- 
mit of the bluff at Vicksburg, and preserving an 
even surface, except where gullies had been hollowed 
out in the soft shelly loam or loess. These are nu- 
merous, and it had be^n necessary to throw bridges 
over many of them so as to preserve the level of the 
road. It was curious to observe, in the cuttings 
made through the loam, that each precipitous face 
retained its perpendicularity, as in natural sections, 
although composed of materials wholly unconsoli- 
dated. Farther to the east, the Eocene strata, be- 
longing to the same series, which are seen at the 
bottom of the bluffs at Vicksburg, rise up to the 
surface from beneath the freshwater loam, which 



CHAP. XXXII.] FOSSILS ON PEARL RIVER. 209 

attains an elevation of about 250 feet above the sea, 
and then gives place to older rocks. 

We passed through large forests of oaks and 
beeches,, just coming into leaf, in which were some 
green hollies. The red-bud, in blossom, was conspi- 
cuous in some of the woods. In the wet grounds 
were cane-brakes, willows, and magnolias. I ob- 
served, in a large clearing, three ploughs following 
each other, one guided by a man, and the others 
each by a negro woman. When we reached the Big 
Black river, twelve miles from Vicksburg, we passed 
over a long wooden bridge and viaduct, built on piles, 
nearly a mile in length. In about four hours, we 
arrived at the town of Jackson. I was wholly with- 
out letters of introduction, having suddenly deter- 
mined on this excursion, and knew not the name of a 
single individual ; which I regretted the more, as I 
had only a few hours of daylight at my disposal, and 
was to return by the cars at noon the day following. 
I inquired, as I had often done in France on similar 
occasions, for the nearest pharmacien, or chemist, and, 
being shown to a shop, asked if they knew any one 
who was interested in geology. The chemist in- 
formed me that Dr. Gist, a physician, lodged in the 
floor above, and might assist me. Fortunately, this 
gentleman was at home, and, telling me he had read 
my work on Geology, he presented me with some 
fossil shells and corals collected by him in the neigh- 
bourhood; and, within ten minutes of my "landing" 
from the cars, we were on our way together to ex- 
plore the dried-up channel of a small tributary of 
the Pearl Kiver, where I found a rich harvest of 



210 ORDINARY AT JACKSON. [CHAP. XXXII. 

fossil marine shells and zoophytes. When we parted, 
my excellent guide agreed to accompany me, early 
the next morning, many miles in another direction. 

On entering my hotel, after dark, I was informed 
that supper was ready, and was conducted to a large 
ordinary, crowded chiefly by lawyers, who were at- 
tending the courts here. The landlord, General 

A , formerly of the Tennessee militia, played 

the part of master of the ceremonies, much to my 
amusement. He first obtained silence by exclaiming, 
with the loud voice of a herald, " Gentlemen, we are 
a great people," and then called out the names of all 
the viands on his long table and sideboard, beginning 
with " Beef-steak, with or without onions, roast 
'turkey, pork, hominy, fish, eggs," &c., and ending 
with a list of various drinkables, the last of which 
was " tea, foreign and domestic." Curiosity led me 
to order the last-mentioned beverage ; but I soon 
repented, finding it to be a liquid of a pink colour, 
made of the root of the sassafras tree, and having a 
very medicinal taste. I was told that many here 
drink it for their health ; but the General, seeing 
that I did not relish it, supplied me with some good 
" foreign " tea. My host then introduced me to 
several of the lawyers who sat near me, which gave 
me an opportunity of asking whether there was any 
truth in the story told me by some of the Whigs at 
New Orleans, of the manner in which the seat of 
Legislature had been transferred from Natchez to 
Jackson. I related the story, which was as follows : 
-"Natchez was the metropolis of the State, and 
the chief town of Adams county, which was so 



CHAP. XXXIL] TRANSFER OF STATE-HOUSE. 211 

wealthy as to pay a third of all the taxes in Missis- 
sippi. It was a city to which the richest and best- 
informed citizens resorted, representing both the 
landed and monied interests of the State. It was, 
moreover, a centre of communication, because it 
commanded the navigation of the great river. That 
the Houses of Legislature should meet here, was so 
natural and convenient, so fitted to promote good 
government, that the democratic party could not be 
expected to put up, for many years, with an arrange- 
ment of affairs so reasonable and advantageous. 
They accordingly decided, by a majority, that some 
change must be made, and gave orders to a surveyor 
to discover the exact geographical centre of the 
State. He found it in a wilderness, about fifty miles 
in a straight line east of Natchez, and pointed out 
an old cypress tree, in the middle of a swamp, acces- 
sible only by a canoe, as the spot they were in search 
of. This was welcome news ; all might now be placed 
on a footing of equality, the spot being equally in- 
accessible and inconvenient for all. When the archi- 
tect, however, came to build the Capitol, he took the 
liberty, instead of erecting the edifice on piles in the 
centre of the swamp, to place it on an adjoining 
rising ground, from which they had cleared away the 
native wood, a serious abandonment of principle, as 
it was several hundred yards from the true geo- 
graphical centre." 

When my auditors had done laughing at this Lou- 
isiana version of a passage in their history, they 
said, the tale, after all, was not so exaggerated as it 
might have been, considering the vexation under 
which the New Orleans Whigs were smarting, in 



212 VOTE BY BALLOT. [CHAP. XXXII. 

having to go to Baton Rouge. They could show 
me, they said, the swamp on the Pearl River, which 
must have been alluded to. That river, though 
now only boatable, might, they declared, be made 
navigable to steam-boats, when the rafts of drift 
timber were cleared away, and they might then 
have a direct commercial intercourse with the Gulf 
of Mexico. The soil, also, surrounding Jackson, 
had proved to be very fertile, and the railway had 
brought the place within three or four hours of 
Natchez, now their port. In short, their town 
was flourishing, by aid of natural advantages, and 
the patronage of the Legislature and Law Courts. 
Next day, after a geological excursion, I was taken 
to see the State House and Governor's mansion, both 
handsome and commodious, and built in a good style 
of architecture, but at great expense, at a time when 
the price of labour happened to be unusually high. 
I heard much regret expressed at the debts they had 
incurred, and at the refusal to acknowledge them in 
1841. One lawyer, a member of the Legislature, 
declared his conviction that the repudiation of the 
State debt would not have been carried in his 
county, but for the facility afforded by secret voting. 
The same individuals, he said, who openly professed 
a more honourable line of conduct, must, out of self- 
ishness, have taken advantage of the ballot-box to 
evade an increase of taxation, otherwise there could 
not have been a majority in favour of disowning their 
liabilities. This was one of the few instances in 
which I heard the ballot condemned in the United 
States ; yet the position of the labouring and middle 
classes is, comparatively, so independent here, in 



CHAP. XXXII.] ELECTION OF JUDGES. 213 

relation to their rich employers, that the chief argu- 
ments relied upon in England in favour of secret 
voting, would seem to be inapplicable. 

The dependence of the judges, for their election, on 
the popular suffrage, appears to have been carried 
farther in Mississippi than in any other State. I was 
told that rival candidates for the bench and chan- 
cellorship, have been known to canvass for votes in 
taverns, and have been asked what construction they 
put on certain statutes relating to banks chartered 
by the State, just as, in an ordinary election for re- 
presentatives, men are asked what are their opinions, 
and how they would vote on certain questions. I 
met with more men of property in Mississippi who 
spoke as if they belonged to an oppressed class, go- 
verned by a rude, ignorant, and coarse democracy, 
than in any other part of my tour. " Many of our 
poorest citizens, they said, would freely admit, that 
nothing is so difficult, for the individual, as self- 
government, and yet hold that nothing is so easy and 
safe as self-government for the million, even where 
education has been carried no farther than here, 
where there are still seven counties without a single 
school-house, and large districts where the inhabit- 
ants have but recently been converted to Christianity 
by itinerant Methodists. They forget that even 
honourable and enlightened men will sometimes do, 
in their corporate capacity, w r hat each individual 
would be ashamed to do if he acted singly. " When 
I heard these remarks, and reflected that even in 
those parts of the State where the whites are most 
advanced, as in Adams county, more than half the 



214 VICKSBUEG TO MEMPHIS. [CHAP. XXXII. 

population are slaves, I felt more surprise that 
English capitalists had lent so much money to Mis- 
sissippi, than that they had repented of it. At the 
same time there is more hope for the future, for edu- 
cation must come. 

The town of Yicksburg is beautifully situated on 
the slope of a wooded bluff, about 180 feet high, and 
walks might be made, commanding the river, which 
would be delightful. At present no one can roam 
along the paths in the suburbs, as they are disgrace- 
fully filthy.* 

We took our passage in the Andrew Jackson 
steamer, from Vicksburg to Memphis, a distance of 
390 miles, and paid only six dollars each (25 shil- 
lings), board and lodging included. The monotony 
of the scenery on the great river for several hun- 
dred miles together, is such as to grow wearisome. 
Scarcely any vessels with sails are seen, all the old 
schooners and smaller craft having been superseded by 
the great steam -ships. The traveller becomes tired 
of always seeing a caving bank on one side, and an 
advancing sand-bar, covered with willows and pop- 
lars, on the other ; the successive growths of young 
trees rising to greater heights, one tier above another, 
as before described, below New Orleans. The water, 
at this season, is too turbid to reflect the sky or the 
trees on its bank. The aspect of things, day after day, 
is so exactly similar, that it might seem as necessary 

* For observations on the Geology of Jackson and Vicks- 
burg, see a paper by the Author, Journ. of Geol. Soc. London 
vol. iv. p. 15. 1847, and Silliman's Journal, Second Series, vol. 
iv. p. 186. Sept. 1847. 



CHAP. XXXIL] MONOTONY OF SCENERY. 215 

to take astronomical observations, in order to discover 
what progress one has made, as if the voyage were in 
mid- Atlantic. That our course is northward, is 
indicated by the willows on the banks growing less 
green, and a diminishing quantity of grey moss hang- 
ing from the trees. The red maple has also disap- 
peared. When I landed at wooding stations, I saw, 
on the damp ground beneath the trees, abundance of 
mosses, with scarcely a blade of grass, while the only 
wild flowers were a few violets and a white bramble. 
The young leaves of the poplars are most fragrant in 
the night air. We were now in latitude 34 north, 
passing the mouths of the Arkansas and White 
rivers. 

The village of Napoleon, 212 miles above Vicks- 
burg, at the mouth of the Arkansas, had suffered 
much by the floods of 1844. Its red, muddy waters 
are hardly mixed up thoroughly with the Mississippi 
till they reach Vicksburg. They often bring down 
much ice into the Mississippi. The White river is 
said to be navigable for about six hundred miles 
above its mouth. 

Our steamer, the Andrew Jackson, bound for Cin- 
cinnati, carrying a heavy cargo of molasses, was eight 
feet deep in the water. To avoid the drift wood, 
which impeded her progress, the captain, on arriving 
at Island Eighty-four ( for they are all numbered, 
beginning from the mouth of the Ohio), determined 
to take a short cut between that island and the left 
river bank. The lead was heaved, and the decreas- 
ing depth, from ten feet to eight and a half, was 
called out ; our vessel then grazed the bottom for a 



216 ACTORS ON BOARD. [CHAP. XXXII. 

moment, but fortunately got off again. There was 
so much sameness in the navigation, that such an inci- 
dent was quite a relief. Soon afterwards, March 
23d, some variety was afforded by a squall of wind, 
accompanied by lightning. I never expected to see 
waves of such magnitude, and was surprised to learn, 
that in some reaches, where the water extends ten 
miles in a straight line, a strong wind blowing against 
the current will cause large steamers to pitch so as 
to make many passengers sea-sick ; but this rarely 
happens. In the night we had often to draw up to 
the bank, wherever a signal-fire was lighted, finding 
sometimes a single passenger waiting to be taken on 
board. 

There were many actors on board, and, among 
others, a pleasing young woman, who turned out to 
be the manager's wife, returning with her family of 
young children and sick husband from Vicksburg, 
where she complained that the drama was at a low 
ebb, and where, as in many other cities in the South, 
the drunken habits of the inferior actors made the 
profession by no means a pleasant one for a woman. 
She was longing for an engagement in some " Eastern 
theatre," where, she told my wife, she would willingly 
take less pay, and would not object to undertake 
the part of "first old woman" for eighteen dollars 
a week, as most of the actresses, being desirous of 
looking young and pretty, compete eagerly for the 
character of " first juvenile." She liked much to 
act chambermaid, as then she was not expected tc 
learn her part so accurately. She had a real feeling 
of enthusiasm for her art, and great admiration for 



CHAP. XXXIL] NEGRO MISTAKEN FOR WHITE. 217 

Mrs. Kean, and spoke with satisfaction of having 
once acted second to her when she was Miss Ellen 
Tree. During her husband's illness at Vicksburg, 
she had been obliged to take the management of the 
theatre herself, and had good reason to lament that 
the temperance movement had not reached so far 
west. The physician, after attending his patient for 
many weeks in a fever, remitted to them a bill of 
fifty dollars, one only of many similar acts of gene- 
rosity in the members of this profession which came 
to my knowledge in the course of my tour. This 
actress had with her a young maid, fairer than many 
an English brunette, but who, though a free woman, 
did not happen to belong to the white aristocracy. 
The stewardess came into the cabin and summoned 
her to dinner, and she, doing as she was bid, sat down 
at the second table, where the officers of the ship and 
the white children were dining. When her repast 
was half finished, her master and mistress suddenly 
discovered the prodigious breach of decorum which 
their attendant was perpetrating, and, calling her 
away from the table, began explaining to one lady 
after another, especially those with whose children 
she had been sitting, that she was really a good girl, 
who knew no better. The stewardess also, knowing 
she should incur blame, came and apologised for her 
mistake, observing that the girl was quite undis- 
tinguishable by her complexion from a white. There 
was a quadroon lady on board, of very respectable 
appearance and manners, who was taking all her 
meals in her own state-room, thus avoiding the 
risk of meeting with similar indignities. It is not 

VOL. II L 



218 MANNEKS IN THE BACKWOODS. [CHAP. XXXII, 

surprising, in such a state of society, that they who 
belong to the degraded race, should make every effort 
to conceal the fact ; or, if that be impossible, to as- 
similate themselves, as far as they can, to individuals 
of the dominant race. In proportion to the mixture 
of white blood, the woolly, short hair of the negro 
lengthens and straightens, and the ambition of the 
black women is to contend with nature in torturing 
their hair, by combing and plaiting, till it resembles, 
as near as possible, the flowing locks of the whites. 

At one of the wooding stations, a countryman 
came on board with his wife, a half-bred Indian. 
She had straight black hair, and a soft mild eye. 
She sat at table with us, taking her place on terms 
of perfect equality, no distinction of caste being made 
in this case. 

As I was pacing the deck, one passenger after 
another eyed my short-sight glass, suspended by a 
riband round my neck, with much curiosity. Some 
of them asked me to read for them the name in- 
scribed on the stern of a steamer so far off that I 
doubted whether a good telescope would have en- 
abled me to do more than discern the exact place 
where the name was written. Others, abruptly 
seizing the glass, without leave or apology, brought 
their heads into close contact with mine, and, looking 
through it, exclaimed, in a disappointed and half 
reproachful tone, that they could see nothing. Mean- 
while, the wives and daughters of passengers of the 
same class, were sitting idle in the ladies' cabin, 
occasionally taking my wife's embroidery out of her 
hand, without asking leave, and examining it, with 



CHAP. XXXII.] MANNERS IN THE BACKWOODS. 219 

many comments, usually, however, in a complimentary 
strain. To one who is studying the geology of the 
valley of the Mississippi, the society of such com- 
panions may be endurable for a few weeks. He 
ought to recollect that they form the great majority 
of those who support these noble steamers, without 
which such researches could not be pursued except 
by an indefinite sacrifice of time. But we sometimes 
doubted how far an English party, travelling for 
mere amusement, would enjoy themselves. If they 
venture on the experiment, they had better not take 
with them an English maid-servant, unless they are 
prepared for her being transformed into an equal. 
It would be safer to engage some one of that too 
numerous class, commonly called " humble com- 
panions," who might occasionally enter into society 
with them. Ladies who can dispense with such as- 
sistance, will find the maids in the inns, whether 
white or coloured, most attentive. 

We were not asked more questions in regard to 
our private affairs than we had often been accustomed 
to submit to when travelling in France and Scot- 
land. Nor had I any reason to complain ; for when 
I had satisfied the curious as to my age, the number 
of my children, how we liked the country, and many 
other particulars, often asked very abruptly by one 
just come on board, I had no ceremony in retaliating 
on him, and putting to him as many queries in my 
turn. Every one must admit that the answers you 
commonly receive are most intelligent. Americans 
of the higher classes seemed more put out than we 
were, when thus catechized. 

L 2 



220 INQUISITIVENESS. [CHAP. XXXII. 

One of them, before we left Boston, as if deter- 
mined that nothing should surprise us, related many 
diverting anecdotes to illustrate the inquisitive turn 
of his countrymen. Among other stories he gave a 
lively description of a New Englander who was 
seated by a reserved companion in a railway car, and 
who, by way of beginning a conversation, said, " Are 
you a bachelor?" To which the other replied, dryly, 
" No, I'm not." "You area married man?" continued 
he.- "No, I'm not." "Then you must be a wi- 
dower ?" " No, I'm not." Here there was a short 
pause ; but the undaunted querist returned to the 
charge, observing, " If you are neither a bachelor, nor 
a married man, nor a widower, what in the world can 
you be?" "If you must know," said the other, 
" I'm a divorced man ! " 

Another story, told me by the same friend, was 
that a gentleman being asked, in a stage coach, how 
he had lost his leg, made his fellow travellers pro- 
mise that if he told them they would put no more 
questions on the subject. He then said, " It was 
bitten off." To have thus precluded them for the rest 
of a long journey from asking how it was bitten off, 
was a truly ingenious method of putting impertinent 
curiosity on the rack. 

When my wife first entered the ladies' cabin, she 
found every one of the numerous rocking-chairs 
filled with a mother suckling an infant. As none of 
them had nurses or servants, all their other children 
were at large, and might have been a great resource 
to passengers suffering from ennui, had they been 
under tolerable control. As it was, they were 



CHAP. XXXII.] SPOILT- CHILDREN. 221 

so riotous and undisciplined, as to be the torment 
of all who approached them. " How fortunate you 
are," said one of the mothers to my wife, " to be 
without children ; they are so ungovernable, and, if 
you switch them, they sulk, or go into hysterics." 
The threat of " I'll switch you," is for ever vocifer- 
ated in an angry tone, but never carried into execu- 
tion. One genteel and pleasing young lady sat down 
by my wife, and began conversation by saying, " You 
hate children, don't you ? " intimating that such were 
her own feelings. A medical man, in large practice, in 
one of the Southern States, told us he often lost 
young patients in fevers, and other cases where ex- 
citement of the nerves was dangerous, by the habitual 
inability of the parents to exert the least command 
over their children. We saw an instance where a 
young girl, in considerable danger, threw the medi- 
cine into the physician's face, and heaped most 
abusive epithets upon him. 

The Director of the State Penitentiary, in Georgia, 
told me, that he had been at some pains to trace out 
the history of the most desperate characters under his 
charge, and found that they had been invariably 
spoilt children ; and, he added, if young Americans 
were not called upon to act for themselves at so 
early an age, and undergo the rubs and discipline of 
the world, they would be more vicious and immoral 
than the people of any other nation. Yet there 
is no country where children ought to be so great 
a blessing, or where they can be so easily pro- 
vided for. Parents have not the excuse of Mrs. 
Mac Clarty, in the " Cottagers of Glenburnie," when 

L 3 



222 SPOILT CHILDREN. [CHAP. XXXII. 

she exclaims, " If I don't give the boy his own way, 
what else have I to give him ? " but it is probably 
because so many of these Western settlers have risen 
recently from Mrs. Mac Clarty's grade in society, that 
they have retained her maxims for the management 
of their children ; for the young people in the families 
of the best class of society in the United States, are 
often kept in as good order, and are as engaging in 
their manners, as they are in any part of Europe. 

Many young Americans have been sent to school 
in Switzerland, and I have heard their teachers, who 
found them less manageable than English or Swiss 
boys, maintain that they must all of them have some 
dash of wild Indian blood in their veins. English- 
men, on the other hand, sometimes attribute the same 
character to republican institutions; but, in fact, 
they are spoilt long before they are old enough to 
know that they are not born under an absolute 
monarchy. 

Some officers of the army, who had been educated 
at Westpoint, a lieutenant in the navy, and a judge, 
with his family, from a Southern State, were agree- 
able companions on this voyage, and differed as much 
in manners from the majority of our messmates, as 
persons of the same rank in Europe would have done. 
There seemed, to us, to be a great want, in such 
steamers, of a second cabin, at a price intermediate 
between that of the first cabin and the deck. A 
poor emigrant, who was roughing it in the latter 
place, remarked to me truly, that they were treated 
there like dogs, and had nothing but a plank to sleep 
upon. He was paying highly for his wife and family, 



CHAP. XXXII.] EQUALITY AND LEVELLING. 223 

who had places in the first cabin. Among all who 
have paid for these, a recognition of perfect equality 
is scrupulously exacted. Not only would a man of 
rank or ancient family, but one of the most refined 
manners, and superior knowledge and education, find 
himself treated as entitled to no more deference or 
respect than the rudest traveller. Plato's definition 
of a man, " bipes implume," " a featherless biped," 
would be most appropriate to one who was journey- 
ing in such company. To a certain extent, however, 
the manners of the ruder members of this society 
are improved by such intercourse, and there is some 
levelling up as well as levelling down. The European 
traveller must also bear in mind, that it would be no 
discredit to those who are settling in this wilderness 
especially when Europe pours into it, annually, 
her hundreds of thousands of ignorant and disap- 
pointed emigrants if the accommodation was of 
the rudest kind ; if there were no steamers in whose 
machinery the latest improvements had been adopted, 
many of them invented in the United States ; and if 
the cabin was not provided with good libraries, or 
the table covered with newspapers, literary magazines, 
and reviews. It is precisely because there is so much 
civilisation in the Western States, that foreigners 
criticise them unfairly, contrasting their condition 
with the highest standard of older countries. 

The authority of the captain is absolute, and he 
does not hesitate, if any unruly spirit is refractory, 
and refuses to conform to the regulations of the ship, 
to put him ashore at the nearest place on the bank 

L 4 



224 ENGLISH NEWSPAPERS. [CHAP. XXXII. 

where he can be landed ; but I never happened to see 
so strong a measure resorted to. 

The newspapers on the cabin table of the Andrew 
Jackson had a column headed in capitals, " Five 
Weeks later from Europe." The mail packet had 
been detained by adverse winds longer than usual, 
and the uneasiness respecting the chances of a war 
with England, still the subject of debate in Congress, 
had risen to a great height. Many lovers of peace 
had misgivings lest the English democracy, growing 
at last impatient, should express themselves with 
violence, and excite the war party here. The first 
glance at the news relieved them from anxiety, 
for the English were entirely absorbed with Free 
Trade, Cheap Bread, and the admission of foreign 
grain without duty. The Cabinet were too well 
satisfied that the people's attention was drawn 
off from foreign affairs to obtrude the American 
question unnecessarily on their attention. One of 
the politicians on board, who had been reading an 
account of the proceedings of the Anti-Corn-Law 
League, and the parliamentary debates on the Corn 
Duties, confessed to me, that the omission of all 
allusion to America the English being so entirely 
occupied with their domestic affairs wounded his 
feelings. "Here we have been talking," he said, 
"for three months about nothing else but Oregon, 
imagining that the whole world was looking on, 
in suspense, at this momentous debate, and even in 
Great Britain it has been forgotten for five entire 
weeks ! What an absurd figure we are cutting ! " 



CHAP. XXXIII.] BLUFFS AT MEMPHIS. 225 



CHAR XXXIII. 

Bluffs at Memphis. New Madrid. No Inn. Undermining of 
River Bank. Examination of Country shaken by Earthquake 
of 181 1-12. Effects of Passage of Waves through Alluvial 
Soil. Circular Cavities or Sand-Bursts. Open Fissures, 
Lake Eulalie drained by Shocks. Borders of Sunk Country , 
West of New Madrid. Dead Trees standing erect. A 
slight Shock felt. Trade in Peltries increased by Earth- 
quake. Trees erect in new-formed Lakes. Indian Tra- 
dition of Shocks. Dreary Forest Scene. Rough Quarters. 
Slavery in Missouri. 

March 24. 1846. AT length we reached Memphis, 
in the State of Tennessee. The town on which this 
ancient and venerable name is conferred appears the 
newest of the large places we have yet seen on the 
Mississippi. It is growing with great rapidity, stand- 
ing on a bluff now fifty-two feet above the level of 
the water when the river is high. The cliff is the 
abrupt termination of deposits similar to those of 
freshwater origin, which I have before alluded to at 
Natchez and Vicksburg. A mass of yellow loam, 
forty- feet thick, reposes on sand with quartz pebbles, 
which rests on clay, not visible at the time of my 
visit. Such a site for a town, in spite of the slow 
undermining of the cliffs, is permanent, by comparison 
with the ordinary banks of the river for hundreds of 
miles continuously ; for, as a general rule, the stream 



226 NEW MADKID. [CHAP. XXXIII. 

in the alluvial plain is either encroaching a foot or 
more annually, so as to wash away buildings, if there 
be any on the bank, or is retreating, so that a port 
soon becomes an inland town. The people of Mem- 
phis are ambitious that their city should be a great 
naval arsenal, and there are considerable naval stores 
here ; but as frigates require from eighteen to twenty- 
three feet water, and men-of-war thirty feet, while 
the bar at the mouth of the Mississippi affords at 
present no more than sixteen feet water, their 
hopes cannot be realised till a ship canal is made 
from some point on the Mississippi to the Gulf of 
Mexico. 

After we left Memphis, we were shown, on the 
Tennessee bank of the river, a log cabin, where they 
said General Jackson began his career ; one of his 
claims to popularity with the democratic party con- 
sisting in his having risen from a very humble origin. 
The advantages of a more liberal education, which a 
rival might have possessed who had begun life in 
easier circumstances, would not have countervailed, in 
the present stage of progress of the Union, the prestige 
which attaches to the idea of a man's having made his 
way by his own merits. 

March 25. From Memphis we sailed in a smaller 
steamer for 170 miles, first between the States of Ten- 
nessee and Arkansas, and then between Tennessee 
and Missouri, and arrived very late at night at New 
Madrid, a small village on the western bank of the 
river, where I intended to stay and make geolo- 
gical observations on the region shaken by the great 
earthquake of 1811-12. So many of our American 



CHAP. XXXIII. ] NEW MADRID. 227 

friends had tried to dissuade us from sojourning in 
so rude a place, that we were prepared for the worst. 
In the wharf-boat, at least, I expected to find a bed 
for the first night, and proposed to seek accommo- 
dation elsewhere the next day ; but, to my dismay, 
the keeper of this floating tavern told me, when I 
landed, that he had just come there, had nothing as 
yet " fixed," and could not receive us. I also learnt 
that the only inn in New Madrid had been given up 
for want of custom. Leaving, therefore, my wife 
sitting by the stove in the wharf-boat, and taking a 
negro as my guide, I began to pace the dark and 
silent streets. First I applied in vain for admittance 
at the old tavern, then to a store-keeper in the neigh- 
bourhood, who informed me that a German baker, 
near the river, sometimes took in lodgers. I next 
roused this man and his wife from their slumbers ; 
their only spare room was occupied, but they asked 
their lodger if he would give it up to us. No sum of 
money would have bribed him to comply, as I was 
satisfied when I knew him better, but his good na- 
ture led him at once to assent cheerfully. We were 
soon shown into the apartment, a kind of scullery, 
with a mattrass on the floor, on which we slept, and 
did not make our appearance next morning till half 
past eight o'clock. We then apologised, fearing we 
had kept them waiting for breakfast. They said, 
good humouredly, they had indeed waited from six 
o'clock, and it was now near their dinner time ! The 
young German, originally from near Strasburg, a man 
of simple manners, regarded himself as belonging to 
a different station in society, and would have acted 

L 6 



228 HUMBLE FARE. [CHAP. XXXIII. 

as waiter till we had finished our repast, had not his 
wife, a native-born American from the State of In- 
diana, insisted on his sitting down to table. They 
were so poor, that they had no servants, not even a 
negro boy or girl, and two children to look after. 
The fare was of the humblest kind, bread of Indian 
corn, bacon, and thick coffee. Some of the indis- 
pensable articles of the breakfast table equipage 
had been purchased, as we afterwards discovered, 
expressly for our use that morning. The lodger, 
" Uncle John," was an old bachelor in easy circum- 
stances, fond of fishing, who had come here to in- 
dulge in that sport. He was an old pilot, who had 
visited half the ports in the Mediterranean, as well 
as Great Britain, and was quite a character. He 
could tell many a good story of his adventures, and, 
like many natives of Louisiana, could bear to be con- 
tradicted on any point rather than hear the healthi- 
ness of New Orleans called in question. His man- 
ners, and those of our host and hostess towards each 
other and to us, were very polite, and never ap- 
proached undue familiarity. Uncle John assured 
me that the Mississippi is now flowing where 
New Madrid stood in 1811, and that the old grave- 
yard has travelled over from the State of Missouri 
into Kentucky. How this had happened, it was 
easy for me to divine when I went out after break- 
fast to look at the place by daylight. 

The river bank is now about twenty-five feet high, 
and would be forty-five feet at the lowest water 
level. It is giving way rapidly, three houses having 
fallen in during the last week, and some proprietors 



CHAP. XXXIII.] UNDERMINING OF RIVER-BANK. 229 

are in the act of shifting their quarters half a mile 
inland. At the bottom of the wasting bank, there 
is a semi-fluid quick-sand, which greatly accelerates 
the process of destruction. Yesterday, the ruins of 
a house, with the wooden fence of a garden, were 
precipitated into the river, and some of the wreck 
has formed a talus, up which I saw some hogs, after 
several unsuccessful attempts, clamber at last into a 
garden, where they began to uproot the flowers. 
The steam-boats, which are now sailing close to the 
bank, will, in a few years, pass freely over the site of 
the humble mansion where we had been sleeping ; 
and the geographer, in constructing a map half a cen- 
tury hence, may have to transfer to the State of 
Kentucky, the spot where I saw a garden flourish. 

I examined the perpendicular face of the bank 
with some interest, as exemplifying the kind of de- 
posits which the Mississippi throws down near its 
margin. They differ in no way from accumulations 
of sand and loam of high antiquity with which the 
geologist is familiar ; some beds are made up of hori- 
zontal layers, in others they are all slanting, or in 
what is called cross-stratification. Some are white, 
others yellow, and here and there a seam of black 
carbonaceous matter, derived apparently from the de- 
struction of older strata, is conspicuous. 

I next set out on an excursion to examine those 
districts, where I heard that some superficial effects 
of the great earthquake of 1811 were still visible. 
The reader should be reminded that this convulsion 
occurred contemporaneously with one of the most 
fatal earthquakes of South America, when the towns 



230 EARTHQUAKE OF 1811-12. [CHAP. XXXIII. 

of Guayra and Caraccas were laid in ruins. The 
shocks were also felt in South Carolina. Humboldt 
has remarked that the shocks of New Madrid are 
the only examples on record, of the ground having 
quaked almost incessantly for three months, at a 
point so far remote from any active volcano. The 
shocks were most violent in part of the region called 
the Little Prairie, to the southward of New Madrid, 
and they extended as far south as the river St. Francis, 
and, northwards, as far as the mouth of the Ohio. 
Although the country was thinly settled, and most 
of the houses built of logs, the loss of life was con- 
siderable. From accounts published at the time, it 
appears that the grave-yard of New Madrid was pre- 
cipitated into the Mississippi, the banks of which 
gave way in many places, and the ground swelled up 
so that the current of the river flowed backwards for 
a time, carrying several flat boats northwards, against 
the stream. In various parts of the region above 
alluded to as having been convulsed, lakes twenty 
miles and upwards in extent were formed, while 
others which pre-existed were drained.* Hundreds 
of chasms opened, and new islands appeared in the 
Mississippi and its tributaries. Flint, the geographer, 
who visited the country seven years after the event, 
says that, at the time of his visit, a district west of 
New Madrid still remained covered with water, and 
that the neighbouring forest presented a scene of 
great confusion, many trees standing inclined in 
every direction, and others having their trunks and 

* Silliman's Journ., vol. xv. 1829. 



CHAP. XXXIII.] EARTHQUAKE OF 1811-12. 231 

branches broken. He also saw hundreds of deep 
chasms remaining in the alluvial soil, which were 
produced, according to the inhabitants, by the burst- 
ing of the earth, which rose in great undulations, and 
discharged vast volumes of water, sand, and coaly 
matter, thrown up as high as the tops of the trees. 
As the shocks lasted throughout a period of three 
months, the country people remarked that, in given 
districts, there were certain prevailing directions in 
which these fissures opened, and they accordingly 
felled the tallest trees, making them fall at right 
angles to the direction of the chasms. By stationing 
themselves on these, they often escaped being swal- 
lowed up when the earth opened beneath them. 
Some of the shocks were perpendicular, while others, 
much more desolating, were horizontal, or moved 
along like great waves. 

Before I left New Orleans, Mr. Bringier, the engi- 
neer, related to me that he was on horseback near New 
Madrid, in 1811, when some of the severest shocks 
were experienced, and that, as the waves advanced, he 
saw the trees bend down, and often, the instant after- 
wards, when in the act of recovering their position, meet 
the boughs of other trees similarly inclined, so as to 
become interlocked, being prevented from righting 
themselves again. The transit of the wave through 
the woods was marked by the crashing noise of 
countless branches, first heard on one side and then 
on the other. At the same time, powerful jets of 
water, mixed with sand, mud, and pieces of bitu- 
minous coaly shale, were cast up with such force, that 
both horse and rider might have perished, had the 



232 SAND-BUKSTS. [CHAP. XXXIII. 

undulating ground happened to burst immediately 
beneath them. He also told me that circular cavities, 
called sink-holes, were formed where the principal 
fountains of mud and water were thrown up. 

Hearing that some of these cavities still existed 
near the town, I went to see one of them, three 
quarters of a mile to the westward. There I found 
a nearly circular hollow, ten yards wide, and five feet 
deep, with a smaller one near it, and I observed, 
scattered about over the surrounding level ground, 
fragments of black bituminous shale, with much 
white sand. Within a distance of a few hundred 
yards, were five more of these "sand-bursts," or 
" sand-blows," as they are sometimes termed here, 
and, rather more than a mile farther west, near the 
house of Mr. Savors, my guide pointed out to me 
what he called " the sink-hole where the negro was 
drowned." It is a striking object, interrupting the 
regularity of a flat plain, the sides very steep, and 
twenty-eight feet deep from the top to the water's 
edge. The water now standing in the bottom is 
said to have been originally very deep, but has grown 
shallow by the washing in of sand, and the crum- 
bling of the bank caused by the feet of cattle coming 
to drink. I was assured that many waggon loads of 
matter were cast up out of this hollow, and the 
quantity must have been considerable to account for 
the void ; yet the pieces of lignite, and the quantity 
of sand now heaped on the level plain near its 
borders, would not suffice to fill one-tenth part of the 
cavity. Perhaps a part of the ejected substance may 
have been swallowed up again, and the rest may have 



CHAP. XXXIII.] LAKE EULALIE. 233 

been so mixed with water, as to have spread freely 
like a fluid over the soil. 

My attention was next drawn to the bed of what 
was once a lake, called Eulalie ; Mr. W. Hunter, the 
proprietor of the estate, accompanying me to the spot. 
The bottom, now dried up, is about 300 yards long by 
100 yards in width, and chiefly composed of clay, co- 
vered with trees, the whole of them less than thirty- 
four years old. They consist of cotton-wood (Populus 
angulata\ willows, the honey locust, and other spe- 
cies. Some single cotton-wood trees have grown so 
fast as to be near two and a half feet in diameter, 
and had not my guide known their age accurately, 
I should have suspected their origin to have been 
prior to 1811. All the species on the bottom differ 
from those covering the surrounding higher ground, 
which is more elevated by twelve or fifteen feet. 
Here the hickory, the black and white oak, the gum, 
and other trees, many of them of ancient date, are 
seen to flourish. On all sides, the ascent from the 
old bed of the lake to its boundary, is by a steep 
slope, on ascending which you reach a platform on a 
level with the top of the bank of the Mississippi, 
which is about a mile distant. Mr. Hunter informed 
me that Lake Eulalie was formerly filled with clear 
water, and abounded in fish, until it was suddenly 
drained by the earthquake. In the clayey bottom, I 
traced the course of two parallel fissures, by which 
the waters escaped. They are separated from each 
other by a distance of about eight yards, and are not 
yet entirely closed. Near their edges, much sand 



234 EXCURSION TO [CHAP. XXXIII. 

and coal shale lie scattered, which were thrown out 
of them when they first opened. 

In regard to the origin of this black bituminous 
shale, so abundantly cast out of chasms in this region, 
it belongs to the alluvial formation, and is found, in 
digging wells, fifteen feet deep, or sometimes nearer 
the surface. It was probably drifted down at a 
former period by the current of the Mississippi, from 
the coal-fields farther north. 

Having learnt that still more striking monuments 
of the earthquake were to be seen in the territory 
farther to the westward of New Madrid, I endea- 
voured, but in vain, to hire a horse. At length a 
merchant's widow kindly lent me a steed. To pro- 
cure a guide was impossible, all hands being fully 
employed. I therefore set out alone through the 
forest, skirting the borders of a swamp called the 
Bayou St. John, where I observed a great many 
fallen trees, and others dead and leafless, but stand- 
ing erect. After riding some miles, I found my way 
to a farm, the owner of which had witnessed the 
earthquake when a child. He described to me the 
camping out of the people in the night when the first 
shocks occurred, and how some were wounded by the 
falling of chimneys, and the bodies of others drawn out 
of the ruins. He confirmed the published statements 
of the inhabitants having availed themselves of fallen 
trees to avoid being engulfed in open fissures, and I 
afterwards heard that this singular mode of escape 
had been adopted in distant places, between which 
there had been no communication, and that even 
children threw themselves on the felled trunks. My 



CHAP. XXXIIL] " SUNK COUNTRY." 235 

new acquaintance then took me to see several fis- 
sures still open, which had been caused by the un- 
dulatory movement of the ground, some of them 
jagged, others even and straight. I traced two of 
them continuously for more than half a mile, and 
found that a few were parallel ; but, on the whole, 
they varied greatly in direction, some being ten and 
others forty-five degrees west of north. I might 
easily have mistaken them for artificial trenches, if 
my companion had not known them within his 
recollection to have been " as deep as wells." Sand 
and black shale were strewed along their edges. 
They were most of them from two to four feet 
wide, and five or six feet deep ; but the action of 
rains, frost, and occasional inundations, and above all 
the leaves of the forest blown into them every au- 
tumn in countless numbers, have done much to fill 
them up. 

Continuing my ride, I came to the house and farm 
of Mr. Love, who had long resided in this district, 
and he took me to part of the forest, on the borders 
of what is called the " sunk country," where all the 
trees of a date prior to 1811, although standing erect 
and entire, are dead and leafless. They are chiefly 
oaks and walnuts, with trunks three or four feet in 
diameter, and many of them 200 years old. They are 
supposed to have been killed by the loosening of the 
roots during the repeated undulations which passed 
through the soil for three months in succession. The 
higher level plain, where these dead trees stand, ter- 
minates abruptly towards the Bayou St. John, and 
the sudden descent of eight or ten feet throughout 



236 SLIGHT SHOCK FELT. [CHAP. XXXIII. 

an area four or five miles long, and fifty or sixty 
broad, was caused, my informant assured me, by the 
earthquake. At the lower level are seen cypresses 
and cotton- wood, and other trees which delight in wet 
ground, all newer than 1812. I was told that there 
are some places where the descent from the upper 
level to that of the sunk country is not less than 
twenty and even thirty feet. In part of this sunk 
ground I saw not only dead oaks and hickory still 
erect, but aged gum-trees also and cypresses (Cu- 
pressus distichd). 

While I was riding with Mr. Love he stopped his 
horse, and asked me if I did not feel the shock of an 
earthquake. When my attention was called to it, I 
fancied I had perceived it, but was not sure. He 
said they were frequent, although he had not felt one 
for the last fortnight. It was now three years since 
they had been seriously alarmed by any movement. 
We looked at our watches, and when we returned to 
the farm he inquired of the family if anything had 
happened. They said they had felt a shock, and 
heard a sound like distant thunder, at twenty-five 
minutes past eleven o'clock, which agreed exactly 
with the time when my companion had felt the 
motion. 

If the information I obtained from several quar- 
ters be correct, in regard to the country perma- 
nently submerged by the earthquake of 1811-12, 
the area must exceed in magnitude what was stated 
in former accounts. The " sunk country," I am told, 
extends along the course of the White Water and its 
tributaries for a distance of between seventy and 



CHAP. XXXIII.] "SUNK COUNTKY." 237 

eighty miles north and south, and thirty miles east 
and west. A trapper, who had been hunting on 
the Little River, told me, that large spaces there were 
obviously under water, owing to the great shake, 
because the dead trees were still standing. In the 
true hunter spirit, he regarded the awful catastrophe 
of 181112 as a blessing to the country, and ex- 
patiated with delight on the vast area turned into 
lake and marsh, and the active trade carried on ever 
since in the furs of wild animals. It had been the 
making of New Madrid, he affirmed, which would 
become a rival of St. Louis, and exported even now 
at least half as many peltries. There had been taken 
last year 50,000 racoon skins, and 25,000 musk-rats 
for making hats and caps; 12,000 mink for trimming 
dresses; 1000 bears and 1000 otters ; 2500 wild cats, 
40 panthers, and 100 wolves. Beavers there were 
none, or only five or six had been trapped. He had 
gone in his canoe, which carried his hut, his gun, 
and his baggage, over the whole sunk country, and 
described to me the villages or hummocks built 
in the swamps by the musk-rats, which he called 
"French settlements," a piece of impertinence in 
which the Anglo-Americans indulge towards the 
Creoles of Louisiana. He told me that within the 
area of the sunk country in Arkansas, about eighty 
miles from New Madrid, is a space called Buffalo 
Island, containing about twenty-five square miles, 
where, two years ago, (1844,) a herd of buffaloes, 
300 or 400 strong, was surprised, and six of them 
taken. 

The sunk country is not confined to the region 



238 TRADITION OF EARTHQUAKES. [CHAP. XXXIII. 

west of the Mississippi ; for, on my way up the river, 
I learnt from Mr. Fletcher, a farmer, who had a 
wooding station in Tennessee, that several extensive 
forest tracts in that State were submerged during the 
shocks of 1811-12, and have ever since formed 
lakes and swamps, among which are those called 
Obion and Reelfoot. He had observed, in several 
of these, that trees which had been killed, and had 
stood for a long time partially submerged, had 
in many places rotted down to the water's edge. 
In some swamps caused by the earthquake, they 
had all decayed to within a few inches of the base of 
the trunk. It is therefore evident, that should the 
turbid waters of the Mississippi overflow that region, 
and deposit their sediment on such stumps, they 
would present to the geologist a precise counterpart 
of the buried stools of trees with their roots before 
described as occurring at the bottom of the bluff at 
Port Hudson.* Mr. Fletcher also told me, that 
he knew several fissures in Tennessee, formed in 
1811-12, where the ground on one side of the rent 
remained higher by two feet than that on the other 
side. 

I was informed at New Madrid that the Indians, 
before the year 1811, had a tradition of a great 
earthquake which had previously devastated this same 
region. Yet there is so wide an area of forest 
without sink-holes or, any great inequalities of sur- 
face, and without dead trees like those above alluded 
to, that we cannot suppose any convulsion of equal 

* Ante, pp. 177180. 



CHAP. XXXIII. ] DREARY FOREST SCENE. 239 

magnitude to have occurred for many centuries pre- 
vious to 1811. 

Having explored the margin of the Great Prairie, 
and seen the sunk country several miles west of 
New Madrid, I returned by a different path through 
the woods, often losing my way, till I fell into the 
main road for the last six miles, which was cut 
straight through the forest, and was at this season 
singularly monotonous and dreary. It was furrowed 
with long deep ruts, cut in black mud, and full of 
miry water. The sky was cloudy, and the plain as 
level as if it had never been disturbed by the slightest 
subterranean movement since it originated. The 
trees were, for the most part, leafless, and almost all 
of the same height, with no evergreens below them, 
and no grass ; but, instead of it, a sombre brown 
covering of damp and dead oak leaves, strewed evenly 
over the ground. At one point I saw the rotting 
trunks of several fallen trees, and near them an old 
oak, on the boughs of which, near the base, a group of 
five turkey-buzzards were perched, in perfect charac- 
ter with the rest of the scene. Twilight was coming 
on, and the woods were silent ; but, as I approached 
the river, the silence was agreeably broken by the 
varied and liquid notes of a mocking-bird, and, at the 
same time, one of the large woodpeckers, with its 
brilliant plumage, flew over my head, as if to remind 
me that at other seasons the solitude is cheered by 
the song and bright colours of birds, when the leaves 
of the trees unfold themselves, and the sun's heat 
would then be so intense, that a traveller would gladly 
retreat into the shades of the dense forest. 



240 BOUGH QUARTERS. [CHAP. XXXIII. 

When I took back my horse to its owner in New 
Madrid, I received a pressing invitation to exchange 
our present homely quarters for her comfortable 
house. Some of the other principal merchants made 
us hospitable offers of the same kind, which were ex- 
ceedingly tempting. We thought it right, however, 
to decline them all, as we might have hurt the feel- 
ings of our German host and his wife, who, in their 
anxiety to accommodate us, had purchased several 
additional household articles. Among these was a 
table-cloth, and, when I entered the house, I was 
amused at the occupations of my wife and her com- 
panion. The baker's lady had accepted the offer of 
her guest to hem the new table-cloth, in which task 
she was busily engaged ; while the settler in the back- 
woods, having discovered that my wife had brought 
from New Orleans a worked collar of the latest 
Parisian fashion, had asked leave to copy it, and was 
intent on cutting out the shape, thus qualifying her- 
self to outdo all the " fashionists" of the sunk 
country. 

A great spirit of equality was observable in the 
manners of the whites towards each other at New 
Madrid, yet with an absence of all vulgar familiarity. 
But what I saw and heard, convinced me that the 
condition of the negroes is least enviable in such 
out-of-the-way and half civilised districts, where 
there are many adventurers, and uneducated settlers, 
who have little control over their passions, and who, 
when they oppress their slaves, are not checked by 
public opinion, as in more advanced communities. 
New comers of a higher tone of sentiment are com- 



CHAP. XXXIIL] SLAVERY IN MISSOURI. 241 

pelled sometimes to witness cruelties which fill them 
with indignation, heightened by the necessity of 
being silent, and keeping on good terms with persons 
of whose conduct they disapprove. To the passing 
stranger, they can enlarge on this source of annoy- 
ance, and send him away grieving that so late as the 
year 1821, Missouri should have been added to the 
Union as a Slave State, against the wishes of a re- 
spectable minority of its own inhabitants, and against 
the feeling of a majority of the more educated popu- 
lation of the North. 



VOL. II. 



242 ALLUVIAL FORMATIONS. [CHAP. XXXIV. 



CHAP. XXXIV. 

Alluvial Formations of the Mississippi, ancient and modern. 
Delta defined. Great Extent of Wooded Swamps. 
Deposits of pure Vegetable Matter. Floors of Slue Clay 
with Cypress Roots. Analogy to ancient Coal-measures. 
Supposed " Epoch of existing Continents." Depth of Fresh- 
water Strata in Deltas. Time required to bring down the 
Mud of the Mississippi. New Experiments and Observations 
required. Great Age of buried and living Cypress-trees. 
Older and newer Parts of Alluvial Plain. Upraised Terraces 
of Natchez, fyc., and the Ohio, the Monuments of an older 
Alluvial Formation. Grand Oscillation of Level. The 
ancient Valleys inhabited by Quadrupeds now extinct. Land- 
shells not changed. Probable Rate of Subsidence and Up- 
heaval. Relative Age of the ancient Alluvium of the Missis- 
sippi, and the Northern Drift. 

BEFORE leaving the valley of the Mississippi, I shall 
take this opportunity to offer some general remarks on 
the modern delta and alluvial plain of the great river, 
and on those freshwater deposits before described in 
the bluffs of Port Hudson, Natchez, Yicksburg, and 
Memphis, which I regard as the monuments of a 
more ancient alluvial formation, one of high antiquity, 
yet formed when the physical geography of the 
country already bore a great resemblance to that 
now existing, and when, moreover, the land and 
waters were inhabited by the same species of terres- 
trial, fluviatile, and lacustrine mollusca, which now in- 



CHAP. XXXIV.] DELTA OF MISSISSIPPI. 243 

habit this region, although the land quadrupeds were 
almost entirely different. 

The delta of the Mississippi may be defined as that 
part of the great alluvial slope, which lies below, or 
to the south of the branching off of the highest arm, 
or that called the Atchafalaya. Above this point, 
which is the head of the delta, the Mississippi re- 
ceives water from its various tributaries; below, it 
gives out again, through numerous arms or chan- 
nels, the waters which it conveys to the sea. The 
delta, so defined, is about 14,000 square miles in 
area, and elevated from a few inches to ten feet 
above the level of the sea. The greater part of it 
protrudes into the Gulf of Mexico, beyond the 
general coast line. The level plain to the north, 
as far as Cape Girardeau, in Missouri, above the 
junction of the Ohio, is of the same character, in- 
cluding, according to Mr. Forshey, an area of about 
16,000 square miles, and is, therefore, larger than 
the delta. It is very variable in width from east 
to west, being near its northern extremity, or at the 
mouth of the Ohio, 50 miles wide, at Memphis 30, 
at the mouth of the White River 80, and contracting 
again further south, as at Grand Gulf, to 33 miles. 
The delta and alluvial plain rise by so gradual a 
slope from the sea as to attain at the junction of the 
Ohio (a distance of 800 miles by the river) an eleva- 
tion of only 200 feet above the Gulf of Mexico. 

First, in regard to the whole alluvial slope, whether 
above or below the present head of the delta, it will 
appear, from what has been already said, that sand 
is thrown down near the borders of the main river 

M 2 



244 WOODED SWAMPS. [CHAP. XXXIV. 

and its tributaries, and fine mud at more distant 
points. The larger portion, however, of the whole 
area consists of swamps, supporting a luxuriant 
growth of timber, interspersed with lakes, most of 
which are deserted river bends. These lakes are 
slowly filling up, and every swamp is gradually 
becoming shallower, the substances accumulated 
in them being, for the most part, of vegetable 
origin, unmixed with earthy matter. It is only on 
their exterior margins (except after a sudden sub- 
sidence, during an earthquake like that of 1811-12,) 
that the waters of the Mississippi throw down sedi- 
ment in the interior of any large swamp or lake, 
for the reeds, canes, and brushwood, through which 
the waters must first pass, cause them to flow slowly, 
and to part with all the matter previously held in 
mechanical suspension. Long before they reach the 
central parts of a morass or lake, they are well 
filtered, although still deeply stained by vegetable 
matter in a state of decomposition. 

Over a large portion of the submerged areas of 
the great plain, trees are seen growing everywhere 
in the water. Into the deeper water, where no 
forest can grow, the trunks of trees are floated, and 
many of these sink, when water-logged, to the bottom, 
which is also raised by an annual deposit of leaves, 
and of peaty matter derived from decaying plants, 
of which there is an exuberant growth round the 
borders of every swamp. That the admixture of 
inorganic matter is very small, has been shown by 
the observations of Messrs. Dickeson and Brown, 
who state, "that when the woods are burning, 



CHAP. XXXIV.] FLOORS OF BLUE CLAY. 245 

after an unusually dry season, pits are found burnt 
into the ground as far as the fire can descend with- 
out coming in contact with water, and scarcely any 
residuum or earthy matter is left." * They also state 
that at the bottom of all the cypress swamps or 
brakes, there is found a peculiar layer of tenacious 
blue clay, which forms the foundation, or floor, on 
which the vegetable matter accumulates. We may 
conclude, therefore, that as the roots of the cypress 
penetrate far beneath the soil, and project horizon- 
tally far and wide, those of one tree interlacing 
with another, such root-bearing beds of argillaceous 
loam must be very analogous to what are called 
fire-clays, so well known to the geologist as oc- 
curring underneath almost every seam of coal in the 
ancient carboniferous rocks.f 

Other points of analogy might also be indicated 
between the deposits, whether of organic or inorganic 
matter, now accumulating in the valley-plain and 
delta of the Mississippi, and those of the ancient 
carboniferous rocks. When, for example, depressions 
are suddenly caused, as in the " sunk country " 
before described, certain wooded areas being sub- 
merged, the lower parts of the erect trees become 
enveloped with sand and mud, the upper portions 

* Sillimau's Journal, Second Series, vol. v. p. 17. January, 
1848. 

} In my former " Travels," I have alluded to the fire-stones 
with Stigmaria (now acknowledged to be the root of Sigillaria), 
underlying the American coal-seams, as they do those of South 
Wales, 3000 miles distant. " Travels in North America," vol. i. 
p. 62. 

M 3 



246 ANALOGY TO COAL-MEASURES. [CHAP. XXXIV. 

rotting away, as must have happened in the case of 
the celebrated fossil forest of Dixon-fold, in Lan- 
cashire, belonging to the ancient coal-measures.* In 
the modern alluvial plain, also, river-sand will be 
often thrown down, as the Mississippi shifts its 
course over spaces on which pure vegetable matter 
had been previously accumulating for hundreds or 
thousands of years, just as we find sandstone some- 
times resting immediately upon the old coal-seams ; 
and, if there be a long succession of downward move- 
ments, the thickness of strata, all formed in shallow 
water or in swamps, may be indefinitely great. 
Should the hilly country, moreover, be distant, pebbles 
will no more be seen in the modern sand strewed 
over the buried trees and layers of vegetable matter, 
than they usually are in the grits associated with the 
coal of ancient date. The phenomena, also, of the 
New Madrid earthquake, may help us to explain the 
vast geographical area over which, in the course of 
ages, dense fluviatile and lacustrine strata, with in- 
tercalated -beds of vegetable origin, may be made to 
extend without any inroads of the sea. For the 
inland parts of any hydrographical basin may be aug- 
mented indefinitely in length and breadth, while the 
seaward portions continue unaltered, as the delta 
around New Orleans, and the low lands bordering 
the Gulf of Mexico, preserved their level unchanged, 
while parts of Missouri and Tennessee were lowered. 
By duly appreciating the permanent geographical 
revolutions which would result from a succession of 

* Proceedings of Geol. Society, 1839, p. 139. 






CHAP. XXXIV.] DEPTH OF FRESHWATER STRATA. 247 

such earthquakes as that of 1811-12, in the territory 
of New Madrid, we shall be prevented from em- 
bracing the theory implied in the language of those 
who talk of tf the epoch of existing continents." In 
treating of deltas, they are in the habit of assuming 
that the present mass of alluvial matter which has 
been thrown into the sea at the mouths of great 
rivers, began to be deposited in all the great hydro- 
graphical basins of the world at one and the same 
fixed period namely, when the formation of the 
existing continents was completed ; as if the relative 
levels of land and sea had, during that time, remained 
stationary, or had been affected to so inconsiderable 
an amount, as to be unimportant in their influence 
on the physical geography of each region, in com- 
parison with the changes wrought by the rivers, in 
converting sea into land. But what we already 
know of the deltas of the Po, Indus, Ganges, and 
other rivers, leads to a very different conclusion. 
The boring of an artesian well at Calcutta, was 
carried to the depth of 481 feet, the greater part of 
the section being below the level of the sea, and yet 
all the beds pierced through were of freshwater 
origin, without any intermixture of marine remains. 
At different depths, even as far down as 380 feet, 
lacustrine shells, and a stratum of decayed wood, 
with vegetable soil, which appears to have supported 
trees, was met with.* These appearances may readily 
be accounted for, by assuming that there was a 
gradual subsidence of the ground for ages, which 



* See " Principles of Geology," Seventh Edition, 1847, p. 266. 
M 4 



248 COMPUTATION OF AGE [CHAP. XXXIV. 

was as constantly raised by the accession of fluviatile 
sediment, so as to prevent any incursion of the sea. 
Occasionally there were pauses in the downward 
movement, when trees grew on the soil, and vege- 
table matter of some thickness had time to ac- 
cumulate. 

Recent observations, by Morlot and others, have 
demonstrated that, since the time of the Romans, 
there has been a general subsidence of the coast at 
the head of the Adriatic, to the amount of five feet, 
which has not prevented the delta of the Po and 
other rivers from advancing on the sea, although it 
must have cheeked their progress. Of the much 
greater movements of elevation and depression which 
have taken place in the delta of the Indus, especially 
those wrought in the year 1819, I have elsewhere 
given an account.* It would, therefore, be perfectly 
consistent with analogy to find, in the neighbour- 
hood^of New Orleans, ancient swamp formations, with 
the roots and stumps of erect trees, unmixed with 
marine remains, far below the level of the sea, as is 
the fact, if I can rely on the information given me 
in 1846. f 

Finding it impossible to calculate the age of the 
delta, from the observed rate of the advance of the 
land on the Gulf in each century, I endeavoured 
to approximate, by a different method, to a minimum 
of the time required for bringing down from the 
upper country that large quantity of earthy matter 
which is now deposited within the area of the delta. 

* Principles, Seventh Edition, p. 437. | See ante, p. 137. 



CHAP. XXXIV.] OF DELTA OF MISSISSIPPI. 249 

Dr. Eiddell communicated to me, at New Orleans, 
the result of a series of experiments which he had 
made, to ascertain the proportion of sediment con- 
tained in the waters of the Mississippi. He con- 
cluded that the mean annual amount of solid matter 
was to the water as y^Vy ' m weight, or about ^oV o 
in volume.* Since that period, he has made another 
series of experiments, and his tables show that the 
quantity of mud held in suspension, increases regu- 
larly with the increased height and velocity of the 
stream. On the whole, comparing the flood season 
with that of clearest water, his experiments, con- 
tinued down to 1849, give an average annual quan- 
tity of solid matter somewhat less than his first 
estimate, but not varying materially from it. From 
these observations, and those of Dr. Carpenter and 
Mr. Forshey (an eminent engineer, to whom I have 
before alluded), on the average width, depth, and 
velocity of the Mississippi, the mean annual discharge 
of water and sediment were deduced. I then as- 
sumed 528 feet, or the tenth of a mile, as the pro- 
bable thickness of the deposit of mud and sand in 
the delta ; founding my conjecture chiefly on the 
depth of the Gulf of Mexico between the southern 
point of Florida and the Balize, which equals, on an 
average, 100 fathoms, and partly on some borings, 
600 feet deep, in the delta near Lake Pontchar- 

* The calculations here given, were communicated to the 
British Association in a Lecture which I delivered at South- 
ampton, in September, 1846. See "Athenaeum Journal," 
Sept. 26. 1846, and "Report of British Association," 1846, p. 1 17. 

M 5 



250 COMPUTATION OF AGE [CHAP. XXXIV. 

train, north of New Orleans, in which the bottom of 
the alluvial matter is said not to have been reached. 
The area of the delta being about 13,600 square 
statute miles, and the quantity of solid matter an- 
nually brought down by the river 3,702,758,400 
cubic feet, it must have taken 67,000 years for the 
formation of the whole ; and if the alluvial matter 
of the plain above be 264 feet deep, or half that of 
the delta, it must have required 33,500 more years 
for its accumulation, even if its area be estimated 
as only equal to that of the delta, whereas it is in 
fact larger. 

From information since received, I think it not 
improbable that the quantity of water may have 
been underrated in this estimate* ; and, if so, a larger 

* I allude chiefly to the observations and experiments, on 
the velocity of the Mississippi at various depths, made by 
Mr. W. H. Sidell, during a Government survey, communicated 
to me through the kindness of Mr. Ruggles, of New York, 
which, if correct, would lead to the inference that the average 
number of cubic feet of water discharged into the Gulf per 
second, is considerably greater than Mr. Forshey and Dr. Car- 
penter deduced from their observations on the velocity of the 
stream at different depths. If, as I understand, there exist 
documents in the hydrographer's office at Washington, which 
would afford more ample data for such calculations, the Govern- 
ment would confer a boon on the scientific world by publish- 
ing them without delay. Such experiments as Mr. Sidell's, 
which give the velocity at various depths and at different dis- 
tances from the banks, are the more needed, because it seems 
doubtful whether any correct mathematical formulae have as 
yet been furnished for calculating the mean rate at which so 
deep a river as the Mississippi flows, from observations made 
simply on its superficial velocity. I placed all the data given 



CHAP. XXXIV.] OF DELTA OF MISSISSIPPI. 251 

amount of sediment would have been brought down 
from the interior in a given time, and consequently 
a deduction would have to be made from the number 
of centuries above stated on that account. But, on 
the other hand, if it could be shown, by more accurate 
experiments and calculations, that the quantity of 
water in the above computation was greatly defi- 
cient, say even one-third less than the real quantity, 
I do not imagine that any exaggeration has been 
made in the time supposed to have elapsed since the 
rivers began to transport their earthy ingredients to 
the alluvial plains of Louisiana. The delta is, after 
all, a mere fragmentary portion of a larger body of 
mud, the finer particles of which never settle down 
near the mouths of the Mississippi, but are carried 
far out into the Gulf, and there dispersed. 

The description which I have given of the great 
distance to which the yellow and lighter streams of 



me by Messrs. Riddell, Forshey, and Carpenter, in the hands of 
my friend, Mr. George Rennie, F.R.S., to whom we are in- 
debted for many valuable papers on the application of the 
science of hydraulics to rivers (see Report of British Asso- 
ciation, vol. iii. p. 415. 1834), and, after examining them, he 
came to conclusions which did not vary materially from those 
which I had previously announced. Mr. James Nicol, As- 
sistant Secretary of the Geological Society of London, before 
he had seen Mr. Sidell's experiments, had expressed to me his 
belief that the quantity of water carried to the Gulf by the 
Mississippi, must be greater than I had assumed from Mr. 
Forshey's calculations, judging from the amount usually as- 
signed as the annual discharge of rivers having hydrographical 
basins smaller than that of the Mississippi. 

M 6 



252 COMPUTATION OF AGE [CHAP. XXXIV. 

freshwater are seen extending, from the various 
mouths, in the flood-season, into the Gulf ; and still 
more, the destruction of the banks and bars of mud 
and sand caused by the tide scouring out the chan- 
nels when the river is low*, and the strength of 
the marine current, running ten miles an hour, and 
the stories of anchors and heavy ballast cast up by 
the breakers high and dry on the shifting shoals 
near the extremity of the delta, make me doubt 
whether the larger part of that impalpable mud, 
which constitutes the bulk of the solid matter car- 
ried into the sea by the Mississippi, is not lost alto- 
gether, so far as the progress of the delta is concerned. 
So impalpable is the sediment, and so slowly does it 
sink, that a glass of water, taken from the Missis- 
sippi, may remain motionless for three weeks, and 
yet all the earthy matter will not have reached the 
bottom. If particles so minute are carried by the 
current, setting for a great portion of the year from 
west to east, across the mouth of the river, into the 
Gulf Stream, and so into the Atlantic, they might 
easily travel to the banks of Newfoundland before 
sinking to the bottom ; and some of them, which left 
the head waters of the Missouri in the 49th degree 
of north latitude, may, after having gone southwards 
to the Gulf, and then northwards to the Great Banks, 
have found no resting-place before they had wan- 
dered for a distance as far as from the pole to the 
equator, and returned to the very latitude from 
which they set out. Were it not for the peculiar 

* See ante, p. 154. 



CHAP. XXXIV.] OF DELTA OF MISSISSIPPI. 253 

manner in which the Mississippi forms long bars of 
sand, which frequently unite with some part of the 
coast, so as to dam out the sea and form lagoons, the 
deposition of sediment in the delta would be much 
less considerable. A lagoon, like Lake Pontchar- 
train, once formed, becomes a receptacle of the finest 
mud, poured into it by an arm of the great river 
during the flood season, and the space thus parted off 
from the Gulf by bars of sand, is protected from the 
action of the breakers and marine currents. 

When I inquired what might be the depth of 
fluviatile mud in the suburbs of New Orleans, I was 
told that, in making a railroad near Lake Pontchar- 
train, piles were driven down sixty feet into the soft 
mud or slush, and when a boring was made there, 600 
feet deep, beds of gnathodon were found, but no 
marine shells. 

The depth of the alluvium may vary in different 
parts of the great sloping plain; for certain areas, such 
as the " sunk country," for example, west of New 
Madrid, may have been repeatedly depressed, and 
have been always brought up again to the same 
superficial level, by the deposition of river mud, or 
the growth of vegetable matter. 

The age of stumps and erect trunks of the decidu- 
ous cypress, whether living or buried, retaining their 
natural position, at points near the present termina- 
tion of the delta, ought to be carefully examined, as 
they might afford evidence of the minimum of time 
which can be allowed for the gain of land on the sea. 
Some single trunks in Louisiana are said to contain 
from 800 to 2000 rings of annual growth, and Dr. 



254 CYPRESS TREES. [CHAP. XXXIV. 

M. W. Dickeson and Mr. A. Brown state, that the 
cypress brakes or basins, which fill up gradually, give 
place at length to other timber ; but before this hap- 
pens, the buried cypress stumps often extend through 
a deposit of vegetable and sedimentary matter 
twenty-five feet thick. " Sections of such filled-up 
cypress basins, exposed by the changes in the position 
of the river, exhibit undisturbed, perfect, and erect 
stumps, in a series of every elevation with respect to 
each other, extending from high- water mark down to 
at least twenty-five feet below, measuring out a time 
when not less than ten fully -matured cypress growths 
must have succeeded each other, the average of whose 
age could not have been less than 400 years, thus 
making an aggregate of 4000 years since the first 
cypress tree vegetated in the basin.* There are also 
instances where prostrate trunks, of huge dimensions, 
are found imbedded in the clay, immediately over 
which are erect stumps of trees, numbering no less 
than 800 concentric layers." 

Michaud, in his famous work on the forest trees of 
North America, mentions that stems of this deciduous 
cypress ( Taxodium distichum) are met with in Florida, 
and in Southern Louisiana, forty feet in circum- 
ference above the enlarged base, which is three or 
four times that size ; but such individuals dwindle to 
nothing before the gigantic trunk near Santa Maria 
del Tule, in the province of Oaxaca, in Mexico, 
which was first mentioned by Exter, who found its 
circumference to be 117'10 French feet. Zuccarini, 

* Silliman's Journal, Second Series, vol. v. p. 17. January, 
1848. 



CHAP. XXXIV.] ALLUVIAL PLAIN. 255 

has lately removed the doubts of De Candolle re- 
specting this measurement, which was taken above 
the dilated base, for that was no less than 200 feet 
in circumference. In this stem there would be 5352 
rings of annual growth, if one line a year was taken 
as the average growth, the deposit of wood becoming 
always much smaller in trees of great age ; but Zuo 
carini, in his estimate, thinks it may be safer to 
assume 1*6 line as the average, which would even 
then give the age of 3512 years for this single tree. 

The great number of crescent-shaped lakes to the 
westward of the Mississippi, which formerly con- 
stituted bends in its ancient channel, are also monu- 
ments of the antiquity of the great plain over which 
the river has been wandering. Darby, the geogra- 
pher, observed that, in the steep banks of the Atchafa- 
laya, there are alternations of the blueish clay of the 
Mississippi and of the red ochreous earth peculiar 
to Red River, proving that the waters of these two 
streams once occupied alternately considerable tracts 
below their present point of union.* Since their 
junction (an event, the date of which is unknown), 
the waters and sediment of the Red River and Mis- 
sissippi have been thoroughly mixed up together, 
before any deposition of their mud takes place in the 
lower country. It is evident, therefore, that, when we 
are enabled, by geological observations such as those 
of Darby, to distinguish the older from the newer 
portions, even of the modern alluvial plain, we may 
obtain more aid in our chronological computations 

* Darby's Louisiana, p. 103. 



256 UPRAISED TEEEACES [CHAP. XXXIV. 

founded on rings of growth in buried trees ; for we 
may then add the years deduced from stumps buried 
in the modern parts of the delta, to those proved by 
the structure of trees included in mud of earlier date. 

After considering the age and origin of the modern 
deposits of the Mississippi and its tributaries, we 
have still to carry back our thoughts to the era of 
the freshwater strata seen in the bluffs which bound 
the great valley. These, in their southern termi- 
nation, have evidently formed an ancient coast-line, 
beyond which the modern delta has been pushed for- 
ward into the sea. Let a, b (fig. 10.) represent the 
alluvial plain of the Mississippi, bounded on its 
eastern side at Yicksburg, as before described, by 
the bluffs d, at the foot of which are seen the Eo- 
cene strata,/, the upper part of the bluff being com- 
posed of shelly loam, or loess, of freshwater origin, 
d, e (No. 2.). 

At Memphis, Port Hudson, and many other 
places, loam of the same age as No. 2., rising from 50 
to 200 feet above the level of the sea, constitutes the 
entire bluffs, forming a table-land like that repre- 
sented at d, e. Similar deposits, a, c (fig. 10.), recur 
in Louisiana, on the western side of the great valley ; 
but they are not, I am informed, denuded so as to 
present a steep bluff at . They rest equally on 
Eocene strata, /(No. 3.) 

From what has been said of the species of shells 
contained in the loam, d, e, at Natchez, and in other 
localities, from the remains also of associated ter- 
restrial animals, and from the buried trees of Port 
Hudson, we have inferred that these deposits (No. 2.), 



CHAP. XXXIV.] OF NATCHEZ AND OHIO. 257 

are the monuments of an ancient alluvial plain, of an 
age long anterior to that through which the Mis- 



Fig. 10. 

VALLEY OF THE MISSISSIPPI. 



Louisiana. 




2 1 34 

1. Alluvium. 2. Loess. 3. /. Eocene. 4. Cretaceous. 

sissippi now flows, which was inhabited by land and 
freshwater mollusca agreeing with those now ex- 
isting, and by quadrupeds now for the most part 
extinct. 

In my former " Travels in North America," I de- 
scribed some ancient terraces of gravel, sand, and 
loam, occurring everywhere in the valley of the 
Ohio, and gave a section of them as they are seen at 
Cincinnati.* I pointed out that the included fossil 
shells demonstrate the fluviatile and modern origin of 
the deposits, and suggested that their present position 
could only be explained by supposing, first, a gra- 
dual sinking down of the land after the original exca- 
vation of the valley, during which period the gravel 
and sand were thrown down, and then an upheaval 
of the same valley, when the river cut deep channels 
through the freshwater beds.f Certain swamp form- 
ations observable in the valleys of small tributaries 
of the Ohio, such as those of Big Bone Lick, in 

* Travels in North America, fig. 9., vol. ii. p. 59. chap. xvii. 
f The second terrace (c, fig. 9. ibid.) at Cincinnati, may 
imply a second oscillation. 



258 EXTINCT QUADRUPEDS. [CHAP. XXXIV. 

Kentucky, and Mill Creek, near Cincinnati, are of 
geological celebrity, in consequence of the great 
number of skeletons of extinct mammalia, such as 
the megalonyx, mastodon, elephant, and others, which 
seem to have lived, and have been mired in an- 
cient morasses, before the land began to sink; for 
the great mass of fluviatile loam and gravel forming 
the terraces, has been superimposed on the black 
bog earth containing such bones. The teeth, how- 
ever, and bones of similar extinct quadrupeds, es- 
pecially the mastodon, are occasionally met with 
scattered through the incumbent gravel and loam, so 
that the same assemblage of quadrupeds continued 
to inhabit the valleys while the first change of level 
or the subsidence was going on. By simply extending 
to the valley of the Mississippi, the theory before 
applied to that of the Ohio, we may, as already stated 
at p. 183. in reference to the Port Hudson bluffs, 
account for the geological appearances seen in the 
larger and more southern area. 

It has been long ascertained that in Norway and 
Sweden a gradual rise of the land above the sea has 
been going on for many centuries, producing an ap- 
parent fall in the waters of the adjoining ocean. The 
rate of elevation increases as we proceed northwards 
from Gothenburg to the North Cape, the two extre- 
mities of this line being distant more than a thousand 
geographical miles from each other, and we know not 
how much farther north or south the motion may be 
prolonged under water. The rise of the land, which 
is more than five feet in a hundred years at the North 
Cape, gradually diminishes to a few inches in a cen- 



CHAP. XXXIV] OSCILLATION OF LEVEL. 259 

tury in the neighbourhood of Stockholm, to the 
south of which the upward movement ceases ; and in 
Scania, the southernmost part of Sweden, appears 
to give place to a slight movement in an opposite 
or downward direction.* 

We also know that part of the west coast of 
Greenland, extending about 600 miles north and 
south, has been subsiding for three or four centuries 
between latitudes 60 and 69 N.f But whether, 
in this instance, the rate of depression varies in 
different parts of the sinking area, has not yet been 
determined. In speculating, however, on the manner 
in which the valleys of the Mississippi and its tribu- 
taries may have been affected by subterranean move- 
ments, we are at least authorised by analogy to 
assume that the downward movement may have 
been greater in the more inland part of the con- 
tinent, just as we have seen in 1811-12, that the 
" sunk country" west of New Madrid subsided, 
while the level of the delta at New Orleans under- 
went no sensible change. If, then, the vertical 
movement in the interior, in and near the valley of 
the Ohio, for example, were greater than near the 
Gulf, as if, in the former case, it were two and a half 
feet in a century, and near the sea only half that 
amount, it would follow that the general fall of the 
rivers would be lessened. They would deposit all 
their heavier, and some even of their finer sediment, 
in their channels, instead of having power to carry it 
to the sea. They would fill up their beds, and often 

* Principles of Geology, Seventh Ed. p. 506. 
f See " Principles, 5 ' ibid. 



260 OSCILLATION OF LEVEL. [CHAP. XXXIV. 

overflow the adjoining plains, raising their level by 
repeated layers of fluviatile matter or silt, frequently 
containing the shells of land and amphibious mol- 
lusks. 

If, even now, the Mississippi, when flooded, dams 
up the mouths of its great tributaries, and transforms 
them for months into temporary lakes, it must have 
produced the same effect to a far greater extent if at 
any time the general fall of the country towards the 
sea was less rapid. 

In narrow valleys bounded by ancient rocks 500 
or 600 feet high, such as that of the Ohio, the 
alluvial formation could never acquire great breadth. 
Its thickness would depend entirely on the length of 
time throughout which the subsidence was prolonged. 
But nearer the sea, where the continent falls with a 
gentle slope towards the Gulf, the encroachment of 
the freshwater deposits (No. 2. fig. 11. p. 262.), 
of the great river on the tertiary strata (No. 3.), 
constituting the original bluffs on its eastern and 
western boundaries, might be very great. 

If we then suppose the downward movement to 
cease, and to be at length converted into an ascend- 
ing one, the rate of upheaval being greatest in the 
more inland country, the fall of every river, and con- 
sequently its velocity, would begin immediately to 
augment. Their power of carrying earthy matter 
seaward, and of scouring out and deepening their 
channels, would be greater and greater, till at length, 
after a lapse of many thousand years, each of them 
would have eroded a deep channel or valley through 
the fluviatile formation previously accumulated. The 



CHAP. XXXIV.] OSCILLATION OF LEVEL. 261 

surface of what was once the river-plain at the period 
of greatest depression, would remain fringing the val- 
ley sides as a terrace, apparently flat, but in reality 
sloping down with the general inclination of the 
valley. Everywhere this terrace would present cliffs 
of gravel and sand facing the river. 

After these changes, the fundamental strata (Nos. 
3,4, 5. fig. 11. p. 262.) might be restored nearly to 
their ancient positions; the freshwater beds (No. 2.) 
having been raised, and having suffered great de- 
nudation. 

It is not improbable that the same series of move- 
ments gave rise to the accumulation and present 
position of marine strata of comparatively modern 
date, forming the lower terrace near Darien in 
Georgia* which is indicated at 2*, in the annexed 
section (fig. 11.). The reader will remember that the 
remains of the megatherium, mastodon, elephant, 
Harlanus, equus, and other extinct species of land 
quadrupeds, are there associated with marine shells, 
of species agreeing with those now inhabiting the 
Atlantic. 

On the other hand, there are proofs in Texas of 
the prevalence of the same succession of subterranean 
movements far to the south-west, along the country 
bordering the Gulf of Mexico ; for on the Brazos 
river there are beds of loam, or loess, examined by 
Dr. Dickeson, and, when at New Orleans, I saw the 
bones of extinct quadrupeds brought from that de- 
posit. Among them was the jaw-bone of a tapir, 

* See ante, vol. i. p. 346. 




SISSTJ\[ 9q? JO 



CHAP. XXXIV.] PKOBABLE EATE OF SUBSIDENCE. 263 

apparently identical with the South American species; 
remains of the mastodon, elephant, ox, arid other 
mammalia, much resembling, on the whole, those 
found at Natchez and on the Ohio. 

As to the seaward extremity of the ancient delta, 
the effect of the gradual depression of land above 
assumed would be to cause its mud and sand to 
increase in thickness, instead of augmenting in area. 
When at length the movement was reversed, and 
the freshwater deposits began to rise, the action of 
the sea would undermine them, and, aided by the 
river and tides, sweep much of them away, and per- 
haps shape out a bay. But the swamp-mud, with 
innumerable interlaced roots of cypress and other 
trees, might offer considerable resistance ; and, after 
a time, the river charged with sediment would throw 
down bars, and form a breakwater, to protect the 
newly upraised deposits from annihilation. 

In regard to the time consumed in accomplishing 
the great oscillation of level which first depressed 
so large an area to the depth of 200 feet or more, 
and then restored it to its former position, it is im- 
possible, in the present state of science, to form more 
than a conjecture as to the probable mean rate of 
movement. To suppose an average sinking and up- 
heaval of two and a half feet in a century, might be 
sufficient, or would, perhaps, be too great, judging 
from the mean rate of change in Scandinavia, Green- 
land, the north of the Adriatic, and other regions. 
Even such an oscillation, if simultaneously continuous 
over the whole area, first in one direction, and then 
in another, and without any interruptions or minor 



264 NORTHERN DRIFT. [CHAP. XXXIV. 

oscillations, would require sixteen thousand years for 
its accomplishment. But the section at Cincinnati 
seems to imply two oscillations, and there would pro- 
bably be pauses, and a stationary period, when the 
downward movement ceased, and was not yet changed 
into an upward one. Nor ought we to imagine that 
the whole space was always in motion at once. 

When we have at length done our best to trace 
back the history of the more modern and more 
ancient alluvial formations of the Mississippi, the 
question still remains, what may be their age rela- 
tively to the great body of the drift containing erratic 
blocks in the northern latitudes of this same con- 
tinent. The terraces of gravel and loam bordering 
the Ohio, and those on a larger scale, but of the 
same age, which constitute many of the eastern bluffs 
of the Mississippi, are evidently features of sub- 
ordinate importance in the physical configuration of 
the continent. But to explain the origin of the 
northern drift of the Canadian lake district, and of 
the St. Lawrence, as I have endeavoured to show in 
my former " Travels," requires a reference to such 
changes as would imply the submergence of a great 
part of the continent drained by the head waters of 
the Mississippi, Missouri, and their northern tribu- 
taries.* For this and other reasons, into which I 
cannot now enter, I presume that the great mass of 
the most elevated drift in the north, and the glacial 
grooving and polishing of the rocks, although they 
belong to a very modern era in the earth's history, 

* See vol. i. ch. ii. p. 47. and vol. ii. eh. xix. p. 99. 



CHAP. XXXIV.] NORTHERN DRIFT. 265 

were nevertheless anterior in date to the loam of 
Natchez and Vicksburg. 

There exist in Canada, in the Niagara district, in 
New York, and other States north of the Ohio, lacus- 
trine and swamp deposits of marl and bog-earth, includ- 
ing the bones of extinct quadrupeds, such as the mas- 
todon, elephant, castoroides, and others, associated 
with land and freshwater shells of recent species, 
which are decidedly post-glacial, and often found in 
hollows in the drift. These may be of contempo- 
raneous date with the loam of Port Hudson and 
Natchez. 

The northern drift, however, is by no means all of 
the same age, and as the period of glaciers and ice- 
bergs freighted with erratics is still going on, and has 
now a wide range in the temperate parts of the 
Atlantic, bordering the eastern shores of North 
America, so must we naturally suppose that certain 
parts of the drift, especially those found at lower 
levels, and near the sea, may not be more ancient than 
the loam of the western bluffs of the Mississippi. 



VOL. II. N 



266 DEPARTURE FROM NEW MADRID. [CiiAP. XXXV. 



CHAP. XXXV. 

Departure from New Madrid. Night-watch for Steamers. 
Scenery of the Ohio River. Mount Vemon, Ornithology. 
No Undergrowth in Woods. Spring Flowers. Visit to 
Dr. Dale Owen, New Harmony. Fossil Forest of erect 
Trees in Coal-measures. Movers migrating Westward. 
Voyage to Louisville. Professional Zeal of one of " the Pork 
Aristocracy." Fossil Coral-reef at the Falls of the Ohio, 
Louisville. Fossil Zoophytes as perfect as recent Stone-corals. 

March 27. 1846. WE took up our quarters in the 
wharf-boat at New Madrid in readiness to sail by 
the first steamer bound for the Ohio, for I wished to 
visit New Harmony in Indiana, and there was some 
risk of being detained several days. The first 
steamer we hailed, was bound for St. Louis, the 
next for the Cumberland river, in Tennessee, and a 
third which might have taken us to Mount Vernon, 
in Indiana, where I meant to disembark, was un- 
willing to lose time by stopping, the captain shout- 
ing out that she was full of passengers, and heavily 
laden. 

Before retiring to rest, I engaged with the keeper 
of the boat that he should appoint a good night- 
watch, and an hour after dark, I was awakened by 
the loud puffing and splashing of a steamer, evidently 
close at hand. Going on deck, I found the faithless 
black sentinel fast asleep. It was already too late to 
hail the vessel, but we made out that she was 



CHAP. XXXV.] NIGHT-WATCH FOR STEAMERS. 267 

the Nimrod, and I after svards learnt, that in the 
course of her voyage she was snagged, both her 
chimneys thrown down, and her boiler pierced, so 
that we had a narrow escape. I now gave the 
keeper of the wharf-boat to understand that the 
whole town of New Madrid should be informed next 
day in what manner their night-watches were kept, 
which piqued him, and he then lighted a large fire on 
the bank ; but having no longer any faith in the sen- 
tinel, I could not sleep, so I determined to keep a 
look-out myself. Fortunately another steamer soon 
appeared ; and, almost before she was fairly alongside, 
a party of active negroes leapt upon our deck, each 
snatching up an article of our luggage, while the 
clerk ushered us over the plank into a brilliantly 
lighted saloon. The change of scene to travellers 
who had been roughing it for several days under a 
humble roof, talking with trappers about the watery 
wilderness of the " sunk country," and who had just 
stepped out of a dark half-furnished wharf- boat, was 
more like the fiction of a fairy-tale, than a real in- 
cident in an ordinary journey. Some musicians 
were playing at one end of the room, which was 150 
feet long, and a gay young party from New Orleans 
were dancing a quadrille. At the other end we were 
delighted to see a table covered with newspapers, for 
we were nearly a week in arrear of news, and their 
columns were filled with the recent debates of the 
English House of Commons. There were also 
many articles reprinted from the best European pe- 
riodicals, quarterly and monthly, besides those pub- 
lished in New Eno-land and New York. Nor were 



o 

X 2 



268 SCENERY ON THE OHIO. [CHAP. XXXV. 

any of the advantages afforded by this floating palace 
more like an eastern tale of enchantment, than the 
thought, as we went to our berths, that before we 
rose next morning to breakfast we should be trans- 
ported more than a hundred miles on our route 
north wards against the current of a mighty river. 

March 29. Passed Cairo in the night, and next 
morning were at Smithland on the Ohio, at the mouth 
of the Cumberland river, having Kentucky on our 
right hand, and Illinois on the left. Limestone 
cliffs, bounding the valley, were a welcome sight, 
after the eye had been dwelling for so many weeks on 
flat and level regions. Although we had not yet 
ascended the river to a height of much more than 
200 feet above the level of the sea, the climate had 
changed, and we were told that snow had fallen the 
day before. We observed that the red- bud, or Judas- 
tree, was not yet in flower. 

On reaching the mouth of the Wabash river, which 
divides Illinois from Indiana, I learnt that when the 
ice breaks up there in the spring, it is often packed 
into such masses that, before melting, they float down 
with gravel frozen on to them as far as New Ma- 
drid. This fact may explain the coarseness of the 
materials observable in the shoals of the Mississippi, 
at low water, near Natchez, and still farther down ; 
and may perhaps throw light on some large boulders, 
of a former period, in the ancient gravel below the 
shelly loam of Natchez. 

At Mount Vernon we landed, and I collected there 
many fossil shells, of freshwater and land species, from 
a terrace of yellow loam, elevated many yards above 
high-water mark, on the Ohio. Returning from my 



CIIAP. XXXV.] ORNITHOLOGY. 269 

excursion, I fell in with a naturalist of the place, 
armed with a rifle, and carrying some wild birds 
which he had shot. He was a shoemaker by trade, 
and had a collection of more than 150 well-stuffed 
birds from the neighbourhood. He told me that the 
notes I heard here in the woods were chiefly those 
of the red-bird, but that some of the most musical 
were the song of a brown thrush, called, in Indiana, 
the mocking bird, but differing from the real mu- 
sician of that name, which, though abounding at 
New Madrid, does not range so far north as the 
Ohio. Conversing with him, I learnt that the loud 
tapping of the large red-headed woodpecker, so com- 
mon a sound in the American forests, is not produced, 
as I had imagined, by the action of the beak perfo- 
rating the bark or wood, but is merely a succession of 
sharp blows on the trunk of the tree, after which the 
bird is seen to listen attentively, to know if there 
are any insects within. Should they stir in their 
alarm, and betray the fact of their being " at home," 
the woodpecker begins immediately to excavate a 
hole in the rotten timber. 

I had promised to pay a visit to Dr. David Dale 
Owen, the State geologist of Indiana, and hired a 
carriage which conveyed us to New Harmony, situ- 
ated on the Wabash river sixty miles above its 
junction with the Ohio. On our way across the 
country, we went through a continuous forest, con- 
sisting chiefly of oak, beech, and poplar, without any 
undergrowth, and in this respect differing remarkably 
from the wooded valleys and hills of the Alleghanies, 
and the region eastward of those mountains, as well 

N 3 



270 SPKING FLOWERS. [CHAP. XXXV. 

as all parts of New England. Here there were no 
kalmias or azaleas, or sweet fern, or candleberry, or 
other evergreens* The green carpet beneath the 
trees was made up largely of mosses, and among 
them was that beautiful European species of feather- 
moss, ffypnum proliferum, in great plenty. The 
trunks of many trees were spotted by a jet-black 
fungus resembling a lichen. Below the branches we 
were pleased to gather several spring flowers, the 
white anemone, the blood-root (Sanguinaria cana- 
densis), the dog-tooth violet (Eryihronium america- 
nuni), and the spring-beauty (Claytonia virginica). 

Though a large proportion of the mosses and other 
cryptogamia are identical with those of Europe, we 
saw no flower which was not peculiar to America. 
Many European plants, however, are making their 
way here, such as the wild camomile, and the thorn- 
apple (Datura Stramonium) ; and it is a curious fact, 
which I afterwards learnt from Dr. Dale Owen, that 
when such foreigners are first naturalised they over- 
run the country with amazing rapidity, and are quite 
a nuisance. But they soon grow scarce, and after 
eight or ten years can hardly be met with. 

We spent several days very agreeably at New 
Harmony, where we were most hospitably welcomed 
by Dr. and Mrs. Dale Owen. The town is pleasantly 
situated in a valley watered by the Wabash, which 
here divides the States of Indiana and Illinois. Some 
large buildings, in the German style of architecture, 
stand conspicuous, and were erected by Rapp; but 
the communities founded by him, and afterwards by 
Robert Owen of Lanark, have disappeared, the prin- 
cipal edifice being now appropriated as a public 



CHAP. XXXV.] NEW HARMONY. 271 

museum, in which I found a good collection of geo 
logical specimens, both fossils and minerals, made 
during the State survey, and was glad to learn that 
the Legislature, with a view of encouraging science, 
has exempted this building from taxes. Lectures on 
chemistry and geology are given here in the winter. 
Many families of superior intelligence, English, Swiss, 
and German, have settled in the place, and there is a 
marked simplicity in their manner of living which 
reminded us of Germany. They are very sociable, 
and there were many private parties where there was 
music and dancing, and a public assembly once a 
week, to one of which we went, where quadrilles 
and waltzes were danced, the band consisting of 
amateur musicians. 

Say, the eminent conchologist, who died at the 
age of forty-five, formerly resided at New Harmony ; 
and recently Prince Maximilian, of Neuwied, and 
the naturalists who accompanied him, passed a winter 
here. We found also, among the residents, a brother 
of Mr. Maclure, the geologist, who placed his excellent 
library and carriage at our disposal. He lends his 
books freely amongst the citizens, and they are much 
read. We were glad to hear many recent publica- 
tions, some even of the most expensively illustrated 
works, discussed and criticised in society here. We 
were also charmed to meet with many children happy 
and merry, yet perfectly obedient ; and once more to 
see what, after the experience of the last two or three 
months, struck us as a singular phenomenon in the 
New World, a sliy child! 

I made some geological excursions with Dr. Owen 

N 4 



272 NEW HARMONY. [CHAP. XXXV. 

and his friend, Mr. Bolton, to see the " carboni- 
ferous rocks," of which this region is constituted, and 
the shelly loam, like that of Natchez, which has 
evidently once filled up to a considerable height the 
valley of the Wabasb/and through which the running 
waters have re-excavated the present valley. 

There is no church or place of public worship in 
New Harmony, a peculiarity which we never re- 
marked in any town of half the size in the course of 
our tour in the United States. Being here on week- 
days only, I had no opportunity of observing whether 
on Sundays there are any meetings for social wor- 
ship. I heard that when the people of Evansville 
once reproached the citizens of this place for having 
no churches, they observed that they had also no 
shops for the sale of spirituous liquors, which is still 
a characteristic of New Harmony ; whereas Evans- 
ville, like most of the neighbouring towns of Indiana, 
abounds in such incentives to intemperance. 

April 3. Left New Harmony for Evansville, on 
the Ohio, Mr. Maclure having kindly lent us his 
carriage and horses. We were accompanied by Dr. 
Dale Owen and Mr. Bolton. On the way, we visited 
Kimball's mill, in the township of Robinson, in Poser 
county, fourteen miles north-west of Evansville, where 
a fine example is seen of upright fossil trees belong- 
ing to a species of Sigillaria. These are imbedded 
in strata of argillaceous shale, or hardened mud, which 
constitute the upper part of the great Illinois coal- 
field, and above them lies a horizontal layer of sand- 
stone, while a seam of coal, eighteen inches thick, is 
observed about eighteen feet below the roots. Having 
borrowed spades from the neighbouring mill, we dug 



CHAP. XXXV.] FOSSIL TREES, INDIANA. 273 

out the earth from round one of the buried trees, 
and exposed a trunk four feet eight inches high, from 
the bottom of which the roots were seen spreading 
out as in their natural position. There were two 
other fossil trees near it, both apparently belonging 
to the same species of SigiUaria. The bark, con- 
verted into coal, displayed the scars left by the at- 
tachment of the leaves, but no internal structure was 
preserved in the mud, now forming a cylindrical mass 
within the bark. The diameter of the three trunks 
was from 18 inches to 2 feet, and their roots were in- 
terlaced. A great number of others, found in like 
manner in an erect posture, Im 7 e been removed in 
working the same quarry. The fossil plants obtained 
here, and in other parts of the Indiana coal-field, 
are singularly like those in other carboniferous 
strata in Ohio, Pennsylvania, Nova Scotia, and Eu- 
rope. Among them occur species of ferns of the 
genera Pecopteris and Cyclopteris, and three plants, 
Neuropteris flexuosa, N. cordata, and Lepidodendron 
olovatwn, all European species, and common to 'the 
Alleghanies and Nova Scotia. 

The three large fossil trees above described as 
newly exposed to view, were standing erect under 
the spreading roots of one living oak, and it is 
wonderful to reflect on the myriads of ages which 
have intervened between the period when the ancient 
plants last saw the light, and the era of this modern 
forest, the vegetation of which would scarcely afford, 
except in the case of the ferns, any generic resem- 
blance, yet where the trees are similar in stature, up- 
right attitude, and the general form of their roots, 

N 5 



274 MOVERS MIGRATING WESTWARD. [CHAP. XXXV. 

As we approached Evansville, we passed a German 
farm, where horses were employed to tread out the 
maize, and another where vines were cultivated on 
the side of a hill. At one turn of the road, in the 
midst of the wood, we met a man with a rifle, car- 
rying in his hand an empty pail for giving water to 
his horse, and followed at a short distance by his wife, 
leading a steed, on which was a small sack. e ? It 
probably contains," said our companions, " all their 
worldly goods ; they are movers, and have their 
faces turned westward, a small detachment of that 
great army of emigrants, which is steadily moving 
on every year towards the Rocky Mountains. This 
young married couple may perhaps go down to the 
Mississippi, and buy, for a few dollars, some acres of 
land, near a wooding station. The husband will fell 
timber, run up a log cabin, and receive ready money 
from the steam-boats, which burn the wood. At the 
end of ten or fifteen years, by which time some of 
their children will have become profitable servants, 
they may have put by 2000 dollars, bought a farm, 
and be living in a frame-house." 

The very moment of our arrival at Evansville, a fine 
steam-boat, the Sultana, came in sight, and we found, 
among the passengers, some agreeable acquaintances, 
whom we had known at New Orleans and Natchez. 

As some of these large vessels are much more ex- 
pensive than others, Americans of the richer class, 
when making a long voyage, choose them purposely, 
as in England we take places in a first-class railway 
carriage, that they may be less thrown into contact 
with ruder travellers. One of our friends, a naval 
officer, speaking of the improvement of society in the 



CHAP. XXXV.] VOYAGE TO LOUISVILLE. 275 

Western States, said that duelling and drinking had 
greatly diminished in the last fifteen years. He re- 
lated one of the strange scenes he had witnessed at a 
dinner-party, only a few years ago, at the house of a 
judge, in a town on the banks of the Mississippi. 
A quarrel had arisen, when one of the guests took 
out a pen-knife, and stabbed the judge in the side, 
so that the blood spirted out. The judge himself 
immediately drew out a bowie knife, and his antago- 
nist, at the same instant, a pistol, and it then ap- 
peared that every other individual was armed with 
knives or pistols. The narrator admitted, that as he 
was travelling, he had also pistols upon him. For- 
tunately some cool, judicious persons of the party 
interposed in time to prevent farther mischief. 

I fell into conversation with an intelligent well- 
dressed passenger, who, as we sailed by the town of 
Utica, in Indiana, remarked that it was too near the 
large city of Louisville to thrive greatly ; and in 
speculating on the future prospects of the West, he 
said that by the census of 1840, it was proved that 
the Atlantic States had about nine and a half mil- 
lions of inhabitants, while the States lying west of 
the mountains, and between the great lakes and the 
Gulf of Mexico, numbered about six millions four 
hundred thousand. Now it is believed that the census 
of 1850 will show the population of the whole 
country to have changed its centre to the west of 
the mountains, and, under a system of universal suf- 
frage, the centre of population becomes the centre 
of political power. After having been much inte- 
rested with the information which I gained from this 

N 6 



276 PORK MERCHANT. [CHAP. XXXV 

companion, although occasionally struck with his vio- 
lation of the rules of ordinary good manners, I was 
trying to divine to what class in society he might be- 
long, when he began to enlarge on the number of 
hogs killed last year in Cincinnati, which exceeded 
all former seasons, amounting to 300,009, and to 
describe to me how the streets, in killing time, were 
blocked up with barrels of salt pork for exportation, 
so that it was not easy to pass in a carriage. He 
then asked me abruptly, " How many hogs do you 
think I killed last season ?" Imagining that he might 
be a farmer, I said, 300. He exclaimed, " 18,000, 
and all of them despatched in thirty-five days ! " He 
next began to boast that one of his men could evis- 
cerate more hogs in one day than any other hand in 
Kentucky ; and, placing himself in the attitude of his 
favourite executioner, he gave me such a minute de- 
scription of his mode of operating, and dwelt on it 
Avith so much zest, as to make me feel satisfied that, 
as Thomas Diafoirus, in the " Malade Imaginaire," 
proposed to treat his mistress with " a dissection," so 
this member of the " pork aristocracy" of the West, 
would never doubt that such feats of professional 
dexterity as he loved to dilate upon, must command 
the admiration of all men who have the slightest 
feeling for superior artistical skill. 

The distance from Evansville to Louisville was 
205 miles, and on both sides of the river were hills of 
limestone or sandstone, of the coal formation, 300 
feet high, frequently presenting steep and picturesque 
cliffs. Everywhere I observed a flat terrace of loam, 
or loess, bordering the river, sometimes on the side 
of Kentucky, sometimes on that of Indiana. 



CHAP. XXXV.] FOSSIL CORAL REEF. 277 

I had found this ledge, both at Mount Yernon and 
at Evansville, to contain land and freshwater shells. 
At the last-mentioned town, where the terrace was 
from twenty to thirty feet high, one of the lower 
beds of coarse materials was full of Paludina and the 
valves of a Unio, both of living species ; yet with 
them were included, in the same gravelly and shelly 
mass, the well-preserved bones of the megalonyx. 

The coal-measures had given place to an older 
series of strata, the Devonian, when we reached the 
Falls of the Ohio, at Louisville, where are saw the river 
foaming over its rocky bed. I first landed at New 
Albany, in Indiana, nearly opposite Louisville, that 
I might visit Dr. Clapp, and see his splendid collec- 
tion of fossil corals, He accompanied me to the bed 
of the river, where, although the water was not at 
its lowest, I saw a grand display of what may be 
termed an ancient coral reef, formed by zoophytes, 
which nourished in a sea of earlier date than the 
carboniferous period. The ledges of horizontal lime- 
stone, over which the water flows, belong to the old 
red sandstone, or Devonian group, and the softer 
parts of the stone have decomposed and wasted away, 
so that the harder calcareous corals stand out in re- 
lief. Many branches of these zoophytes project 
from their erect stems precisely as if they were 
living. Among other species I observed large masses, 
not less than five feet in diameter, of Favosites 
gothlandica, with its beautiful honeycomb struc- 
ture well displayed, and, by the side of it, the Favis- 
tella, combining a similar honeycombed form with 
the star of the Astrcea. There was also the cup- 
shaped Cyathophyllum, and the delicate network of 



278 FOSSIL CORAL REEF. [CHAP. xxxv. 

the Fenestella, and that elegant and well-known 
European species of fossil, called " the chain coral," 
Catenipora escharoides, with a profusion of others, 
which it would be tedious to all but the geologist to 
enumerate. These coralline forms were mingled 
with the joints, stems, and occasionally the heads, of 
lily encrinites. Although hundreds of fine speci- 
mens have been detached from these rocks, to enrich 
the museums of Europe and America, another crop is 
constantly working its way out, under the action of the 
stream, and of the sun and rain, in the warm season 
when the channel is laid dry. The waters are now 
twenty feet above their lowest, and more than forty 
feet below their highest level, so that large spaces of 
bare rock are exposed to view. 

On one of the window-sills of Dr. Clapp's library 
was displayed a group of these ancient corals, and, in 
the other window, a set of recent corals from the 
West Indian seas, of the genera Meandrina, Astrea, 
Madrepora, and others ; some of them as heavy and 
stony as those of older date, their pores, foramina, and 
minute microscopic structure, not being more dis- 
tinctly preserved. No one but a zoologist would 
have been able to guess which set were of modern, 
and which of ancient origin. Yet so old are the 
fossils, that they are referable to an era antecedent 
to the Alleghanies, the Alps, and the Pyrenees, nay, 
even to the time when by far the greater part of 
the materials composing these mountain-chains were 
slowly elaborated beneath the ocean. 



CHAP. XXXVL] LOUISVILLE. 279 



CHAP. XXXYI. 

Louisville. Nolle Site for a Commercial City. Geology. 
Medical Students. Academical Rotation in Office. Epis- 
copal Church. Preaching against the Reformation. Service 
in Black Methodist Church. Improved Condition of Negroes 
in Kentucky. A coloured Slave married as a free White. 
Voyage to Cincinnati. Naturalised English Artizan gam' 
Uing. Sources of Anti-British Antipathies Progress of 
Cincinnati. Increase of German Settlers. Democracy of 
Romanists. Geology of Mill Creek. Land Tortoises. ' 
Observatory. Cultivation of the Vine. Sculpture by Hiram 
Powers. 

April 5. 1846. FROM New Albany we crossed the 
river to Louisville, the metropolis of Kentucky, and 
found the Gait House the best hotel we had been in 
since we left the St. Louis at New Orleans. On our 
way through the streets, we saw written in large 
letters, over a smith's shop, the word " blacksmithy," 
and another inscription ran thus : " Cash paid for 
coon, mink, wild-cat, beaver, musk-rat, otter, bear, 
wolf, and deer-skins ;" which reminded us that this 
city, being the first place where large vessels coming 
up the river are stopped by the Falls, is the natural 
emporium for the produce of the western hunting 
grounds. A more noble site for a great commercial 
town cannot be imagined ; and several merchants ex- 
pressed to me their opinion, that Cincinnati, founded 
at a later date, would not have outstripped her rival 
in the race, so as to number now a population of 
nearly 100,000 souls, more than double that of Louis- 



280 LOUISVILLE, KENTUCKY. [CHAP. XXXVI. 

ville, but for the existence of slavery, and a large 
negro population in Kentucky. Besides the disad- 
vantages always arising from the partition of a 
country between two races, evils which emancipation 
cannot put an end to, Kentucky suffers from the 
decided preference shown to the right bank of the 
river by the best class of new settlers from the north- 
eastern States, who choose the Free State of Ohio 
for their residence, instead of the Slave State on the 
left bank. 

I made a geological excursion with Dr. Yandell, 
one of the Professors of the University of this place, 
into the neighbourhood, going to the summit of a 
hill called Button-Mould Knob, so named from the 
joints of encrinites with which the lower strata of the 
carboniferous formation are charged. Here we en- 
joyed a wide prospect of the surrounding country, 
which, if all the valleys were filled up, would form 
an even table-land, the nearly horizontal strata having 
been evidently planed off at a certain level by the 
denuding action of the sea. The valley of the Ohio 
forms the principal break in a region otherwise void 
of any striking feature in its natural scenery. A 
few spring flowers only were to be seen, the most 
plentiful being the Houstonia and the Claijtonia. 

We went to an evening party at the house of one 
of the Professors of the University, and met many of 
his colleagues, and some medical students. Two of 
the latter informed me, that they had been sent to 
London to finish their course of study, having been 
brought up to feel great respect and veneration for 
English educational establishments. They had been 



CHAP. XXXVI.] MEDICAL STUDENTS. 281 

received kindly and politely by the professors, but 
the prejudices of the majority of their fellow pupils 
against the institutions of the United States, and 
still more their rude remarks about the vulgarity 
of all Americans (of whom they knew scarcely any- 
thing), had so wounded their national feelings, that 
they had written home to entreat their parents to 
allow them to attend classes at Paris, or in some 
German University, to which they had reluctantly 
assented. These young men, being of good families 
in Kentucky, were gentlemanlike in their manners, 
in this respect decidedly above the average standard of 
students of the same profession in England, and they 
spoke with no bitterness even on this annoying topic. 
Talking over academical matters, some elders of the 
company complained of the wish of the democratic 
party to apply their favourite dogma of " rotation in 
office," or " let every man have his turn," not only to 
members of the executive and the election of judges, 
but actually to University professors. " You may 
amuse your countrymen," said they, " on your re- 
turn, by telling them of the wisdom of our sovereign 
rulers, who would shorten to a minimum the term of 
service even of men who fill literary or scientific 
chairs." I informed them that nearly the whole 
University lectures at Oxford and Cambridge, had of 
late years, in opposition to earlier usage, been trans- 
ferred to temporary occupants of tutorships, who 
looked forward to the resigning of their academical 
functions as soon as they could afford to marry, or 
could obtain church preferment ; so that the extreme 
democracy of Kentucky would at least have no 



282 EPISCOPAL CHURCH. [CHAP. XXXVL. 

claim to originality, should they apply their maxim 
of rotation in office to a body of academical lecturers. 
On Sunday we attended service in an Episcopal 
church. The young preacher dwelt largely on the 
supreme authority of the Church, and lamented 
that many dogmas and pious usages, which had re- 
ceived the unbroken sanction of fifteen centuries, 
should have been presumptuously set at naught by 
the rebellious spirit of the sixteenth century, the 
great intellectual movement of which he described as 
marked by two characteristics, " nonsense and philoso- 
phy;" nor was it easy to discover which of these two 
influences, in their reference to matters ecclesiastical, 
were most evil in his sight. After a long dissertation in 
this strain, he called up to him a number of intelligent 
looking young girls to be catechized, and I never saw 
a set of children with more agreeable or animated 
countenances, or who displayed more of that modest 
reverence and entire unreflecting trust in their teacher, 
which it is so pleasing to see in young pupils. That 
some of the questions should have reference to the 
doctrines just laid down in the preceding discourse, 
was to be expected. One of the last of the interroga- 
tories, "Who wrote the Prayer-book?" puzzled the 
whole class. After waiting in vain for an answer, the 
minister exclaimed, "Your mother;" and made a short 
pause, during which I saw the girls exchange quick 
glances, and I found time to imagine that each might 
be exclaiming mentally to herself, " Can he mean my 
mother?" when he added, in a solemn and emphatic 
tone, " Your mother, the Church !" Had this congre- 
gation belonged to any other than the Anglican Church, 



CHAP. XXXVI.] BLACK METHODIST CHURCH. 283 

I might simply have felt regret and melancholy at 
much that I had witnessed ; as it was, I came out of 
the church in a state of no small indignation. I had 
heard, in the course of my travels, several discourses 
equally at variance with the spirit of the Reformation, 
but none before in which the Reformation itself was 
so openly denounced, and I could not help reflecting 
on the worldly wisdom of those who, wishing in the 
middle of the nineteenth century, to unprotestantise 
the members of a reformed church, begin their work 
at an age when the mind is yet unformed and plastic 
dealing with the interior of the skull as certain 
Indian mothers dealt with its exterior, when they 
bound it between flat boards, and caused it to grow 
not as nature intended, but into a shape which suited 
the fashion of their tribe. 

In the evening we were taken, at our request, to a 
black Methodist church, where our party were the 
only whites in a congregation of about 400. There 
was nothing offensive in the atmosphere of the place, 
and I learnt, with pleasure, that this commodious 
building was erected and lighted with gas by the 
blacks themselves, aided by subscriptions from many 
whites of different sects. The preacher was a full 
black, spoke good English, and quoted Scripture 
well. Occasionally he laid down some mysterious 
and metaphysical points of doctrine with a dogmatic 
air, and with a vehement confidence, which seemed 
to increase in proportion as the subjects transcended 
the human understanding, at which moments he occa- 
sionally elicited from his sympathising hearers, es- 
pecially from some of the women, exclamations such 



284 BLACK METHODIST CHURCH. [CHAP. XXXVI. 

as " That is true," and other signs of assent, but no 
loud cries and sobs, such as I had heard in a white Me- 
thodist church in Montgomery, Alabama. It appeared 
from his explanation of " Whose superscription is 
this ? " that he supposed the piece of money to be a 
dollar note, to which Cresar had put his signature. 
He spoke of our ancestors in the garden of Eden in 
a manner that left no doubt of his agreeing with Dr. 
Prichard, that we all came from one pair, a theory to 
which, for my own part, I could never see any ethno- 
logical or physiological objection, provided time 
enough be allowed for the slow growth of races; 
though I once heard Mr. A, W. Schlegel, at Bonn, pro- 
nounce it to be a heresy, especially in an Englishman 
who had read the " Paradise Lost." " I could have 
pardoned Prichard," said the Professor, " for believing 
that Adam was the forefather of all the Africans, had 
he only conceded that ' the fairest of her daughters, 
Eve,' never could have been a negress." 

Towards the close of the discourse, the minister 
said " that a protracted meeting would soon be held ; 
but such assemblies were, in his judgment, becom- 
ing too frequent." He also announced that on 
Easter Sunday there would be a love-feast, which no 
doubt would be very crowded, " and where I hope you 
will all enjoy yourselves." He then said, " Sirs and 
Madams, I have now to warn you of a serious matter, 
but I see many of you are nodding, and let every 
one wake up his neighbour. The sexton, poor man, 
has more than he can do." This official, by the 
way, had been administering with his cane many ad- 
monitory taps on the heads of the younger part of 



CHAP. XXXVI.] BLACK PREACHER. 285 

the congregation, such as must have precluded them 
from napping for some time, if their skulls are not 
harder than those of their white brethren. There 
was a general stir, and two fat negro women, between 
whom my wife was wedged in (for the two sexes sat 
on separate sides), looked to see if she was awake. 
" There is a storm brewing," said the preacher, 
6{ owing to some late doings in Ohio, and I hope that 
none of the membership will get themselves into a 
scrape." The exciting topic on which he then en- 
larged was the late seizure, or kidnapping, as it was 
termed, of Jerry Phinney, who, after residing some 
years in Ohio, had been reclaimed by the heirs of his 
ownsrs, in consequence of some flaw in his letters of 
freedom, and brought back to Kentucky. An attempt 
at a rescue was for a time apprehended, but 500 
dollars were soon raised and paid to secure his release. 
When I commended the action of the black 
preacher as graceful, I w r as assured that he had suc- 
cessfully imitated an eminent American player who 
had lately performed at Louisville. " These blacks," 
said my informant, " are such inimitable mimics, that 
they will sometimes go through a whole sermon in 
the same style as they have heard it delivered by 
a white man, only appearing somewhat to caricature 
it, because they are more pompous and declamatory ; 
w T hich in them is quite natural, for they are a more de- 
monstrative race than we are. If he addressed them 
in a plain, colloquial manner, his sermon would seem 
tame, and make no impression. They cannot talk 
about the price of a pair of shoes, or quid of tobacco, 
without such gesticulations that you would fancy it 



286 NEGROES IN KENTUCKY. [CHAP. XXXVI* 

was a matter of life and death they were discussing." 
There was a second coloured man in the pulpit, who 
delivered a prayer with a strong nasal twang, and 
very extravagant action. The hymns were some of 
them in rather a wild strain, but, on the whole, not 
unmusical. 

I learnt that the domestic servants of Louisville, 
who are chiefly of negro race, belong very commonly 
to a different church from their owners. During our 
short stay here, an instance came to my knowledge of 
a master who, having an untractable black servant, 
appealed to a negro minister, not of his own church, 
to interfere and reprove him for his bad conduct, a 
measure which completely succeeded. We were told 
of four Sunday schools for coloured people in the city, 
and in one of them 170 children receive instruction. 
There are also other schools on week days for teach- 
ing negroes to read, both in Kentucky and Tennessee. 
When I communicated these facts to Americans in 
Philadelphia, they were inclined to be incredulous, 
and then said, "If such be the condition of negroes in 
Kentucky, they must be better off in slave. States than 
in others called free ; but you must not forget that 
their most worthless runaways take refuge with us." 

A recent occurrence in Louisville places in a strong 
light the unnatural relation in which the two jraces 
now stand to each other. One of the citizens, a re- 
spectable tradesman, became attached to a young 
seamstress, who had been working at his mother's 
house, and married her, in the full belief that she was 
a white, and a free woman. He had lived happily 
with her for some time, when it was discovered that 



CHAP. XXXVL] WHITE MARRYING A SLAVE. 28? 

she was a negress and a slave, who had never been 
legally emancipated, so that the marriage was void 
in law. Morally speaking, it was certainly not void ; 
yet a separation was thought so much a matter of 
course, that I heard the young man's generosity com- 
mended because he had purchased her freedom after 
the discovery, and given her the means of setting up 
as a dressmaker. No doubt the lady knew that she 
was not of pure blood, and we were told that only 
six years before she had run away from her owner. 
She had also concealed this fact from her lover, but 
at a time probably when her affections were deeply 
engaged. On the other hand, we may pity the hus- 
band who suddenly finds that he is disgraced by 
having made an unlawful marriage, that his children 
are illegitimate, and that the wife of his choice be- 
longs to an inferior caste in society. This incident 
is important in many points of view, and especially 
as proving to what an extent the amalgamation of 
the two races would take place, if it were not checked 
by artificial prejudices and the most jealous and 
severe enactments of law. I found that many 
here believe and hope that the time of emancipation 
is near at hand ; but I was sorry to discover that the 
most sagacious seemed to think that the blacks in 
these middle States will not be able to stand alone 
when no longer protected by enjoying the monopoly 
of the labour market. 

April 1. Sailed in the Ben Franklin steamer 
from Louisville to Cincinnati, a distance by the river 
of 130 miles. The scenery much resembled that be- 
low the Falls ; the valley of the Ohio being bounded 



288 VOYAGE TO CINCINNATI. [CHAP. XXXVI. 

by flat-topped hills, 200 or 300 feet high, formed of 
horizontal beds of sandstone or limestone, with steep 
slopes or cliffs towards the river, and at the base of 
these a flat terrace of gravel or loam on one or both 
sides of the Ohio, above high-water mark. 

We made twelve miles an hour against the stream, 
and if we were descending, the captain says, we 
should go at the rate of eighteen miles an hour. 
Among the passengers I saw a thin, sallow-faced, 
anxious looking artizan, whom I mistook for a native- 
born Yankee, holding forth to a small circle of idlers 
about "our revolution" and "our glorious victories 
over the British," and calling upon all to prove them- 
selves " true democrats." Soon after we started I 
saw him take a dram, and then sitting down to cards 
lose sixty dollars in half an hour. The officers of the 
ship, observing this transaction, interfered and put a 
stop to the game, giving orders to the steward not to 
sell any more brandy to this passenger. I afterwards 
learnt that he was an Englishman, a skilful, first- 
rate mechanic in the iron trade at Pittsburg, who 
had come out from Liverpool about sixteen years 
ago. After drinking and losing all his earnings 
at the gaming table, he has returned again and again 
to work, and can always command high wages. He 
has read up the history of the American revolution, 
and at an election can harangue a mob of newly come 
emigrants with great effect, and with all the authority 
of a native, assuming a tone of intense nationality. 
On other occasions I had met with a naturalised En- 
glishman of a different stamp, who might equally be 
described as "ipsis Americanis Americanior," one 



CKAP. XXXVI.] ANTI-BRITISH ANTIPATHIES. 289 

who, having been born in the middle classes, has gone 
over early in life to the New World, where he has 
succeeded in business, risen to a good social position, 
and given his children an excellent education. He 
then goes back to visit the " old country," and see 
his friends and relatives, and is surprised and morti- 
fied that they are separated by so great a gulf from 
the higher classes, greater than exists between the 
humblest and most elevated in his adopted country. 
He finds, also, the religious sect to which he and 
his kindred belong, only tolerated, and not standing 
on the same footing of ' ' gentility " as the dominant 
church. His sectarian zeal, his feelings of social 
pride, and his political principles are all up in arms, 
and he comes back to America far more patriotic and 
more of an optimist than any native. If he then 
ventures to enter on the political arena, his oppo- 
nents warn the electors against one who is an alien 
by birth and feeling, and, in his efforts to disprove 
such imputations, he reaches the climax of anti- 
British antipathy. 

Such citizens were unaffectedly incapable of com- 
prehending that I could have seen so much of the 
Union, and yet have no wish whatever to live there. 
Instead of asking, " Would you not like to settle 
here ? " it would be more prudent for them to shape 
their question thus : " If you were to be born over 
again, and take your chance, by lot, as to your sta- 
tion in society, what country would you prefer ? " 
Before choosing, I should then have to consider, that 
the chances are many thousands to one in favour of 
my belonging to the labouring class, and the land 

VOL. II. O 



290 PKOGKESS OF CINCINNATI. [CHAP. XXXVI. 

where they are best off, morally, physically, and in- 
tellectually, and where they are most progressive, 
would be the safest one to select. Such being the 
proposition, the Free States of the Union might well 
claim a preference. 

Every town we had visited in the last three months, 
since we left Savannah, in January, was new to us, 
and Cincinnati was the first place where we were able 
to compare the present state of things with that 
observed by us in the summer of 1842. In this 
short interval of four years, great improvements in 
the buildings, streets, and shops were visible ; a vast 
increase of population, and many additional churches, 
and new cotton factories. The soil of the country 
immediately behind the town is rich, and there is an 
ample supply of labourers, partly indeed because the 
Catholic priests strive to retain in the city all the 
German emigrants. Although they are industrious 
and thrifty, such an arrangement is by no means the 
best for promoting the progress of Ohio, or her me- 
tropolis ; for, next to having an " Irish quarter," a 
" German quarter " in a large city is most undesir- 
able. The priests, no doubt, judge rightly, both in 
reference to their notions of discipline, and with a 
view of maintaining their power ; for these peasants, 
when scattered over the country, and interspersed 
with Protestants, cannot be made to confess regularly, 
attend mass, and read orthodox German newspapers, 
three of which are published here daily, and one 
weekly, all under ecclesiastical censorship. There are 
a large number of German Protestants, and 20,000 
Catholics, in all twelve churches, where the service is 



CHAP. XXXVI.] DEMOCRACY AND ROMANISM. 291 

performed in the German language. Only half of 
these are Romanist churches, but they are much more 
crowded than the others. The chief emigration has 
been from Bavaria, Baden, Svvabia, Wirtemberg, and 
the Black Forest, and they are almost all imbued 
with extreme democratic notions, which the ordinary 
European training, or the working of semi-feudal 
institutions, evidently fosters in the minds of the mil- 
lion, far more than does the republicanism of the 
United States. The Romanist priests feel, or affect, 
sympathy with this political party, and in the last 
election they instructed the Germans and the Irish 
to vote for Polk against Clay. It ought, indeed, to 
serve as a warning, and afford serious matter of re- 
flection to the republicans of America, that a church 
which requires the prostration of the intellect in 
matters of faith and discipline, and which is most 
ambitious of worldly power, is also of all others the 
most willing to co-operate with the ultra-democratic 
party. Are the priests conscious of having embarked 
in a common cause with the demagogue, and that 
they must, like him, derive their influence from court- 
ing the passions, prejudices, and ignorance of the 
people ? If so, one method alone remains for com- 
bating both the removal of ignorance by a well- 
organized government system of schools, neither 
under sectarian or ecclesiastical control, nor under 
the management of any one political party. 

In the city, the New Englanders appeared to me 
to have lost political weight since we were last here. 
To show me how seriously the priests interfere in 

o 2 



292 GEOLOGY OF MILL CREEK. [CHAP. XXXVI. 

their domestic affairs, a bookseller told me that he 
had just lost the services of a young shopman who, 
although a Protestant, like his father, found that his 
mother, a Catholic, considered it her duty never to 
let him rest till he adopted some other profession. 
The priest had told her that he was constantly 
handling dangerous and heretical books in his store, 
with which his mind must be contaminated. 

In many of the large towns, in the valley of the 
Mississippi, the Catholics have established such ex- 
cellent schools, and enforced discipline so well, that 
the children of Protestants have been attracted there, 
and many have become proselytes ; but I heard of 
still more Catholics who have become converts to 
Protestantism, and I cannot but believe that Ro- 
manism itself will undergo many salutary modifica- 
tions under the influence of the institutions of this 
country. 

I made an excursion with Messrs. Buchanan, James, 
Carley, Clark, and Anthony, to Mill Creek, a tribu- 
tary valley of the Ohio, where loam and gravel, with 
freshwater shells, overlies a deposit of leaves and 
fossil stems of trees. The shells are of recent species, 
and the layer of vegetable matter of the same age as 
that which contains the bones of the mastodon, ele- 
phant, megalonyx, and other extinct animals at Big 
Bone Lick, in Kentucky.* I afterwards saw in the 
city some beautiful collections of Silurian fossils 
from the blue limestone, and was struck with the 

* See ante, p. 257258. and " Travels in North America," 
vol. ii. pp. 62. 65. 67. 



CHAP. XXXVI.] LAND TORTOISES. 293 

dimensions of some of the trilobites of the genus 
Isoteles, the most perfect specimen being eight inches 
long, and many large fragments of other individuals 
indicating a length of not less than eighteen or 
twenty inches. 

In Mr. Clark's garden were several land-tortoises 
( Testudo clausa, Say), which had lived there for ten 
years ; and, after a hybernation of some months, had 
just re-appeared. They were crawling about in 
search of snails, but will also eat strawberries and 
meat, both raw and cooked. They grow very slowly ; 
the largest are eight inches long, and some of the 
young ones not bigger than a half-crown piece. Mr. 
Clark tells me, that the female lays four eggs, and 
digs a hole for them in the ground, hollowing it out 
with her hind feet to the depth of four inches, and 
shaping it so that it enlarges below. After being 
occupied for about a week in this excavation, she 
deposits the eggs and fills up the hole with earth, 
beating it down with her hind feet to make it firm. 
The spot is well concealed by a covering of soil two 
inches thick, which does not prevent the sun's heat 
from hatching the eggs as the summer advances. 

In one of the cabinets of Ohio insects, I saw 
specimens of that common English butterfly, Vanessa 
atalanta, or " red admirable," which I had observed, 
in the winter, flying about in the woods of Alabama. 
I could not distinguish it from the European species, 
yet Mr. Doubleday, the entomologist of the British 
Museum, at once recognised all I showed him as 
American specimens ; for there is a minute, but con- 

o 3 



294 OBSERVATORY. [CHAP. XXXVI. 

stant difference, first pointed out by Mr. J. F. Ste- 
phens, in the markings of the beautifully coloured 
anterior wing. On an accumulation of facts of this 
kind must depend ultimately the answer to that 
difficult question, What is the difference between a 
species and a permanent variety ? How far can 
climate, food, heat, light, and other causes give rise 
to fixed and constant modifications in individuals 
descended from one parent stock ? 

We ascended the hill, on which a new observatory 
has been built by subscription since we were last 
here, and where there is an equatorial telescope 
seventeen feet twelve inches in diameter. Dr. 
Mitchell, the astronomer, proposes to explore a part 
of the heavens more to the south than that which falls 
within the range of any active European observatory. 
From this hill we had a fine view of the winding 
valley of the Ohio, and the city on its banks, with 
nearly 100,000 inhabitants, the flat terraces of loam 
and gravel bordering the river, and the wharf with 
its fleet of steamers. On the opposite side of the 
Ohio is the town of Covington in Kentucky, the 
streets of which are made so to correspond with 
those of Cincinnati, that they appear as if they were 
parts of the same city, and a bridge over the river 
is in contemplation. 

The height of the hills above the river is about 
400 feet. The trees are still in great part leafless, 
but our eyes were refreshed with the green sward 
adorning the sloping banks, such as we had not seen 
during our winter tour in the Southern States. 

The German settlers have greatly extended the 



CHAP. XXXVL] CULTIVATION OF THE VINE. 295 

cultivation of the vine on the steep and terraced sides 
of these hills, and they make wine, preferred by them- 
selves, at least, to beer, and to many German wines. 
Some lands near the river, recently rugged and sterile, 
but suited to the grape, have risen immensely in 
value, being now trenched and walled. This work 
has been done in the winter when there was no other 
employment. Some are of opinion, that the native 
American grape ought to have been cultivated and 
improved instead of importing foreign kinds. A rich 
citizen, who had spoken very contemptuously of the 
home-made article, was lately hoaxed by having some 
of it passed off upon him as Rhenish hock, which 
he declared was excellent, while some genuine hock of 
the Rhine, given him as home-made, was pronounced 
to be l( sour cider." 

The small number of coloured people is striking 
to one coming direct from Louisville, and I was 
glad to hear that a stand had recently been made 
against the prejudices which prevent the improve- 
ment of the mixed race. A free school for girls 
having been established at the expense of the city, 
some of the parents complained that the trustees had 
admitted two children of colour ; and, in fact, there 
were among them two daughters of a white father 
and mulatto mother. One of the managers told me, 
that taking the complainants into the school, he 
asked them to point out which of the pupils they 
supposed to have African blood in their veins ; they 
confessed themselves unable to guess, for the two 
girls were not only among the best scholars, but 

O 4- 



296 SCULPTURE BY POWERS. [CHAP. XXXVI. 

better looking and less dark than many of the other 
pupils. 

At Mr. Longworth's we saw a beautiful piece of 
sculpture, an ideal head called Ginevra, by Hiram 
Powers, who had sent it from Rome as a present to 
his first patron. It appeared to me worthy of the 
genius of the sculptor of " Eve " and the " Greek 
Slave." Thorwaldsen, when he saw Powers' "Eve," 
foretold that he would create an era in his art ; and 
not a few of the Italians now assign to him the first 
place in the " Naturalista " school, though assuredly 
there is much of the ideal also in his conceptions of 
the beautiful. It augurs well for the future cultiva- 
tion of the fine arts in the United States, that the 
Americans are as proud of their countryman's success 
as he himself could desire. 



CHAP. XXXVII.] CINCINNATI TO PITTSBUKG. 297 



CHAP. XXXVII. 

Cincinnati to Pittsburg. Improved Machinery of Steamer. 
Indian Mound. Gravel Terraces. Pittsburg Fire. 
Journey to Greensburg. Scenery like England. Oregon 
War Question. Fossil Foot-prints of Air-breathing Reptile 
in Coal Strata. Casts of Mud- cracks. Foot-prints of Birds 
and Dogs sculptured by Indians. Theories respecting the 
Geological Antiquity of highly organized Vertebrata. Pre- 
judices opposed to the Reception of Geological Truths. Popu- 
lar Education the only Means of preventing a Collision of 
Opinion between the Multitude and the Learned. 

April 13. 1846. FROM Cincinnati we embarked 
in the Clipper steamer for Pittsburg, a distance of 
no less than 450 miles ; so magnificent is the scale of 
the navigation of this mere tributary of the Missis- 
sippi ! Yet there are other large steamers also ply- 
ing above Pittsburg, on the tributaries of the Ohio. 
We observe more punctuality than in 1842, in the 
starting of the steamers. The Clipper made ten 
miles an hour against the current, including stop- 
pages. We fell in with some large artificial rafts 
of wood stretching more than half across the river, 
and met a steamer, which had run foul of one of 
them, still entangled, and, though bound for Pitts- 
burg, floating down the stream with the raft. Our 
steamer only draws 3| feet water, and her engines 
are of a very peculiar construction, hitherto used in 

o 5 



298 MACHINERY OF STEAMEK. [CHAP. XXXVII. 

sea-boats only, with the exception of one on Lake 
Erie. The inventor of this improvement is Thomas 
K. Litch. There are two cylinders, one twice the 
size of the other, and the steam escapes from the 
smaller into the larger, instead of issuing into the 
open air, so that its heat is not lost. The economy 
of fuel arising from this contrivance is great, and the 
vibrations and noise much less than in other boats 
on the same high-pressure principle. In place of the 
usual bell, signals are made by a wild and harsh 
scream, produced by the escape of steam, as in loco- 
motive engines ; a fearful sound in the night, and 
which, it is to be hoped, some machinist who has 
an ear for music will find means to modulate. There 
was a Pennsylvanian farmer on board who told me 
that, having a large family to provide for, he had re- 
solved to settle in Indiana, and was returning from 
that State, after making a purchase of land in " the 
rolling prairies." He had paid the usual government 
price of 1^ dollar, or about 5s. 6d. an acre; whereas 
he could sell his own property in Pennsylvania, which 
had a house on it, at the rate of 60 dollars an acre. 
He had been much concerned at finding a strong war 
party in the West, who were eager to have a brush 
with the English. " It was a short-sighted policy," 
he remarked, "in your country, to exert so little 
energy and put forth so small a part of her strength 
in the last war with the United States. It will one 
day involve both you and us in serious mischief." 

At a point about twenty-four miles below Wheel- 
ing, we came to the largest of the Indian mounds 
on the Ohio, of which I have spoken in my former 



CHAP. XXXVII.] GRAVEL TERRACES. 299 

" Travels." * It is between 60 and 70 feet high, 
rising from a flat terrace of loam, and a very striking 
object, reminding one, by its shape, of the pyramidal 
Teocallis of the ancient Mexicans, of which Hum- 
boldt has given figures, and which are so well de- 
scribed by Prescott, in his " History of Cortes." As 
we approached Wheeling, the valley of the Ohio 
became narrower, and the hills, composed of strata of 
the coal formation, sensibly higher. The State of 
Ohio was on our left hand, or on the northern 
bank of the river, and that of Virginia on our right. 
The flat terrace of loam and gravel, extending every- 
where from the base of the hills to the river's bank, 
forms a picturesque contrast to the steep slope of the 
boundary hills, clothed partly with ancient timber, 
and partly with a second growth of trees of less 
height, which has sprung up where clearings have 
been made. It is worthy of remark, that the mate- 
rials of the great terrace of loam and gravel become 
more and more coarse as we approach nearer the 
mountains between Wheeling and Pittsburg, and at 
the same time the terrace itself is more and more 
elevated above the level of the river. It appeared 
to be about 60 feet high near the mouth of the 
Great Kanawha, and about 80 feet high at George- 
town, 40 miles below Pittsburg, which I can only 
explain by reference to the theory before advanced -j- ; 
namely, by supposing the amount of subsidence, as well 
as of the subsequent upward movement, to have been 

* Vol. ii. p. 32. f See ante, p. 259. 

o 6 



300 PITTSBURGH FIKE. [CHAP. XXXVII. 

greater inland, or farther north, than in the south, 
or nearer the Gulf of Mexico. 

April 16. There had been so hard a frost in 
the night, that the roof of our steamer's cabin was 
glazed with a thin sheet of ice as we approached 
Pittsburg, and we heard fears expressed that the 
fruit trees would be injured. Four years had elapsed 
since we were last at Pittsburg, and, in the interval, 
a considerable part of the city, covering sixty acres, 
had been burnt to the ground, the great roofed bridge 
over the Monongahela, all built of wood, having shared 
the same fate. A light suspension bridge has already 
replaced that structure of ponderous aspect, and al- 
though the conflagration only happened in April of last 
year, new streets have sprung up everywhere from 
the ashes of the old, and the town has very far from 
a ruined or desolate look. Commanding the naviga- 
tion of three great rivers, and an inexhaustible supply 
of coal, it has every advantage save that of an at- 
mosphere free from coal smoke. 

I learnt that there had recently been a strike of 
the factory girls here for ten instead of twelve hours 
of daily labour. Their employers argue that they 
are competing with rivals who work their girls twelve 
or more hours per day, and the strike has failed ; yet 
many are of opinion, that even without legislative in- 
terference, a ten hour rule will be eventually esta- 
blished. 

Most of our companions in the steamer were 
agents of commercial houses going to look out for 
orders at Pittsburg. On the whole they were very 
intelligent, and conversed well on a variety of sub- 



CHAP. XXXVII.] JOURNEY TO GREENSBURG. 301 

jects, while most of them were too gentlemanlike to 
feel ashamed of " the shop." But we had now been 
living so many weeks in public with strangers, and 
without opportunities of choosing our society, that 
great was our delight to be able to hire at Pittsburg 
a private carriage, and set out alone on an expedition 
to Greensburg, 32 miles distant, where I had a point 
of geological interest to investigate. As we were 
leaving the hotel, a news-boy, finding I was supplied 
with newspapers, offered to sell me a cheap American 
reprint of the miscellaneous works of Lord Jeffrey, 
assuring me that " it contained all the best articles he 
had written in the Edinburgh Review." 

To be once more climbing hills even of moderate 
height, was an agreeable novelty after dwelling so 
long on the flat plains of the Mississippi. We were 
on the direct road, leading across the Alleghanies to 
Harrisburg. The scenery often reminded us of Eng- 
land, for we were travelling on a macadamized road, 
and passing through turnpike gates, with meadows on 
one side, and often on the other large fields of young 
wheat, of an apple-green colour, on which a flock of 
sheep, with their lambs, had been turned in to feed. 
The absence of stumps of trees in the fields was 
something new to us, as was the non-appearance for 
a whole day of any representative of the negro race. 
Here and there a snake-fence, and a tall strong 
stubble of maize, presented a point of contrast with 
an English landscape. In some of the water-meadows 
the common English marigold (Caltha palustris) was 
in full flower. At one turn of the road, a party of 
men on foot came in sight, each with his rifle, and 



302 GREENSBURG. [CHAP. XXXVII. 

they were followed, at a short distance, by a waggon 
with women and children, and a train of others laden 
with baggage. Our driver remarked that they were 
" movers," and I asked him if he ever knew an 
instance of an American migrating eastward. He 
said that he was himself the only example he ever 
heard of; for he was from Kentucky, having come 
the year before to satisfy his curiosity with a sight 
of the great Pittsburg fire. There he found a great 
demand for work, and so was tempted to stay. 

Our road lay through East Liberty, Wilkinsburg, 
and Adamsburg. Some day-labourers, who were 
breaking stones on the road, told me they were re- 
ceiving seventy-five cents, or three shillings, a day ; 
and this in a country where food and fuel are much 
cheaper than in England, although clothing is rather 
dearer. 

Near Turtle Creek, two farmers conducted me to 
a spot where coal was worked, and where the undu- 
lating ground consisted of sandstone, limestone, and 
shale, green and black, of the coal-formation, pre- 
cisely resembling strata of the same age in England, 
both in mineral appearance, and in most of the species 
of imbedded fossil plants. 

About fifteen miles before we reached Greensburg, 
we saw, in the extreme distance, the blue, faint, long, 
and unbroken line of the most western ridge of the 
Alleghanies. 

Greensburg is a neat, compact town of about 1000 
inhabitants. The houses are all of brick ; there is a 
court-house and five churches, some Lutheran, others 
Calvinistic, the German language being used in some, 



CHAP. XXXVII.] SCARCITY OF SERVANTS. 303 

and the English in others. They publish three 
newspapers. We took up our quarters at a com- 
fortable old-fashioned inn, where we were waited 
upon by the members of the family, for the difficulty 
of hiring or retaining servants here, seems to be ex- 
treme. One girl had left a lady, whose acquaintance 
we made, because, being a farmer's daughter, she 
was not allowed to sit down at table with her mis- 
tress. The lady's sister, who was accomplished, and 
conversed with us on many literary subjects, was 
obliged to milk the cow for the whole summer, though 
they were in easy circumstances, such was the 
scarcity of " help." Fortunately for us, my wife 
and I had, by this time, acquired the habit of wait- 
ing on ourselves in the inns, going occasionally down 
to the kitchen to ask for things, in a way which in 
England would be thought quite derogatory to one's 
dignity, especially in the eyes of the servants, whose 
trouble would thereby be lessened. Here, on the 
contrary, we found that it made us popular. The 
general system in America that servants at inns re- 
ceive no gratuities, but are paid ample wages in- 
stead, is one cause of this difference. Yet much may 
be said in its favour, as it raises the independence of 
the servants, and relieves strangers from the per- 
plexity of determining what fees are suitable. 

There was a crowded public meeting the day of 
our arrival, at which several orators were haranguing 
an audience of the lowest class, in favour of war 
with England about Oregon. The walls were pla- 
carded with bills, on which were printed, in large 
letters, these words, " Forty-Five, or Fight," which 



304 FOSSIL FOOT-PRINTS [CHAP. XXXVII. 

meant that the Oregon territory must extend as far 
north as the 45th degree of latitude. 

This ambition of the people of the West to pos- 
sess Oregon, is at least no new idea, for I happened 
to purchase at Louisville an old guide-book describing 
the Falls of the Ohio and the city, in which, when 
speaking of commercial matters, the colonization and 
annexation of Oregon was set forth as the means of 
" opening a direct trade with China." I observed 
to one of the citizens, that it was satisfactory to see 
that none of the upper, or even of the middle classes, 
were taking any part at Greensburg in this agita- 
tion. He shook his head, and said, " Very true ; 
but these meetings are most mischievous, for you 
must bear in mind, that your nobody in England is 
our everybody in America." 

I had determined to visit Greensburg, on my way 
from Pittsburg to Philadelphia, that I might ex- 
amine into the evidence of the reality of certain fos- 
sil foot-prints of a reptile said to have been found 
in strata of the ancient coal-formation, and of which 
Dr. King, of Greensburg, had published an account 
in 1844. The genuineness of these foot-marks was 
a point on which many doubts were still entertained, 
both in Europe and America, and I had been re- 
quested by several geological friends not to return 
without having made up my mind on a fact which, 
if confirmed, was of the highest theoretical im- 
portance. Up to this period, no unequivocal proofs 
had been detected of the fossil remains of vertebrated 
animals more highly organised than fishes, in strata 
of such antiquity as the carboniferous rocks, and the 



CHAP. XXXVIL] IN COAL STRATA. 305 

absence of air-breathing quadrupeds or birds, served 
to constitute negative evidence, of peculiar signifi- 
cance, in reference to the coal-measures, because, as 
before stated*, they contained the monuments of 
shallow freshwater swamps, and often of surfaces of 
land covered with a luxuriant vegetation of terres- 
trial plants, some of the buried trees of which still 
remain with their roots in their natural position. 
That we should never have found, in such deposits, 
the remains of air-breathing creatures, except a few 
insects, that we should not yet have met with a 
single mammifer or bird, or lizard, snake, or tortoise, 
or the faintest indication of their existence, seemed 
most inexplicable, and led many geologists to em- 
brace the opinion, that no beings having a higher 
organization than fishes, were created till after the 
carboniferous strata had been elaborated. 

During my stay in Westmoreland county, I was 
indebted to Dr. King for the most active assistance 
in the prosecution of my inquiries. He kindly de- 
voted several days to this object, and we first visited 
together a stone quarry in Union township, six miles 
south-east of Greensburg, on a farm belonging to 
Mr. Gallagher, where the foot-marks had been first 
observed, standing out in relief from the lower sur- 
face of slabs of sandstone, resting on thin layers of 
fine clay. These slabs were extracted for paving- 
stones, and the excavation was begun in the bank of 
a small stream, where there was at first a slight 
thickness only of shale overlying the harder beds; 

* See ante, p. 245, 246. 



306 



FOSSIL FOOT-PRINTS [CHAP. XXXVII. 



Fig. 12. 




Scale one-sixth the original. 

Slab of sandstone from the coal-measures of Pennsylvania, with foot- 
prints of air-breathing reptile and casts of cracks. 



CHAP. XXXVII.] IN COAL STEATA. 307 



Fig. 13. 








Series of reptilian foot-prints in the coal-strata of Westmoreland 
County, Pennsylvania. 

a. Mark of nail ? 



308 FOSSIL FOOT-PRINTS [CHAP. XXXVII. 

but as they cut their way into the bank, the mass of 
shale became so dense as to oblige them to desist 
from the work. Between the slabs of stone, each a 
few inches thick, were thin parting layers of a fine 
unctuous clay, well fitted to receive and retain faith- 
ful impressions of the feet of animals. On the upper 
surface of each layer, Dr. King saw the foot-steps im- 
pressed more or less distinctly ; but, as the clay was 
left exposed to the weather, it had crumbled to pieces 
before I examined it, and I had only an opportunity 
of seeing the casts of the same projecting in relief 
from the undersides of slabs of argillaceous sandstone. 
I brought away one of these masses, of which the 
annexed figure (fig. 12.) is a faithful representation; 
and it will be observed that it displays not only the 
marks of the foot-prints of an animal, but also casts 
of cracks, , a', of various sizes, which must have ex- 
isted in the clay. Such casts are produced by the 
drying and shrinking of mud, and they are usually 
detected in sandstones of all ages in which foot-marks 
appear. It will be seen that some of these cracks, as 
at b, c, traverse the foot-prints, and they not unfre- 
quently produce distortion in them, as might have 
been expected, for the mud must have been soft 
when the animal walked over it and left the impres- 
sions, whereas, when it afterwards dried up and shrank, 
it would become too hard to receive such indenta- 
tions. I have alluded, in my former "Travels,"* to the 
recent foot-prints of birds called sand-pipers ( Tringa 
minutd), which I saw running, in 1842, over the red 

* Vol. ii. p. 168 



CHAP. XXXVII.] IN COAL STRATA. 309 

mud thrown down by every tide on the borders of 
estuaries connected with the Bay of Fundy. When 
this mud, which extends over thousands of acres, has 
been baked by the hot summer sun of Nova Scotia, 
it shrinks and cracks to the depth of several inches or 
even feet, and acquires such consistency as to be 
divisible into the successive layers of which it is com- 
posed, presenting on many upper surfaces impres- 
sions of birds' feet and cracks, and on the undersides 
the casts of the same standing out in relief.* 

I have also stated f that on the sea beach near 
Savannah, in Georgia, I saw clouds of fine sand 
drifted by the wind, filling up the foot-prints of 
racoons and opossums, which a few hours before had 
passed along the shore, after the retreat of the tide. 
This process will account, in a satisfactory manner, 
for the sharpness of many fossil casts of animals in 
ancient rocks, as the grains of uniformly fine sand 
were poured into the newly made cavities, not by a 
current of water, which could scarcely have failed to 
disturb the soft mud, but by the air, which could not 
cause the slightest derangement of the most delicate 
imprints. 

No less than twenty-three foot-steps were observed 
by Dr. King on slabs in the stone quarry of Union 
township before mentioned, before its abandonment, 
and the greater part of these were so arranged (see 
fig. 13.) as to imply that they were the marks of the 

* I have presented specimens of this red mud, with the foot- 
prints of birds, to the British Museum, Geological Society, and 
Museum of Economic Geology. 

t Travels, vol. i. p. 167. , 





310 FOSSIL FOOT-PRINTS [CHAP. XXXVII. 

successive foot-steps of the same animal. Everywhere 
there was seen a double row of tracks, occurring in 
pairs, each pair consisting of a hind and 
fore foot, and each being at nearly equal 
distances from the next pair. The toes in 
each of these parallel rows turn the one 
set to the right, the other to the left. It 
is instructive to compare these impressions 
with those which had previously been met 
with in an ancient European rock (although 
one of less antiquity than the coal-form- 
ation), namely, the new red sandstone or 
Trias of Saxony and Cheshire. The ac- 
companying figure (fig. 14.) represents the 
Saxon Cheirotherium, so called by Professor 
Kaup, because the marks both of the fore 
and hind feet resemble the shape of a 
human hand. Now in these European 
hand-shaped foot-marks, both the hind 
and fore feet have each five toes, and 
the size of the hind foot is about five 
times as large as the fore foot ; but in 

fo 

the American fossil (fig. 13.), the posterior 
foot-print is not nearly twice as large as the an- 
terior, and the number of toes is unequal, being- 
five in the hinder and four in the anterior foot. 
In the Greensburg animal, as in the European 
Cheirotherium, the fifth toe stands out nearly at a 
right angle with the foot, and somewhat resembles 
the human thumb. On the external side of all the 
Pennsylvanian tracks, both the larger and smaller, 
there is a protuberance like the rudiment of another 




CHAP. XXXVII. ] IN COAL STKATA. 311 

toe. The average length of the hind foot Is five and 
a half inches, and of the fore foot four and a half. 
The fore and hind feet being in pairs, follow each 
other very closely, there being an interval of about 
one inch only between them. Between each pair 
the distance is six to eight inches, and between the 
two parallel lines of tracks there is about the same 
distance. 

In the case of the European Cheirotherium, whe- 
ther English or German, the hind and fore feet occur 
in pairs, but they form only one row, as in fig. 14., 
in consequence of the animal having put its feet to 
the ground nearly under the middle of its body, and 
the thumb-like toes are seen to turn to the right and 
to the left in the alternate pairs. But in the Ame- 
rican tracks, which form two parellel rows, all the 
thumb-like toes in one set turn to the right, and in 
the other set to the left. We may infer, therefore, 
that the American Cheirotherium belongs to a new 
genus of reptilian quadrupeds, wholly distinct from 
that which characterises the triassic strata of Europe, 
and such a generic diversity might have been ex- 
pected in reptilian fossils of such different ages. 

The geological position of the sandstone of Greens- 
burg is perfectly clear, being situated in the midst of 
the Appalachian coal-field, having the main bed of 
coal, called the Pittsburg seam, three yards thick, a 
hundred feet above it, worked in the neighbourhood, 
and several other seams of coal at lower levels. The 
impressions of Lepidodendron, Sigillaria, Stigmaria, 
and other characteristic carboniferous plants, are 



312 FOSSIL FOOT-PRINTS [CHAP. XXXVII. 

found both above and below the level of the reptilian 
foot-steps. 

We may safely assume that the huge reptile which 
left these prints on the ancient sands of the coal- 
measures was an air-breather, for its weight would 
not have been sufficient under water to have made 
impressions so deep and distinct. The same conclu- 
sion is also borne out by the casts of the cracks above 
described, for they show that the clay had been ex- 
posed to the air and sun, so as to have dried and 
shrunk. As we so often see the ripple mark pre- 
served in sandstones of all ages, and in none more 
frequently than in the American and European coal 
strata, we ought not to feel surprise that superficial 
markings, such as foot-prints, which are by no means 
more perishable or evanescent in their nature, should 
have been faithfully preserved down to our times, 
when once the materials had been hardened into 
stone. 

There are some bare ledges of rock, composed of 
pure white quartzose grit of the coal-measures, stand- 
ing out exposed above the general level of the ground, 
in many places near Greensburg, especially near 
Deny, in Westmoreland county, about fourteen 
miles north of Greensburg. They are so bare that 
scarcely any lichens grow upon them, and on some 
of them the foot-prints of birds, as well as those of 
dogs and some other quadrupeds have been artificially 
cut. After examining them carefully, I entertain no 
doubt that they were sculptured by Indians, for 
there are many Indian graves near Derry, and one 
of their paths, leading through the forest from the 



CHAP. XXXVII.] SCULPTURED FOOT-PRINTS. 313 

Alleghany Mountains to the west, lay precisely in 
the line of these curious carvings. The toe joints in 
the feet of the birds thus cut are well indicated, as 
might have been expected, for the aboriginal hunting 
tribes of North America were skilful in following 
the trail of all kinds of game, and are known to have 
carved in some places on rocks, many rude imita- 
tions of the external forms of animals. If, therefore, 
they were sometimes tempted to use the representa- 
tion of foot-prints as symbols of the birds or qua- 
drupeds which they hunted, they would be not un- 
likely to give very accurate copies of markings with 
which they were so familiar. The important obser- 
vations made by Dr. King relatively to the fossil 
imprints, called the attention of the whole country 
to the Indian antiquities of comparatively modern 
date; but the popular notion that there was a con- 
nection between them is wholly erroneous. 

Since the announcement, by Dr. King, in 1844, 
of the proofs of the existence of reptiles at the period 
when the coal strata of Pennsylvania were formed, 
Professor Goldfuss, of Bonn, has published the de- 
scription of more than one saurian found in the 
ancient coal-measures of Saarbruck, near Treves. 

Never, certainly, in the history of science, were 
discoveries made more calculated to put us on our 
guard for the future against hasty generalisations 
founded on mere negative evidence. Geologists have 
been in the habit of taking for granted, that at 
epochs anterior to the coal there were no birds or 
air-breathing quadrupeds in existence ; and it seems 
still scarcely possible to dispel the hypothesis that 

VOL. II. P 



314 PREJUDICES OPPOSED TO [CHAP. XXXVII. 

the first creation of a particular class of beings coin- 
cides in date with our first knowledge of it in a 
fossil state, or the kindred dogma that the first ap- 
pearance of life on the globe agrees, chronologi- 
cally, with the present limits of our insight into the 
first creation of living beings, as deduced from organic 
remains. These limits have shifted, even in our 
own times, more than once, or have been greatly ex.. 
panded, without dissipating the delusion, so intense is 
the curiosity of man to trace back the present system 
of things to a beginning. Rather than be disap- 
pointed, or entertain a doubt of his power to discern 
the shores of the vast ocean of past time, into which 
his glances are penetrating, like the telescope into 
the region of the remoter nebula?, he cannot refrain 
from pleasing his imagination with the idea that some 
fog-banks, resting on the bosom of the deep, are, in 
reality, the firm land for which his aching vision is on 
the stretch. 

I cannot conclude these remarks on the geological 
discoveries made in these remote valleys of the Alle- 
ghanies, without alluding to a moral phenomenon, 
which was forcibly brought before my mind in the 
course of the investigation. The interest excited by 
these singular monuments of the olden times, natu- 
rally led to animated discussions, both in lecture- 
rooms and in the columns of the daily journals, of 
Pennsylvania, during which the high antiquity of the 
earth, and the doctrine of former changes in the 
species of animals and plants inhabiting this planet 
before the creation of man, were assumed as esta- 
blished truths. But these views were so new and 



CHAP. XXXVII.] GEOLOGICAL TRUTHS. 315 

startling, and so opposed to popular prepossessions, 
that they drew down much obloquy upon their pro- 
rnulgators, who incurred the censures not only of the 
multitude, but also of some of the Roman Catholic 
and Lutheran clergy. The social persecution was 
even carried so far as to injure professionally the 
practice of some medical men, who had given pub- 
licity to the obnoxious doctrines. Several of the 
ministers of the Lutheran church, who had studied 
for years in German universities, were too well in- 
formed not to believe in the conclusions established 
by geologists, respecting the immensity of past time 
and former vicissitudes, both in animal and vegetable 
life; but although taking a lively interest in disco- 
veries made at their own door, and joining in the 
investigations, they were compelled by prudence to 
conceal their opinions from their congregations, or 
they would have lost all influence over them, and 
might perhaps have seen their churches deserted. 
Yet by maintaining silence in deference to the 
opinions of the more ignorant, they become, in some 
degree, the instruments of countenancing error ; nay, 
they are rearing up the rising generation to be, in 
their turn, the persecutors of many of their contem- 
poraries, who may hereafter be far in advance in their 
scientific knowledge. 

" To nothing but error," says a popular writer of 
our times, " can any truth be dangerous ; and I know 
not," he exclaims, " where else there is seen so alto- 
gether tragical a spectacle, as that religion should be 
found standing in the highways, to say, ' Let no 
man learn the simplest laws of the universe, lest they 

JP 2 



316 INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM. [CHAP. XXXVII. 

mislearn the highest. In the. name of God the 
Maker, who said, and hourly yet says, Let there be 
light, we command that you continue in darkness ! ' " * 
Goldsmith, in the " Vicar of Wakefield," makes 
his traveller say, that after he had walked through 
Europe, and examined mankind nearly, he found 
that it is not the forms of government, whether 
they be monarchies or commonwealths, that deter- 
mine the amount of liberty enjoyed by individuals, 
but that " riches in general are in every country 
another name for freedom." I agree with Goldsmith 
that the forms of government are not alone sufficient 
to secure freedom they are but means to an end. 
Here we have in Pennsylvania a free press, a widely 
extended suffrage, and the most perfect religious 
toleration, nay, more than toleration, all the various 
sects enjoying political equality, and, what is more 
rare, an equality of social rank ; yet all this ma- 
chinery is not capable, as we have seen, of securing 
even so much of intellectual freedom as shall enable a 
student of nature to discuss freely the philosophical 
questions which the progress of science brings natu- 
rally before him. He cannot even announce with 
impunity, results which half a century of observation 
and reasoning has confirmed by evidence little short 
of mathematical demonstration. But can riches, as 
Goldsmith suggests, secure intellectual liberty ? No 
doubt they can protect the few who possess them 
from pecuniary penalties, when they profess unpopu- 
lar doctrines. But to enable a man to think, he 

* Letter on Secular Education, by T. Carlyle, July, 1848. 



CHAP. XXXVII.] POPULAR EDUCATION. 317 

must be allowed to communicate freely his thoughts 
to others. Until they have been brought into the 
daylight and discussed, they will never be clear even 
to himself. They must be warmed by the sympathy 
of kindred minds, and stimulated by the heat of con- 
troversy, or they will never be fully developed and 
made to ripen and fructify^ 

How, then, can we obtain this liberty ? There is 
only one method ; it is by educating the millions, and 
by dispelling their ignorance, prejudices, and bigotry. 

Let Pennsylvania not only establish numerous 
free schools, but let her, when she organizes a system 
of government instruction, raise the qualifications, 
pay, and station in society of the secular teachers, as 
highly as Massachusetts is now aspiring to do, and 
the persecution I have complained of will cease at 
once and for ever. 

The project of so instructing the millions might 
well indeed be deemed Utopian, if it were necessary 
that all should understand the patient and laborious 
trains of research and reasoning by which we have 
arrived at grand generalisations in geology, and other 
branches of physical science. But this is not requi- 
site for the desired end. We have simply to com- 
municate the results, and this we are bound to do, 
without waiting till they have been established for 
half a century. We ought rather carefully to prepare 
the public mind for new conclusions as soon as they 
become highly probable, and thus make impossible 
that collision of opinion, so much to be deprecated, 
between the multitude and the learned. 

It is as easy to teach a peasant or a child that the 

f 3 



318 POPULAR EDUCATION. [CnAp. XXXVII. 

earth moves round the sun, as to inculcate the old 
exploded dogma that it is the motionless centre of 
the universe. The child is as willing to believe that 
our planet is of indefinite antiquity, as that it is only 
6000 years old. Tell him that the earth was inha- 
bited by other races of animals and plants before the 
creation of man, as we now know it to have been, 
and the idea is not more difficult for him to conceive 
than the notion which is usually allowed to take root 
in his mind, that man and the species of animals and 
plants, now our contemporaries, were the first occu- 
pants of this globe. All that we require, when once 
a good system of primary and normal schools has 
been organized, is a moderate share of moral courage 
and love of truth, on the part of the laity and clergy ; 
and then the academical chair and scientific lecture- 
room, and every pulpit, and every village school, may 
be made to speak the same language, in regard to 
those natural phenomena, which are of a kind to 
strike and interest the popular mind. * 

* The substance of the above remarks, on the fossil foot- 
prints of Greensburg, was given by me in a Lecture to the 
Royal Institution, London, Feb. 4. 1848. 



CHAP. XXXVIII.] STAGE TRAVELLING. 319 



CHAP. XXXVIII. 

Greensburg to Philadelphia. Crossing the Alleghany Moun- 
tains. Scenery. Absence of Lakes. Harrisburg. 
African Slave-trade. Railway Meeting at Philadelphia. 
Borrowing Money for Public Works. Negro Episcopal 
Clergyman. Washington. National Fair and Protectionist 
Doctrines. Dog-wood in Virginia. Excursion with Dr. 
Wyman. Natural History. Musk-rats. Migration of 
Humming-birds to New Jersey. 

April 19. 1846. LEFT Greensburg, intending to 
cross the Alleghany Mountains to Harrisburg, and 
go thence to Philadelphia. We started in the even- 
ing in a large stage coach, in which were nine inside 
passengers, so that our night journey through 
Youngstown, Stonytown, and Shellsburg was fa- 
tiguing, and not the less so by our having twice to 
turn out in the dark, while all the luggage was 
shifted to a new vehicle. The last of these broke 
down, one of the wheels having given way, and we 
had an opportunity of witnessing the resources and 
ingenuity displayed on such occasions by American 
travellers. A large bough of a tree was cut off with 
an axe, and tied on to the axletree with ropes, so as 
to support the body of the carriage, and in this way 
we went several miles without inconvenience. Du- 
ring one of the night transfers of our luggage a 
carpet bag of mine was left behind, and when I after- 

r 4 



320 CROSSING THE ALLEGHANIES. [CHAP. XXXVIII. 

wards missed it at Philadelphia I wrote to three 
places to claim it. After five days I found it in my 
room in the hotel, no one knowing whence it came, 
and nothing having been paid for it. Before reach- 
ing Philadelphia it must have been transferred to 
three distinct conveyances, including two railways. 
I may state here a fact highly creditable to the public 
conveyances in the United States, that I never lost 
a package in either of my tours, although I sent 
more than thirty boxes of geological specimens from 
various places, often far south of the Potomac, and 
west of the Alleghanies ; some by canals, some by 
river steamers, others by coaches or railways. Every 
one of them sooner or later found their way safely 
to my house in London. 

On leaving Greensburg we crossed one after ano- 
ther of the long parallel ridges of which the Alle- 
ghany chain is composed, descending into each of the 
long intervening valleys, the hills becoming higher and 
higher as we advanced eastward. The character of 

o 

the forest changed as we came to higher ground, 
especially by the intermixture of trees of the fir tribe, 
and by the undergrowth of azaleas, kalmias, and 
rhododendrons, for I had seen none of these ever- 
greens since I left Indiana, not even under the oak 
wood round Greensburg. When day dawned we 
had reached the highest part of our road, and enjoyed 
a splendid mountain view, the steep wooded slopes 
being relieved by the contrast of green meadows 
bordering the rivers in the bottom of each deep valley, 
while in many parts of the landscape a picturesque 
effect was produced by what appeared to be extensive 



CHAP. XXXVIIL] ABSENCE OF LAKES. 321 

lakes. All who were strangers to the scene required 
to be assured that they were not really sheets of 
water ; yet they were simply banks of dense white 
fog resting on the low grounds, which the heat of the 
sun would soon dissipate. It is singular that there 
are no lakes in the Appalachian chain, all the rivers 
escaping from the longitudinal valleys through gorges 
or cross fissures, which seem invariably to accompany 
such long flexures of the strata as characterise the 
Alleghanies or the Jura. 

In Campbell's " Gertrude of Wyoming," indeed, 
we see 

" Lake after lake interminably gleam," 

amidst the Appalachian ridges ; but such character- 
istics of the scenery of this chain are as pure inven- 
tions of the poet's imagination, as the flamingos, 
palrns, and aloes with which he adorns the banks of 
the Susquehanna. 

Near the highest summit of the chain I saw two 
seams of excellent coal, one of them twelve feet 
thick, in strata belonging to the same series which 
I had examined near Greensburg. After descending 
from the highest level, we followed for a time the 
windings of the Juniata river, the road often bounded 
by high rocky cliffs, on the ledges of which we saw 
the scarlet columbine, blue hepatica, and other wild 
flowers in blossom. 

We slept at Cbambersburg, where, on the roof of 
the court-house, stands a statue of Franklin, holding 
a lightning conductor in his hand. A company of 
firemen were exercising their engines in the great 

r 5 



322 HARRISBURG. [CHAP. XXXVIII. 

square, throwing up powerful jets of water high 
enough to wash the statue. 

From Chambersburg we went on by railway at 
the rate of fourteen miles an hour, only slackening 
our pace when we passed through the middle of 
towns, such as Shippensburg and Carlisle, where we 
had the amusement of looking from the cars into the 
shop windows. 

On reaching the Susquehanna we came in sight of 
Harrisburg, the seat of Legislature of Pennsylvania, 
a cheerful town, which makes a handsome appear- 
ance at a distance, with its numerous spires and 
domes. The railway bridge over the river had been 
burnt down, and the old bridge carried away by a 
recent freshet, when large fragments of ice were 
borne down against the piers. 

Among the passengers in the railway to Phila- 
delphia, was an American naval officer, who had just 
returned from service on the coast of Africa, fully 
persuaded that the efforts made by the English and 
United States' fleets to put down the slave-trade, 
had increased the misery and loss of life of the 
negroes without tending to check the traffic, which 
might, he thought, have been nearly put an end to 
before now, if England and other countries had spent 
an equally enormous sum of money in forming set- 
tlements such as Liberia ; although he admitted 
that negroes from the United States, whose families 
had been acclimatised in America for several genera- 
tions, and who settled in Liberia, were cut off by 
fever almost as rapidly as Europeans. 

Returning to Philadelphia, after an absence of six 



CHAP. XXXVIII. J RAILWAY MEETING. 323 

months, we Vere as much pleased as ever with the 
air of refinement of the principal streets, and the 
well-dressed people walking on the neat pavements, 
under the shade of a double row of green trees, or 
gazing, in a bright, clear atmosphere, at the tastefully 
arranged shop windows ; nor could we agree with 
those critics who complain of the prim and quakerish 
air, and the monotonous sameness, of so regularly 
built a city. 

During our stay, a large meeting was held to pro- 
mote a scheme for a new railway to Pittsburg, 
through Harrisburg, the interest of the money to be 
raised chiefly by city rates. Some of my friends 
here are opposed to the measure, declaring that such 
public works are never executed with economy, nor 
thriftily managed. The taxation always falls on 
some districts, which derive no profit from the enter- 
prise, and they demand other grants of public money 
as a compensation, and these are laid out with equal 
extravagance. The good sense of the New England- 
ers, say they, has almost invariably checked them 
/ from entering upon such undertakings, and in one of 
the few instances in which they have deviated from 
sound policy, they have repented. For when, in 
opposition to the richer inhabitants, a branch railway 
was made to connect Bridgeport, in Connecticut, 
with the main line of road, the bonds of that small 
inland town were pledged as security for the money 
borrowed. The traffic proved insufficient to meet 
their liabilities, and a majority of the citizens then 
determined to repudiate. The rich alleged that they 
had opposed the project, and the poor, who had voted 

r 6 



324 NEGRO CLERGYMAN. [CHAP. XXXVIII. 

away their monoy, were quite willing that no new 
taxes should be imposed. The creditors, however, 
went to law, and, by aid of the courts, compelled pay- 
ment, as the Supreme Court might have done in the 
case of the delinquent States (had not the original con- 
stitution of the Union been altered before any of them 
repudiated), which might have given a wholesome 
check to rash enterprises guaranteed by State bonds. 

The booksellers tell me that their trade is injured 
by the war-panic, and I observe that most of the 
halfpenny, or cent papers, are still very belligerent 
on the Oregon question. 

On Sunday I attended service, for the first time, 
in a free black Episcopal church. Prayers were read 
well by a negro clergyman, who was evidently an 
educated man. The congregation consisted wholly 
of the coloured race. Where there is a liturgy, and 
where written sermons are read, there is small oppor- 
tunity of comparing the relative capabilities of Afri- 
cans and Europeans for the discharge of such func- 
tions. In the Baptist, Methodist, and Presbyterian 
services, the success of the minister depends much 
more on his individual ability. I was glad, however, 
to see a negro officiating in a church which confers 
so much social rank on its clergyman, and in no city 
more than Philadelphia does the coloured race stand 
in need of some such make- weights to neutralise the 
prejudices which retard their natural progress. We 
were told of an ineffectual attempt, recently made 
by a lady here, to obtain leave to bury a favourite 
free negro woman in St. James's graveyard, although 
she had died a member of the Episcopal church; 



CHAP. XXXVIII.] WASHINGTON, FREE TRADE. 325 

nor are any coloured people allowed to be buried at 
the Laurel Hill Cemetery. That burial-ground com- 
mands a beautiful view up and down the Schuylkill, 
and the ground there is laid out with much taste, 
being covered with evergreens and trees, and having 
many of the graves adorned, at this season, with vio 
lets and lilies of the valley. 

April 27. Leaving my wife with some friends 
at Philadelphia, I set out on a geological tour to 
Richmond, Virginia, to resume my examination of 
the Oolitic coal-field, left half finished in December 
last. At Washington I found they were holding a 
national fair, or grand exhibition of manufactured 
articles, intended to convince Congress of the advan- 
tage of a high tariff. The protectionists maintain 
that every article which, for seven years, has been 
shielded from foreign competition, has been reduced 
in price to the consumer below the foreign cost at the 
time when the duty was imposed. The free-traders, 
on the other hand, argue, that their antagonists 
keep out of sight the fact that in those same seven 
years the price of the foreign articles might, and 
probably would, have fallen as much. One party 
points to the former policy of Great Britain towards 
her American colonies ; how she interdicted them 
from manufacturing for themselves, and even from 
selling the productions of their own soil and indus- 
try to any but the mother country ; how she grew 
rich by monopoly and restrictions, nursing her in- 
fant agriculture, commerce, and factories, by prohi- 
bitive duties; and they ask whether, if the English 
cabinet really believed in the theory of free-trade, 



326 DOG- WOOD IN VIRGINIA. [CHAP. XXXVIII. 

they would not long ere this have repealed the 
navigation laws ? The advocates of the opposite 
policy appeal to the recent law for admitting Ameri- 
can corn duty-free into England, as demonstrating 
the sincerity of the British government. But in this 
controversy it happens, as usual, that class-interests 
are espoused with all the personal zeal and energy 
with which men pursue a private object, while the 
cause of science, and the general good of the public, 
being every body's business, are treated with compa- 
rative apathy. 

When I arrived in Virginia, April 29th, I found 
the woods everywhere enlivened by the dazzling 
white flowers, or bracteae, of the dog-wood ( Cornus 
Jlorida), the average height of which somewhat ex- 
ceeds that of our white thorn ; and when, as often 
happens, there is a back -ground of cedar or pine, the 
mass of flower is almost as conspicuous as if a shower 
of snow had fallen upon the boughs. As we some- 
times see a pink variety of the wild thorn in England, 
so there occurs here, now and then, though rarely, a 
pink dog-wood. Having never remarked this splen- 
did tree in any English shrubbery or park, I had 
some fine young plants sent home from a nursery to 
several English friends, and, amongst others, to Sir 
William Hooker, at Kew, who was not a little di- 
verted at my zeal for the introduction of a tree which 
had been well-established for many years in the 
British arboretum. But now that I have since seen 
the dwarfed and shabby representatives of this species 
in our British shrubberies, I am ready to maintain 
that it is still unknown in our island. No Virginian, 



CHAP. XXXVIIL] TEEES AND FLOWERS. 327 

who was not a botanist, could ever recognise it in 
England as the same plant as the dog-wood of his 
native land. Yet it is capable of enduring frosts as 
severe and protracted as are ever experienced in the 
south of England, and the cause of its flowers not 
attaining their full size in our climate, is probably a 
want of sufficient intensity of light and heat. 

A great variety of oaks were now in leaf in the 
Virginian forests, among which I observed the white 
oak, with its leaves in the shape of a violin, and the 
willow oak, with long and narrow leaves. The 
ground underneath these trees was adorned with the 
pink azalea and many other flowers, among the 
rest the white violet, a species of phlox, and an ever- 
lasting Gnaphalium. 

The cedar (Juniperus virginiana) is often covered 
at this season with what is termed here the cedar 
apple (Podisoma macropus) supposed by many of the 
inhabitants to be the flower or fruit of the tree itself. 
It is a beautiful orange-coloured fungus, ornamented 
with tassels, a very conspicuous object after a shower, 
but shrinking up if exposed to a day's sunshine. 

I made excursions in various directions with my 
friend, Mr. Gifford, to examine the coal mines north 
and south of Blackheath, near Richmond, and have 
already given the results of our observations in the 
first volume.* I afterwards made an expedition with 
Dr. Wyman, now Professor of Comparative Anatomy 
at Cambridge, Massachusetts, to examine the geology 
of the tertiary strata round Richmond, and those 
(of the Eocene period) displayed in the cliffs border- 
Vol. i. p. 279- 



328 NATURAL HISTORY. [CHAP. XXXVIII. 

ing the Potomac river, near Acquia Creek. In one 
of our walks we saw some dogs feeding on part of 
the carcass of a horse, and a group of turkey-buzzards 
eagerly looking on close at hand, but not daring to 
share in the repast. Near the same spot were the 
skulls of two dogs lying bleached in the sun, and in 
the hollow of each we found the nest of a large species 
of wasp, somewhat resembling our hornet, containing 
a good store of honey. On the surface of some pools 
of water I saw floating the singular seed-vessel of 
the nuphar, or yellow pond lily (Nelumlium). These 
seeds have been known to vegetate after they have 
been kept for a hundred years. 

In passing through a wood near Acquia Creek, on 
a hot day, we came upon a large snake, about four 
feet long, resembling that called the moccasin, which 
lifted itself up, folding its body into several graceful 
coils, and then darted its head and neck forward at a 
dog which had followed us from the inn. The dog 
dexterously retreated as often as a blow was aimed 
at him, barking loudly, and enjoying the mock fight. 
The extremity of the snake's tail, although not armed 
with a rattle, was in a state of constant vibration. 

On a soft sandy road we saw a great many of the 
ball-rolling beetles (Ateuchus volvens), which resemble 
in form the Scarabaus sacer of Egypt. They were 
all busily engaged in pushing along round balls of 
dung, in the centre of some of which we found an 
egg, and in others a maggot. A pair of beetles was 
occupied with each globular mass, which considerably 
exceeded themselves in size. One of them went be- 
fore, and usually climbed up the side of the ball till 



CHAP. XXXVIIL] BALL-KOLLING BEETLES. 329 

the weight of its body made the mass fall over, the 
other pushing behind, so as to urge it forwards, or at 
least prevent it from rolling back again. We saw 
two of them in half a minute force a ball for a dis- 
tance of eighteen inches up a gentle slope, and when 
they reached a soft part of the road, one of them be- 
gan to excavate a hole, and soon entirely disappeared 
under ground, heaving up the earth till it cracked 
and opened wide enough to allow his companion to 
push the ball of dung into it. The round mass im- 
mediately began to sink, and in a few minutes was 
out of sight. We saw another pair try in vain to 
bury their treasure, for they had selected a spot where 
the soil was too hard ; at last they gave up the at- 
tempt, and, rolling it away, set out in search of a more 
favourable spot. 

We crossed several ploughed fields on the slope of 
the hills which descend towards the Potomac, where a 
singular kind of manure is used, consisting of dead 
fish, and almost exclusively of the bony pike, or gar- 
fish (Lepidosteus oxyurus). The hard stony scales 
resist decomposition for several years. The fisher- 
men told us that they are greatly annoyed by con- 
stantly taking these pikes in their nets with the 
herrings. There is so enormous an abundance of 
herrings in some spots in this estuary, that 50,000 
have sometimes been taken this season in a few 
hours. 

In a marsh near the inn, we observed numerous 
habitations of the musk-rat, standing up like hay- 
cocks. When the small size of the animal is consi- 
dered, the quantity of dried grass, reeds, and rushes 



330 MUSK-RATS. [CHAP. XXXVIII. 

accumulated in one of these hummocks, at least a 
cart-load, is surprising. We waded through the 
water to one of them, and found that it was four feet 
high, and nine feet in diameter. When we pulled it 
to pieces, the smell of musk was very perceptible. 
At the depth of about sixteen inches from the top 
we found a cavity, or chamber, and a small gallery 
leading from it to another chamber below, from 
which a second gallery descended, and then went up- 
wards again to a third chamber, from all which there 
was a perpendicular passage, leading down to below 
the level of the water, so that the rats can dive, and, 
without being seen again, enter their apartments, in 
which they breathe air. 

The unio, or freshwater mussel, is a favourite food 
of these rats, and they often leave the shells on the 
banks of the American rivers, with one valve entire 
and the other broken. In the evening the note of 
the bull-frog, in these swamps, reminded me much of 
the twanging of a large Jew's harp. 

From Acquia Creek, I went, by steamer, to Wash- 
ington, and thence by railway through Philadelphia, 
to the town of Burlington, in New Jersey, beauti- 
fully situated on the banks of the Delaware. Here 
I paid a short visit to my friend, Mr. William 
M'llvaine, and crossed the Delaware with him to 
Bristol, to renew my acquaintance with Mr. Vanux- 
em, a geologist of no ordinary merit. His death, 
which happened soon afterwards, was a loss to the 
public as well as to many personal friends. 

In Wilson's " Ornithology" it is stated, that the 
humming-bird migrates from the South to Pennsyl- 



CHAP. XXX\JII.] HUMMING-BIRDS. 331 

vania the latter part of April, and builds its nest 
there about the middle of May. For the last thirty 
years, Mr. M'llvaine had never been disappointed 
in seeing it reach Burlington the first week of that 
month, generally about the middle of the week, its 
northward progress being apparently hastened or re- 
tarded by the mildness or inclemency of the season. 
They seem always to wait for the flowering of a 
species of horse-chesnut, called here the buck-eye, 
from a fancied likeness of its fruit to the eye of a 
deer. The bright-red blossoms of this tree supply 
the nourishment most attractive to these birds, whose 
arrival had been looked for the very day after I 
came. Strange to say, one of them, the avant- 
courier of the feathered host, actually appeared, and 
next morning, May 7th, hundreds were seen and 
heard flitting and humming over the trees. A lady 
sent us word that a straggler from the camp was 
imprisoned in her greenhouse, and, going there, I saw 
it poised in the air, sucking honey from the blossom 
of an orange-tree. The flower was evidently bent 
down slightly, as if the bird rested its bill upon it 
to aid its wings in supporting its body in the air, or 
to steady it. When it wished to go out, it went 
straight to the window at which it had entered, and, 
finding it closed, flew rapidly round the large conser- 
vatory, examining all parts of it, without once strik- 
ing the glass or beating its wings against the wall, 
as the more timid of the feathered tribe are apt 
to do. No sooner, however, was a small casement 
opened, than it darted through it like an arrow. 



332 NEW YORK. [CHAP. XXXIX. 



CHAP. XXXIX. 

New York, clear Atmosphere and gay Dresses. Omnibuses. 
Naming of Streets. Visit to Audubon. Croton A queduct. 

Harper s Printing Establishment. Large Sale of Works 
by English and American Authors. Cheapness of Books. 
International Copyright. Sale of Eugene Sue's " Wandering 
Jew? Tendency of the Work. Mr. Gallatin on Indian Corn. 

War with Mexico. Facility of raising Troops. Dr. 
Dewey preaching against War. Cause of Influence of Uni- 
tarians. Geological Excursion to Albany. Heldei^berg War. 

Voting Thanks to the Third House. Place-hunting. 
Spring Flowers. Geology and Taconic System. 

May 7. 1846. ON our return to New York, we 
were struck with the brightness of the atmosphere 
in spring, arising not merely from the absence of 
smoke, but from the quantity of solar light as com- 
pared to England, this city being in the same lati- 
tude as Naples. The unsullied purity of the air 
makes gay and brilliant colours in dress and furni- 
ture appropriate. 

Every fortnight the " Journal des Modes " is re- 
ceived from France, and the ladies conform strictly 
to the Parisian costume. Except at balls and large 
parties, they wear high dresses, and, as usual in mer- 
cantile communities, spare no expense. Embroidered 
muslin, of the finest and costliest kind, is much worn ; 
and my wife learnt that sixteen guineas were not un- 
frequently given for a single pocket handkerchief. 



CHAP. XXXIX.] OMNIBUSES. 333 

Extravagantly expensive fans, with ruby or emerald 
pins, are also common. I had heard it said in France 
that no orders sent to Lyons for the furnishing of 
private mansions, are on so grand a scale as some of 
those received from New York ; and I can well be- 
lieve it, for we saw many houses gorgeously fitted 
up with satin and velvet draperies, rich Axminster 
carpets, marble and inlaid tables, and large looking- 
glasses, the style in general being Parisian rather 
than English. It was much more rare here than at 
Boston to see a library forming part of a suite of 
reception-rooms, or even a single book-case in a 
drawing-room, nor are pictures so common here. 

In the five months since we were last in this me- 
tropolis, whole streets had been built, and several 
squares finished in the northern or fashionable end of 
the town, to which the merchants are now resorting, 
leaving the business end, near the Battery, where 
they formerly lived. Hence there is a constant in- 
crease of omnibuses passing through Broadway, and 
other streets running north and south. Groups of 
twelve of these vehicles may be seen at once, each 
with a single driver, for wages are too high to sup- 
port a cad. Each omnibus has an opening in the 
roof, through which the money is paid to the coach- 
man. We observed, as one woman after another got 
out, any man sitting near the door, though a stran- 
ger, would jump down to hand her out, and, if it was 
raining, would hold an umbrella over her, frequently 
offering, in that case, to escort her to a shop, atten- 
tions which are commonly accepted and received by 
the women as matters of course. 



334 NAMINO OF STREETS. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

All the streets which cross Broadway, run east and 
west, and are numbered, so that they have now ar- 
rived at 146th Street, a mode of designating the 
different parts of a metropolis worthy of imitation on 
both sides of the Atlantic, since experience has now 
proved that there is, in the Anglo-Saxon mind, an in- 
herent poverty of invention in matters of nomen- 
clature. For want of some municipal regulations 
like those of New York, the same names are in- 
definitely multiplied in every great city, and letters, 
after wandering over all the streets bearing the same 
appellation, to the infinite inconvenience and cost of 
the post-office, are at length received, if haply they 
ever reach their destination, long after they are due. 

The low island on which New York is built, is com- 
posed of granite and gneiss covered with " drift" and 
boulders. The original surface being very uneven, 
the municipality has fixed upon a certain grade or 
level to which all heights must be lowered by blast- 
ing the rocks or by carting away gravel, and up to 
which all the cavities must be raised. Besides other 
advantages of this levelling process, the ground is 
said to become more healthy and free from malaria, 
there being no longer any stagnant pools of water 
standing in the hollows. 

May 10. Paid a visit to Mr. Audubon, the 
celebrated ornithologist, at his delightful residence 
on the banks of the Hudson, north of Bloomingdale. 
His son had just returned from Texas, where he had 
been studying the natural history of that country, 
especially the mammalia, and was disappointed at the 
few opportunities he had enjoyed of seeing the wild 



CHAP. XXXIX.j CROTON AQUEDUCT. 335 

land quadrupeds in a state of activity, so as to observe 
their habits. I told him I had been equally sur- 
prised at the apparent scarcity of this tribe in the 
native forests of the United States. This whole 
class of animals, he said, ought to be regarded as 
properly nocturnal ; for not merely the feline tribe 
and the foxes, the weasels and bats shun the day- 
light, but many others feed partly by night, most 
of the squirrels and bears for example. The rumi- 
nants no doubt are an exception, yet even the deer 
and the buffalo, like the wild horse, travel chiefly in 
the night. 

From Mr. Audubon's I went to Highbridge, 
where the Croton water is made to play for the 
amusement of visitors, and is thrown up in a column 
to the height of 120 feet. 

I went also to see the reservoir, enclosing an area 
of no less than thirty-six acres, from which the water 
is distributed to all parts of New York. In this ar- 
tificial lake all the river sediment is deposited, the 
basin being divided into two parts, so that one may 
be cleaned out while the other is use. The tunnel 
or pipe conveying the water for a distance of more 
than thirty miles, from the source to the Haerlem 
river, is so large, that the chief engineer and com- 
missioners of the works were able to float down it 
in a flat-bottomed boat when it was first opened, in 
July, 1842. 

While at New York, we were taken by our literary 
friend, Mr. Cogswell, over the printing and publish- 
ing establishment of the Harpers, the largest in 
America, and only surpassed, in the scale of its 



336 HARPER'S PRINTING-OFFICE. [CHAP, xxxix. 

operations, by two or three in Great Britain. They 
give employment to three hundred men, manufacture 
their own types and paper, and have a " bookbindery " 
under the same roof; for, in order to get out, with 
the utmost despatch, the reprints of foreign works not 
entitled to copyright, they require to be independent 
of all aid from other traders. We were shown a fire- 
proof vault, in which stereotype plates, valued at 
about 300,000 dollars, are deposited. In one of the 
upper stories a long line of steam-presses was throw- 
ing off sheets of various works, and the greater 
number were occupied with the printing of a large 
illustrated Bible, and Morse's Geography for the use 
of schools. In 1845, the Harpers sold two millions 
of volumes, some of them, it is true, being only 
styled numbers, but these often contain a reprint of 
an entire English novel, originally published in two 
or three volumes, at the cost of a guinea and a half, 
the same being sold here for one or two shillings. 
Several of Bulwer's tales are among these, 40,000 
copies of his " Last of the Barons" having just issued 
from this house. It may, indeed, be strictly said of 
English writers in general, that they are better 
known in America than in Europe. 

Of the best English works of fiction, published at 
thirty-one shillings in England, and for about six- 
pence here, it is estimated that about ten times as 
many copies are sold in the United States as in 
Great Britain ; nor need we wonder at this, when 
we consider that day labourers in an American vil- 
lage often purchase a novel by Scott, Bulwer, or 
Dickens, or a popular history, such as Alison's Eu- 



CHAP. XXXIX.] CHEAPNESS OF BOOKS. 337 

rope (published at thirteen pounds in England and 
sixteen shillings in America), and read it at spare 
moments, while persons in a much higher station 
in England are debarred from a similar intellectual 
treat by considerations of economy. 

It might have been apprehended that, where a 
daily newspaper can be bought for a halfpenny, and 
a novel for sixpence, the public mind would be so 
taken up with politics and light reading, that no time 
would be left for the study of history, divinity, and 
the graver periodical literature. But, on the con- 
trary, experience has proved that, when the habit 
and facility of reading has been acquired by the 
perusal even of trashy writings, there is a steady 
increase in the number of those who enter on deeper 
subjects. I was glad to hear that, in proportion as 
the reading public augments annually, the quality of 
the books read is decidedly improving. About four 
years ago, 40,000 copies were printed of the ordinary 
common-place novels published in England, of which 
sort they now only sell about 8000. 

It might also have been feared that the cheapness 
of foreign works unprotected by copyright, would 
have made it impossible for native authors to obtain 
a price capable of remunerating them highly, as well 
as their publishers. But such is not the case. Very 
large editions of Prescott's "Ferdinand and Isabella," 
and of his " Mexico," and " Peru," have been sold at 
a high price ; and when Mr. Harper stated to me his 
estimate of the original value of the copyright of these 
popular works, it appeared to me that an English au- 
thor could hardly have obtained as much in his own 

VOL. II. Q 



338 CHEAPNESS OF BOOKS. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

country. * The comparative cheapness of American 
books, the best editions of which are by no means in 
small print, seems at first unintelligible, when we 
consider the dearness of labour, which enters so 
largely into the price of printing, paper, and binding. 
But, first, the number of readers, thanks to the free- 
schools, is prodigiously great, and always augmenting 
in a higher ratio even than the population ; and, se- 
condly, there is a fixed determination on the part of 
the people at large to endure any taxation, rather 
than that which would place books and newspapers 
beyond their reach. Several politicians declared to 
me that not only an income tax, but a window tax, 
would be preferred; and "this last," said they, "would 
scarcely shut out the light from a greater number of 
individuals." The duty on paper, in the United States, 
is trifling, when compared to that paid in Great Bri- 
tain. Mr. Chambers informs us, that the Government 
duty of 5 0007. , paid by him for his Miscellany, in 



* A letter dated April 15. 1849, was lately shown me from 
the Harpers, with permission to make known its contents, in 
which they mentioned, that having been authorised by Mr. 
Macaulay to publish in America his "History of England," they 
had printed six editions at various prices varying from four 
dollars to fifty cents (sixteen shillings and sixpence to two 
shillings). At the expiration of the first three months, they 
had sold 40,000 copies, and other booksellers who had issued 
independent editions had sold about 20,000 ; so that 60,000 
copies had been purchased in the United States at a time when 
about 13,000 had been disposed of by Longman and Co., in 
London, at the price of 17. 12s. each. As the cheap American 
editions were only just brought into the market at the date of 
this letter, the principal sale of the book was but commencing. 



CHAP. XXXIX.] INTERNATIONAL COPYRIGHT. 339 

twenty volumes, was equal in amount to the whole 
profits of that publication. The cost of advertise- 
ments, in America, is also small. One of my Ame- 
rican friends sent over to a London publisher 250 
copies of his work, charging him 4s. 6d. each. After 
paying entrance duties, and necessary outlay for ad- 
vertisements in London, and the agency, it was found 
that the price must be as high as 16s. 

The party who are in favour of an international 
copyright between England and the United States, 
seems to be steadily gaining strength among the 
booksellers, publishers, and authors, although the 
editors of newspapers and their readers may perhaps 
oppose the measure for some time. The number of 
reprisals now made by English speculators are very 
numerous. According to a statement lately presented 
to Congress by Mr. Jay, of New York, there are 
about 600 original American works " pirated " in 
Great Britain; or, to speak more correctly, while the 
law remains in its present state, reprinted without 
leave of their American authors, or any pecuniary 
acknowledgment to them. 

Many are of opinion that the small print of cheap 
editions in the United States, will seriously injure 
the eyesight of the rising generation, especially as 
they often read in railway cars, devouring whole 
novels, printed in newspapers, in very inferior type. 
Mr. Everett, speaking of this literature, in an address 
to the students of Harvard College, said, " If cheap 
it can be called, which begins by costing a man his 
eyes, and ends by perverting his taste and morals." 

As an illustration of the mischievous tendency of 
Q 2 



340 THE " WANDERING JEW." [CHAP. XXXIX. 

the indiscriminate reading of popular works by the 
multitude, when the higher classes and clergy can exert 
little or no control in the selection of the books read, 
the wonderful success of Eugene Sue's " Wandering 
Jew" was pointed out to me by many, with no small 
concern. This led me to ask Mr. Harper how many 
copies he had disposed of, and he answered, " 80,000, 
issued in different shapes, and at various prices." It 
had so often been thrust into my hands in railway 
cars, and so much talked of, that, in the course of 
my journey, I began to read it in self-defence ; and, 
having begun, could not stop till I had finished the 
whole, although the style of the original loses half 
its charms in an imperfect translation. " Le vieux 
dragon," for example, is always rendered the "old 
dragon," instead of "dragoon," and the poetry of a bril- 
liant passage is nearly destroyed by "defense" being 
translated "defence, "instead of "barrier," with other 
blunders equally unpardonable. Yet the fascination 
of the original, and its power to fix the attention, 
triumph over these disadvantages and over the vio- 
lence done to probability in the general plot, and 
over the extravagance of many of its details. The 
gross, sensual, and often licentious descriptions in 
which the author indulges, in some scenes, and still 
more, such sentimental immorality as is involved in 
the sympathy demanded for Hardy's love and in- 
trigue with a married woman (he being represented 
as the model of a high-minded philanthropist), 
make one feel the contrast of such a work with the 
chaste and pure effusions of Scott's genius. Yet 
there is much pure feeling, many touches of tender- 



CHAP. XXXIX.] ITS TENDENCY. 341 

ness in the tale, and many passages fitted to awaken 
our best affections. Even the false political economy 
bordering on communism, is redeemed by the tendency 
of the book to excite sympathy for the sufferings, 
destitution, and mental degradation of the poor. The 
dramatic power displayed in many scenes, is of a 
high order ; as when the Jesuit Rodin, receiving his 
credentials from Rome, is suddenly converted into 
the superior of the haughty chief to whom he had 
been previously the humble secretary, and where 
Dagobert's wife, under the direction of her confessor, 
refuses, in opposition to a husband whom she loves 
and respects, to betray the place of concealment of 
two young orphans, the victims of a vile conspiracy. 
In this part of the narrative, moreover, the beauty 
of the devotional character of the female mind is 
done full justice to, while the evils of priestly domi- 
nation are exhibited in their true colours. The im- 
prisonment of a young girl, of strong mind and 
superior understanding, in a madhouse, until she is 
worked upon almost to doubt her own sanity, are 
described with much delicacy of feeling and pathos, 
and make the reader shudder at the facility with 
which such institutions, if not subject to public in- 
spection, may be, and have been abused. 

The great moral and object of the whole piece, is 
to expose the worldly ambition of the Romanist 
clergy, especially of the Jesuits, and the injury done, 
not only to the intellectual progress of society at large, 
but to the peace and happiness of private families, by 
their perpetual meddling with domestic concerns. 

Q 3 



342 MR. GALLATIN [CHAP. XXXIX. 

That the shafts of this satire have not missed their aim, 
has been proved, among other evidences, by its having 
been thought politic, even in England, to circulate, 
chiefly, it is said, among the Irish Catholics, an " Adap- 
tation of the Wandering Jew, from the original of 
Eugene Sue." In this singular re-cast of the French 
romance, which I have perused, the Russian police is 
everywhere substituted for the Jesuits, and Rodin 
becomes the tool of the Czar, intriguing in French 
politics, instead of the servant of the successor of 
Ignatius Loyola. On the whole, I am inclined to 
believe that the good preponderates over the evil, in 
the influence exerted on the million, even by such a 
romance. It has a refining rather than a corrupting 
effect, and may lead on to the study of works of a more 
exalting character. The great step is gained, when the 
powers of the imagination have been stimulated and 
the dormant and apathetic mind awakened and lifted 
above the prosaic monotony of every-day life. 

May 9. Called with a letter of introduction 
on Mr. Gallatin, well known by a long and distin- 
guished career in political life. As a diplomatist in 
London, he negotiated the original Oregon treaty with 
Great Britain, and has now, at the age of eighty-two, 
come out with several able and spirited pamphlets, to 
demonstrate to his countrymen that their national 
honour would not be compromised by accepting the 
terms offered by the British Cabinet. Being at the 
same time an experienced financier, he has told them 
plainly, if they will go to war, how much it will cost 
them annually, and what taxes they should make up 
their minds to submit to cheerfully, if they would 



CHAP. XXXIX.] ON INDIAN CORN. 343 

carry on a campaign with honour and spirit against 
such an enemy. 

In the course of conversation, I found that Mr. 
Gallatin was of opinion that the indigenous civilisa- 
tion of several Indian tribes, and of the Mexicans 
and Peruvians among others, was mainly due to the 
possession of a grain so productive, and, when dried in 
the sun, so easily kept for many years, as the maize 
or Indian corn. The potatoe, which, when healthy, can 
rarely be stored up and preserved till the next harvest, 
may be said, on the contrary, to be a food on which 
none but an improvident race would lean for support. 
"I have long been convinced," said Mr. Gallatin, "that 
the Indian corn has also given a powerful impulse to 
the rapid settlement of the whites in Ohio, Indiana, 
Illinois, and other western States. In one of my 
first excursions to the West, I saw a man felling 
trees in March, who, when I returned in October, 
had harvested a crop of Indian corn, grown on the 
very spot. He had also the leaves and stems of the 
plant to serve for winter fodder for his cattle. He 
was an emigrant, newly arrived, and entirely with- 
out the capital indispensable to enable him to culti- 
vate wheat, which must have been twelve or thirteen 
months in the ground before it could be reaped." 

Next day the stirring news of the invasion of the 
Mexican territory by the American army, reached 
New York, and I met the news-boys, in every street, 
crying out, " War with Mexico ! " Soon afterwards 
I saw the walls covered with placards, headed with 
the words, " Ho, for the halls of the Montezumas I " 

The mayor had called a public meeting to ex- 
Q 4 



344 WAR WITH MEXICO. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

press sympathy with the President and the war- 
party at Washington. This meeting was held in the 
Park, and although it may have served the purpose 
of the democratic party, it was certainly a signal 
failure, if any strong expression of popular feeling in 
favour of such a war was looked for. Jn the crowd 
I heard nothing but Irish, Scotch, and German 
accents, and the only hearty cheer which any one 
orator could draw, even from this mob of foreigners, 
was obtained by representing the Mexicans as acting 
under the influence of British gold. 

I met with no one person in society who defended 
the aggression on the Mexican territory ; but as they 
cannot prevent it, they endeavour, each in his way, to 
comfort themselves that the mischief is no worse, 
some saying, it will be a less evil than fighting with 
Great Britain, others that it will furnish employ- 
ment for a host of turbulent spirits ; while some mer- 
chants hint that the democratic party, had they been 
economical, might have lowered the tariff, and carried 
out their dangerous theory of free-trade, whereas 
now they will plunge the nation into debt, and be 
compelled to resort to high duties, which will " pro- 
tect native industry." The dissatisfaction of others 
is unbounded ; they dread the annexation of a re- 
gion containing five millions of Indians, which, say 
they, will deteriorate the general standard of the 
white population ; they deplore the development of 
a love for military, glory, a passion inconsistent with all 
true republican principles ; and one friend observed 
to me, " You will soon see a successful soldier, wholly 
unknown to all of us at this moment, a man unversed 



CHAP. XXXIX.] RAISING TROOPS. 345 

in civil affairs, raised to the Presidentship." I asked 
whether, in a country where nearly all are industri- 
ously employed, it will be possible to find recruits for 
foreign service. Nothing, they reply, is more easy. 
" Our broad Indian frontier has nurtured a daring 
and restless population, which loves excitement and 
adventure, and in the Southern States there are num- 
bers of whites to whom military service would be a 
boon, because slavery has degraded labour." A 
week later I received a letter from a correspon- 
dent in the South, who said, " Such is the mili- 
tary fever in Arkansas, Louisiana, Alabama, and 
Mississippi, that these States alone would furnish 
50,000 men, if required; and in many districts 
we are in fear of such an enlistment of the white 
population, that there will be too few left at home 
to serve as a police for the negroes. Married men 
are going as well as bachelors, lawyers, medical men, 
and schoolmasters, many of whom have no taste 
whatever for fighting or foreign service, but they 
know that to have served a year in a campaign, to 
have been in a battle, or to have been wounded, 
would advance them more in an election, or even in 
their several professions, than any amount of study 
or acquired knowledge." 

The Sunday following we heard a sermon by the 
Rev. Orville Dewey, in which this spirit of territorial 
aggrandisement, this passion for war, these false no- 
tions of national honour and glory, were characterised 
as unchristian and indicating a low standard of pri- 
vate as well as public morality. I remarked to a 
New England acquaintance, who was one of the largQ 



346 DR. DEWEY. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

congregation, that whatever might be said against 
the voluntary system, the pulpit in America seemed 
to me more independent than the press. " Because 
every newspaper," he replied, " is supported by half 
yearly or annual subscribers, and no editor dares 
write against the popular sentiment. He knows that 
a dagger is always suspended over him by a thread, 
and if he presumed to run counter to the current, 
his table would be covered next morning with letters 
each beginning with the dreaded words, ' Stop my 
paper.' He has made a bargain like that of Doctor 
Faustus with the devil, bartering away his immortal 
soul for a few thousand dollars." When I after- 
wards reflected on this alleged tyranny of regular 
subscribers, it occurred to me that the evil must be 
in a great degree mitigated by the cheapness and 
variety of daily prints, each the organ of some dis- 
tinct party or shade of opinion, and great numbers 
of them freely taken in at every reading-room and 
every hotel. 

I might say of Dr. Dewey's discourse, as I have 
already said of the preaching of the Unitarians gene- 
rally, that, without wanting spirituality, it was more 
practical and less doctrinal than the majority of ser- 
mons to which I have been accustomed to listen. 
But I should mislead my readers, if I gave them to 
understand that they could frequent churches of this 
denomination without risk of sometimes having their 
feelings offended by hearing doctrines they have been 
taught to reverence treated slightingly, or even with 
contempt. On one occasion (and it was the only one in 
my experience), I was taken, when at Boston, to hear 
an eminent Unitarian preacher who was prevented by 



CHAP. XXXIX.] UNITARIANS. 347 

illness from officiating, and his place was supplied by 
a self-satisfied young man, who, having talked dog- 
matically on points contested by many a rationalist, 
made it clear that he commiserated the weak minds 
of those who adhered to articles of faith rejected by 
his church. If this too common method of treating 
theological subjects be ilLcalculated to convince or 
conciliate dissentients, it is equally reprehensible from 
its tendency to engender, in the minds of those who 
assent, a Pharisaical feeling of self-gratulation that 
they are not as other sectarians are. 

I can only account for the power which the Unita- 
rians have exerted, and are now exerting, in forward- 
ing the great educational movement in America, in the 
face of that almost superstitious prejudice with which 
their theology is regarded by nineteen-twentieths 
of the population, by attributing it to the love of in- 
tellectual progress which animates both their clergy 
and laity, and the deep conviction they are known to 
feel that public morality and happiness can only be 
ensured by spreading an elevated standard of popular 
education throughout the masses. In their enthusi- 
astic pursuit of this great end, they are acknowledged 
to have no thought of making proselytes to any system 
of religious doctrines, and are therefore trusted in 
the management of schools by the parents of children 
of the most opposite persuasions. In regard to their 
own faith, some misapprehension has arisen in conse- 
quence of the name they bear, which was not chosen 
by themselves, but to which, on the contrary, they 
have objections such as members of the Anglican 
Church might feel if some such name as Anti-tran- 

Q 6 



348 EXCURSION TO ALBANY. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

substantiationists, or any term which simply expressed 
their opposition to some one article of the Romanist 
creed, had been fixed upon them. "When the rigid 
Calvinism of the old Puritans caused a schism in New 
England, the seceders wished to free themselves from 
the fetters of a creed, and to take the Gospel alone as 
their standard of faith. They were naturally, therefore, 
averse to accept a name which might be generally 
supposed to imply that they attached a prominent 
importance to the negation of any one doctrine pro- 
fessed by other Christians. " I desire," said Chan- 
ning, " to wear the livery of no party ; but we accept 
the appellation which others have imposed upon us, 
because it expresses what we believe to be a truth, 
and therefore we ought not to shrink from the re- 
proaches cast upon it. But, had the name been 
more honoured, had no popular cry been raised against 
it, I would gladly have thrown it off." * 

May 11. Sailed from New York to Albany in 
a steamer, which carried me at the rate of eighteen 
miles an hour through the ' beautiful scenery of the 
Hudson river. I had been invited by two of the 
State surveyors of New York to make an excursion 
with them to the north of Albany, and to discuss in 
the field some controverted points respecting the 
geology of the oldest fossiliferous strata. There was 
a physician on board, who, having been settled for 
twenty-six years in Virginia, had now come back, 
after that long absence, to see his native State. His 
admiration and wonder at the progress made by New 
York in a quarter of a century were unbounded. 

Channing's Works, vol. iii. p. 210. 



CHAP. XXXIX.] HELDERBERG WAR. 349 

Speaking of his adopted country, he exclaimed, " We 
have been left far behind in the race." I suggested, 
that if, twenty-six years ago, a period had been fixed 
upon by law for the emancipation of their slaves, Vir- 
ginia might, ere this, have been relieved of nearly all 
her negro population, so great has been the migration 
of negroes to the South. " It is useless," he said, 
" to discuss the practicability of such a measure, while 
the majority of our legislators, having been born 
slave-holders, are not convinced of its desirability." 
While my companion was absorbed in admiration at 
the improvement of " the Empire State," my thoughts 
and feelings took a very different turn, when I learned 
that " the Helderberg war," which I have alluded to 
in my former " Travels,"* is still going on, and seems 
as far from a termination as ever. The agricultural 
population throughout many populous counties have 
now been in arms for eight years, to resist the pay- 
ment of rents due to their landlords, in spite of the 
decisions of the courts of law against them. Large 
contributions have been made towards an insurrec- 
tionary fund, one of its objects being to support 
a newspaper, edited by a Chartist refugee from Eng- 
land, in which the most dangerous anti-social doc- 
trines are promulgated. The " anti-renters " have 
not only set the whole militia of the State at defiance, 
in more than one campaign, but have actually killed 
a sheriff's officer, who was distraining for rent ! If 
any thing could add to the disgrace which such pro- 
ceedings reflect on the political administration of 

Vol. i. p. 68. 



350 VOTING THANKS TO [CHAP. XXXIX. 

affairs in New York, it is the fact that the insurgents 
would probably have succumbed ere this, had they not 
been buoyed up by hopes of legislative interference 
in their favour, held out to them by popularity- 
hunting candidates for the governorship, and other 
official places. 

In the newspapers of the day, a scene described as 
having occurred at the close of the Legislative Ses- 
sion in Albany excited my curiosity. One of the 
members of the House of Representatives moved 
a vote of thanks " to the gentlemen of the third 
house for the regularity of their attendance and the 
courtesy with which they had conducted themselves." 
The motion was seconded, read from the chair amidst 
great laughter, and then allowed to drop. I inquired 
what might be the meaning of this joke, and was 
asked in reply whether I had read the letters of Jesse 
Hoyt and others, edited by Mackenzie ? I had, in- 
deed, purchased the pamphlet alluded to, containing 
a selection from an immense mass (said to amount to 
twenty-five volumes) of the private and confidential 
correspondence of official men, left accidentally by 
them, on a change of administration, in the custom- 
house of New York. All these had been printed for 
the benefit of the public by their successors. The 
authenticity of the documents made known by this 
gentlemanlike stroke of party tactics, purporting to 
be penned by men who had filled high places in the 
State and Federal Governments, had been placed 
beyond a doubt ; for the writers had attempted to 
obtain an injunction in the law courts to stop the 
publication, claiming the copyright of letters which 



CHAP. XXXIX.] THE THIRD HOUSE. 351 

they had written. Some time before this conversa- 
tion, a merchant of Boston, who wished me to look 
only on the bright side of their institutions, and who 
was himself an optimist, had said to me, " Our poli- 
ticians work in a glass hive, so that you always see 
the worst of them; whereas your public men can 
throw a decent veil of secrecy over much that may 
be selfish and sordid in the motives of their conduct. 
Hence the scandal of your court and cabinets is only 
divulged to posterity, a hundred years after the events, 
in private memoirs." Unfortunately for this theory, 
a glance at the Mackenzie letters was enough to 
teach me, that, if the American bees work in a glass 
hive, the glass is not quite so transparent as my 
friend would have led me to believe. The explana- 
tion of the satirical motion made in the house at 
Albany, then proceeded thus : " The patronage of the 
State of New York is enormous ; the Governor alone 
has the appointment of two hundred and sixty civil 
officers, and the nomination of more than two thousand 
places is vested jointly in him and the senate. Some 
of these are for two, others for five years, and they 
are worth from two hundred to five thousand dollars 
a-year. Among the posts most coveted, because the 
gains are sometimes very high, though fluctuating, 
are those of the inspectors, who set their mark or 
brand on barrels of exported goods, such as flour, to- 
bacco, preserved pork, mackerel and other fish, to 
guarantee their good quality, and guard the public 
against imposition, in cases where the articles would 
be injured if opened and examined by the purchaser. 
It is scarcely necessary to state, that where the prey is 



352 PLACE HUNTING. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

so abundant, there will the eagles be gathered together ; 
and besides the aspirants to vacant offices, there is a 
crowd of lawyers and paid agents of private indivi- 
duals and companies, who have to watch the passage 
of private and public bills through the Legislature. 
During the whole session, they fill the Governor's 
ante-room, and the lobby of each House ; and, as 
they are equal in respectability, number, station, and 
influence, to the two other houses put together, be- 
sides that they spend, perhaps, more money in 
Albany, we dignify them with the name of f the 
third house.' " 

" Are they," said I, " suspected of giving money- 
bribes to legislators ? " " No ; but they may convey 
a party of representatives on a railway trip, to make 
them acquainted with the merits of some case relat- 
ing to a canal or railroad, and then entertain them 
with a dinner before they return." " In Massachu- 
setts," said I, " people speak with more respect of 
their assembly." " No doubt, for in that State there 
is much less to give away, and therefore less corrup- 
tion and intrigue. Besides, we have only 160 sena- 
tors and representatives, whereas the assembly at 
Boston is far more numerous, so that it is not so 
easy to bring the influence pf ' the third house ' to 
bear upon it." 

In the public museum at Albany, Dr. Emmons 
showed me a fine collection of simple minerals, rocks, 
and fossils, made by himself and other geologists to 
whom the State survey was entrusted. He then ac- 
companied me across the Hudson river, to examine 



CHAP. XXXIX.] SPRING FLOWERS. 353 

the slate and limestone eastward of Albany. Here, 
from the summit of Greenbush Hill, we enjoyed a 
magnificent view of the Catskill Mountains, and the 
Helderberg range in the distance. In the foreground 
was the river, and Albany itself, now containing a 
population of 40,000 inhabitants, with its domes and 
spires clustered together, in the higher parts of the 
city, and lighted up by a bright sunshine. 

The day following, Dr. Emmons and Mr. James 
Hall went with me to explore the chain of the Bald 
Mountains, north of Galeville. We passed through 
the gay town of Saratoga Springs, where the mineral 
waters burst out from " the Lower Silurian," or most 
ancient fossiliferous rocks. We saw many picturesque 
spots, especially the waterfall called Baaten Kill, near 
Galeville, but no grand or striking scenery. Among 
the plants in blossom, we gathered Anemone nemorosa, 
Trientalis Americana (less beautiful than our British 
Trientalis Europ&d), Cypripcdium pubescens, Gera- 
nium sylvaticum, three species of violet (all without 
scent), Houstonia c&rulea, Gnaphalium perenne, and 
in several copses, the beautiful Polygala pauciflora, 
which might be truly said 

" To purple all the ground with vernal flowers." 

Whether, in this part of the United States, there are 
any fossiliferous rocks older than the Lower Silurian, 
was the geological point at issue ; and the question 
resembled one on which an animated controversy had 
lately been carried on in Great Britain, in regard to 



354 GEOLOGY. [CHAP. XXXIX. 

the relative age of the " Cambrian " and " Silurian " 
groups. As those strata, called Cambrian, which con- 
tained organic remains, were found to be nothing 
more than highly disturbed and semi-crystalline 
Silurian rocks, so I believe the formations called 
Taconic in the United States, to have claim to no 
higher antiquity, and to be simply Silurian strata 
much altered, and often quite metamorphic. 



CHAP. XL.] RAILWAYS. 355 



CHAP. XL. 



Construction and Management of Railways in America. 
Journey by Long Island from New York to Boston. Whale 
Fishery in the Pacific. Chewing Tobacco. Visit to Wenham 
Lake. Cause of the superior Permanence of Wenham Lake 
Ice. Return to Boston. Skeletons of Fossil Mastodons. 
Food of those extinct Quadrupeds. Anti-war Demonstration. 

Voyage to Halifax. Dense Fog. Large Group of Ice- 
bergs seen on the Ocean. Transportation of Rocks by Icebergs. 
Danger of fast Sailing among Bergs. Aurora Borealis. 

Connection of this Phenomenon with drift Ice. Pilot with 
English Newspapers. Return to Liverpool. 



May 21. 1846. IN the construction and manage- 
ment of railways, the Americans have in general 
displayed more prudence and economy than could 
have been expected, where a people of such sanguine 
temperament were entering on so novel a career of 
enterprise. Annual dividends of seven or eight per 
cent, have been returned for a large part of the capital 
laid out on the New England railways, and on many 
others in the Northern States. The cost of passing 
the original bills through the State parliaments has 
usually been very moderate, and never exorbitant ; 
the lines have been carried as much as possible 
through districts where land was cheap ; a single line 
only laid down where the traffic did not justify two ; 
high gradients resorted to, rather than incur the 



t 
356 NEW YORK TO BOSTON. [CHAP. XL. 

expense of deep cuttings ; tunnels entirely avoided ; 
very little money spent in building station-houses ; 
and, except where the population was large, they have 
been content with the speed of fourteen or sixteen 
miles an hour. It has, moreover, been an invariable 
maxim " to go for numbers," by lowering the fares so 
as to bring them within the reach of all classes. Oc- 
casionally, when the intercourse between two rich and 
populous cities, like New York and Boston, has ex- 
cited the eager competition of rival companies, they 
have accelerated the speed far beyond the usual 
average ; and we were carried from one metropolis to 
the other, a distance of 239 miles, at the rate of 
thirty miles an hour, in a commodious, lofty, and 
well-ventilated car, the charge being only three 
dollars, or thirteen shillings. We went by a route 
newly opened, first through Long Island, ninety-five 
miles in length, over a low, level tract, chiefly com- 
posed of fine sand ; and we then found a steamer 
ready to take us across the Sound to New London in 
Connecticut, where we were met by the cars at Point 
Allen ; after which we enjoyed much delightful 
scenery, the railway following the margin of a river, 
where there were cascades and rapids foaming over 
granite rocks, and overhung with trees, whose foliage, 
just unfolded, was illumined by a brilliant sunshine. 

In the estuary of New London we saw many large 
whalers, and a merchant talked to me with satisfaction 
of the success of the United States' whale-fishery in 
the Pacific, saying it amounted to 200,000 tons, 
while that of Great Britain did not exceed 60,000. 
" Five fish," said he, " is the usual cargo of an En- 



CHAP. XL.] WHALE FISHERY. 357 

glish whaler, as they boil the blubber at home, 
whereas the Americans boil it in a huge cauldron on 
deck, and after staying out three years, return with 
the oil of ninety whales in one ship. Our fishery in 
the Pacific is becoming a most important nursery for 
seamen, giving occupation to about 20,000 men, 
which would enable us at any moment to man a 
powerful fleet. The possession of California is 
therefore much coveted by us, because the port of 
San Francisco is the only one in the Northern Pacific 
not exposed to the west wind, or blocked up by a bar 
of sand, such as that which renders the mouth of the 
Columbia river impassable to large ships. It is not 
territory but a sea-port we need, and this advantage 
a war w r ith Mexico may give us." 

There was besides much characteristic conversation 
in the cars, about constructing a railway 4000 miles 
long from Washington to the Columbia river ; and 
some of the passengers were speculating on the hope 
of seeing in their lifetime a population of 15,000 souls 
settled in Oregon and California. A variety of plans 
was also freely discussed for crossing the isthmus from 
the Gulf of Mexico into the Pacific, so as to avoid 
the long and dangerous voyage round Cape Horn. 
A ship-canal across the isthmus of Tehuantepec, 
135 miles in length, was alluded to as the favourite 
scheme ; and the expediency of forcing Mexico to 
cede a right of way was spoken of as if the success 
of their campaign was certain. 

It is the fashion for travellers in the New World 
to dwell so much on the chewing of tobacco, that 
I may naturally be expected to say something of this 



358 CHEWING TOBACCO. [CHAP. XL. 

practice. There is enough of it to be very annoying 
in steam-boats and railway-cars, but far less so as we 
journey northwards ; and I never saw, even in the 
South, any chewing of the weed in drawing-rooms, 
although we were told in South Carolina that some 
old gentlemen still indulged in this habit. That it is 
comparatively rare in the New England States, was 
attested by an anecdote related to me of a captain 
who commands one of the steamers on Lake Cham- 
plain, who prided himself on the whiteness of his 
deck, intended to be kept as a promenade. Observing 
a Southerner occasionally polluting its clean floor, 
he ordered a boy to follow him up and down with a 
swab, to the infinite diversion of the passengers, and 
the no small indignation of the Southerner, when at 
length he discovered how his footsteps had been 
dodged. The governor of a Penitentiary told me, 
that to deprive prisoners of tobacco was found to be 
a very efficient punishment, and that its use was 
prohibited in the New England madhouses, as being 
too exciting. 

From Boston we went to Ipswich, Massachusetts, 
to visit Mr. Oakes, the botanist, with whom we had 
spent many pleasant days in the White Mountains.* 
He set out with us on an excursion to Wenhain 
Lake, from which so much ice is annually exported 
to England and other parts of the world. 

This lake lies about twenty miles to the north- 
east of Boston. It has a small island in the middle 
of it, is about a mile long and forty feet deep, and 

* See Vol. I. p. 71. 



CHAP. XL.] WENHAM LAKE. 359 

is surrounded by hills of sand and gravel, from forty 
to a hundred feet high. The water is always clear 
and pure, and the bottom covered with white quart- 
zose sand. It is fed by springs, and receives no mud 
from any stream flowing into it ; but at the lower 
extremity a small brook of transparent water flows 
out. In some parts, however, there must, I presume, 
be a soft and muddy bottom, as it is inhabited by 
eels, as well as by pickerell and perch. Mr. Oakes 
had recently received a present of a snapping turtle, 
weighing 25 Ibs., taken from the lake. The ice is con- 
veyed by railway to Boston to be shipped, and the 
increase of business has of late been such as to cause 
the erection of new buildings, measuring 127 feet by 
120, and 24 feet high. They stand on the water's 
edge, by the side of the old storehouses, which are 
very extensive, built of wood, with double walls two 
feet apart, the space between being filled with saw- 
dust, which excludes the external air; while tan is 
heaped up, for the same purpose, on the outside. 
The work of cutting and storing the ice is carried on 
in winter, and is not commenced till the ice is at least 
a foot thick. The surface is always carefully swept 
and kept free from snow ; and as none but the most 
compact and solid ice is fit for the market, it is neces- 
sary to shave off three inches or more of the super- 
ficial ice, by means of a machine called an ice-plane, 
drawn by a horse. This operation is especially re- 
quired after a thaw or a fall of rain, succeeded by a 
frost, which causes the lake to be covered with opake, 
porous ice. 

Sir Francis Head, in his "Emigrant," 1846, has 



360 WENHAM LAKE ICE. [CHAP. XL. 

attributed the durability of the Wenham Lake ice, 
or its power of resisting liquefaction, to the intense 
cold of a North American winter. It is perfectly 
true that this ice does not melt so fast as English ice ; 
but the cause of this phenomenon is, I believe, very 
different from that assigned for it by the late Gover- 
nor of Upper Canada. " People in England," he 
says, " are prone to think that ice is ice ; but the 
truth is, that the temperature of 32 Fahrenheit, that 
at which water freezes, is only the commencement 
of an operation that is almost infinite : for after its 
congelation, water is as competent to continue to 
receive cold, as it was when it was fluid. The 
application of cold to a block of ice does not, 
as in the case of heat applied beneath boiling water, 
cause what is added at one end to fly out at the 
other : but, on the contrary, the centre cold is added 
to and retained by the mass, and thus the tempe- 
rature of the ice falls with the temperature of the air, 
until in Lower Canada it occasionally sinks to 40 
below zero, or 72 below the temperature of ice just 
congealed. It is evident, therefore, that if two ice- 
houses were to be filled, the one with Canada ice, 
and the other with English ice, the difference be- 
tween the quantity of cold stored up in each would 
be as appreciable as the difference between a cellar 
full of gold and a cellar full of copper ; that is to say, 
a cubic foot of Lower Canada ice is infinitely more 
valuable, or, in other words, it contains infinitely 
more cold, than a cubic foot of Upper Canada ice, 
which again contains more cold than a cubic foot of 
Wenham ice, which contains infinitely more cold 



CHAP. XL.] WENHAM LAKE ICE. 361 

than a cubic foot of English ice ; and thus, although 
each of these four cubic feet of ice has precisely the 
same shape, they each, as summer approaches, diminish 
in value ; that is to say, they each gradually lose a 
portion of their cold, until, long before the Lower 
Canada ice has melted, the English ice has been con- 
verted into lake- warm water." 

There can be no doubt that where an intense frost 
gives rise to a great thickness of ice, permitting large 
cubic masses to be obtained after the superficial and 
porous ice has been planed off, a great advantage is 
afforded to the American ice merchant, and the low 
temperature acquired by the mass must prevent it 
from melting so readily when the hot season comes on, 
since it has first to be warmed up to 32 Fahrenheit, 
before it can begin to melt. Nevertheless, each frag- 
ment of ice, when removed from the store-house, 
very soon acquires the temperature of 32 Fahren- 
heit, and yet when a lump of Wenham ice has been 
brought to England, it does not melt by any means 
so readily as a similar lump of common English ice. 
Mr. Faraday tells me that Wenham Lake ice is ex- 
ceedingly pure, being both free from air-bubbles and 
from salts. The presence of the first makes it ex- 
tremely difficult to succeed in making a lens of En- 
glish ice which will concentrate the solar rays and 
readily fire gunpowder, whereas nothing is easier 
than to perform this singular feat of igniting a com- 
bustible body by the aid of a frozen mass, if Wenham 
ice be employed. 

The absence of salts conduces greatly to the per- 
manence of the ice, for where water is so frozen that 

VOL. II. R 



362 EETURN TO BOSTON. [CHAP. XL. 

the salts expelled are still contained in air-cavities 
and cracks, or form thin films between the layers of 
the ice, these entangled salts cause the ice to melt 
at a lower temperature than 32, and the liquefied 
portions give rise to streams and currents within the 
body of the ice, which rapidly carry heat to the in- 
terior. The mass then goes on thawing within as 
well as without, and at temperatures below 32; 
whereas pure and compact Wenham ice can only 
thaw at 32, and only on the outside of the mass. 

Boston, May, 23. Sir Humphrey Davy, in his 
" Consolations in Travel,"* has said, that he never 
entered London, after having been absent for some 
time, without feelings of pleasure and hope,; for there 
he could enjoy the most refined society in the grand 
theatre of intellectual activity, the metropolis of the 
world of business, thought, and action, in politics, 
literature, and science. 

" I have more than once experienced the same feel- 
ings of hope and pleasure after having wandered 
over the less populous and civilised parts of the 
United States, when I returned to Boston, and never 
more so than on this occasion, when, after travelling 
over so large a space in the southern and western 
States, we spent ten days in the society of our literary 
and scientific friends in the metropolis of Massachu- 
setts, and in the flourishing university in its suburbs. 
They who wish to give a true picture of the national 
character of America, what it now is, and is destined 
to become, must study chiefly those towns which 

* P. 168. 



CHAP. XL.] FOSSIL MASTODON. 363 

contain the greatest number of native-born citizens. 
They must sojourn in the east, rather than in the 
west or south, not among the six million who are one 
half African and the other half the owners of ne- 
groes, nor among the settlers in the back-woods, who 
are half Irish, German, or Norwegians, nor among 
the people of French origin in Louisiana ; for, how- 
ever faithfully they may portray the peculiarities of 
such districts, they will give no better a representa- 
tion of America, than an accurate description of 
Tipperary, Connemara, the West Indies, French Ca- 
nada, Australia, and the various lands into which 
Great Britain is pouring her surplus population, 
would convey of England. 

Among other scientific novelties at Boston, I was 
taken to see two magnificent skeletons, recently ob- 
tained, of the huge mastodon, one of them found in 
Warren county, New Jersey, which a farmer had 
met with six feet below the surface, when digging 
out the rich mud from a small pond newly drained. 
There were no less than six skeletons, five of them 
lying together, and the sixth and largest about ten 
feet apart from the rest. A large portion of the 
bones crumbled to pieces as soon as they were ex- 
posed to the air, but nearly the whole of the separate 
specimen was preserved. Dr. John Jackson called 
my attention to the interesting fact that this perfect 
skeleton proved the correctness of Cuvier's conjec- 
ture respecting this extinct animal, namely, that it 
had twenty ribs like the elephant, although no more 
then nineteen had ever been previously found. From 
the clay in the interior within the ribs, just where 

R 2 



364 FOOD OF MASTODON. [CHAP. XL. 

the contents of the stomach might naturally have 
been looked for, seven bushels of vegetable matter 
had been extracted ; and Professor Webster, of Har- 
vard College, had the kindness to present me with 
some of it, which has since been microscopically ex- 
amined for me in London by Mr. A. Henfrey, of the 
Geological Survey. He informs me that it consists 
of pieces of the small twigs of a coniferous tree of 
the cypress family ; and they resemble in structure 
the young shoots of the white cedar ( Thuja occiden- 
talis\ still a native of North America, on which, 
therefore, we may conclude that the mastodon fed. 

But a still nobler specimen of this great probos- 
cidian quadruped was exhumed in August, 1845, in 
the town of Newburg, New York, and purchased by 
Dr. John C. Warren, Professor of Anatomy in Har- 
vard University. It is the most complete, and, 
perhaps, the largest ever met with. The bones 
contain a considerable proportion of their original 
gelatine, and are firm in texture. The tusks, when 
discovered, were ten feet long ; but the larger part of 
them had decomposed, and could not be preserved. 
The length of the skeleton was twenty-five feet, and 
its height twelve feet, the anchylosing of the two 
last ribs on the right side affording the comparative 
anatomist a true gauge for the space occupied by the 
intervertebrate substance, so as to enable him to form 
a correct estimate of the entire length. Dr. Warren 
gave me an excellent Daguerreotype of this skeleton 
for Mr. Clift, of the College of Surgeons in London. 

Nothing is more remarkable than the large propor- 
tion of animal matter in the tusk, teeth, and bones of 



CHAP. XL.] ANTI-WAR DEMONSTRATION. 365 

many of these extinct mammalia, amounting in some 
cases, as Dr. C. T. Jackson has ascertained by ana- 
lysis, to 27 per cent., so that when all the earthy 
ingredients are removed by acids, the form of the 
bone remains as perfect, and the mass of animal mat- 
ter is almost as firm, as in a recent bone subjected to 
similar treatment. It would be rash, however, to 
infer confidently from such data that these quadru- 
peds were mired at periods more modern than the 
fossil elephants found imbedded in similar clayey de- 
posits in Europe, for the climate prevailing in this 
part of America may possibly have been colder than 
it was on the eastern side of the Atlantic. At the 
same time, I have stated in my former " Travels," ' 
that all the mastodons whose geological position I 
was able to examine into, in Canada and the United 
States, lived subsequently to the period of erratic 
blocks, and the formations commonly called glacial. 
I have also shown that the contemporary freshwater 
and land shells were of such species as now live in 
the same region, so that the climate could scarcely 
have differed very materially from that now prevail- 
ing in the same latitudes. 

During my stay at Boston, as I was returning one 
evening through Washington Street, I fell in with a 
noisy rabble of young men and boys, some of whom 
were dressed up for the occasion in rags, and pro- 
vided with drums, sticks, whistles, tin-kettles, and 
pans, with other musical instruments, most of them 
on foot, but some mounted and sitting with their 

* Vol. I. pp. 51. 55. Vol. II. p. 65. 
R 3 



366 VOYAGE TO HALIFAX. [CHAP. XL. 

faces towards the horse's or ass's tail, others with 
banners, calling out, " Hurrah for Texas," for they 
styled themselves " the Texas volunteers." This I 
found was an anti-war demonstration, and shows 
that there is a portion even of the humblest class 
here, who are inclined to turn the aggressive spirit 
and thirst for conquest of the Washington Cabinet 
into ridicule. 

June 1. Sailed for England in the Britannia, one 
of the Cunard line of steamers, the same in which 
we had made our outward voyage. For several days 
a white fog had been setting in from the sea at Bos- 
ton, and we were therefore not surprised to find the 
mist so dense off the harbour of Halifax that the 
lighthouse was invisible. By a continual discharge 
of guns, which were answered by the firing of cannon 
at the lighthouse, our captain was able safely to steer 
his ship into the harbour. In the post-office we 
found letters from England, left by a steamer which 
had touched there two days before, and had come from 
Liverpool in nine days. 

June 7. When we had quitted Halifax five days, 
and were on the wide ocean, the monotony of the 
scene was suddenly broken by the approach of a 
group of icebergs, several hundred in number, vary- 
ing in height from 100 to 250 feet, all of the purest 
white, except such portions as, being in shade, as- 
sumed a greenish hue, or such as acquired a delicate 
rose-colour tint from the rays of the evening sun. 
These splendid bergs were supposed to have floated 
from Placentia Bay, in Newfoundland, where a great 
many merchantmen had been imprisoned for several 



CHAP. XL.] ICEBERGS. 367 

months by a huge barrier of ice. They were almost 
all of picturesque shapes, and some of them of most 
fantastic form ; three in particular, which came 
within a mile of us. One presented a huge dome, 
rising from the centre of a flat tabular mass ; an- 
other, more than 100 feet high, was precisely in the 
form of a pyramid, quite sharp at the top, and the 
angle formed by the meeting of two sides, very well 
defined ; at the base of it rose a hummock, which 
we called the Egyptian Sphinx. The third was 
covered with pinnacles, and seemed like a portion of 
the Glacier des Bossons, in the valley of Chamouni, 
detached and afloat. Erect on one side of it stood 
an isolated obelisk of ice, 100 feet high, which in- 
creased very slightly in size towards the base. Some 
of these bodies appeared to the north, others far to 
the south of us, the loftiest of the whole rising out of 
the water to the height of 400 feet, according to the 
conjecture of the seamen, who thought they could 
not be far out in their estimate, as there was a 
schooner alongside of it, and they could tell the 
height of her mast within a few feet. We sailed 
within half a mile of several bergs, which were 250 
feet, and within a quarter of a mile of one 150 feet 
in height, on which, by aid of the telescope, we dis- 
tinctly observed a great number of sea-birds, which 
looked like minute black specks on a white ground. 
I was most anxious to ascertain whether there was 
any mud, stones, or fragments of rock on any one of 
these floating masses, but after examining about forty 
of them without perceiving any signs of foreign mat- 
ter, I left the deck when it was growing dusk. My 

R 4 



368 ICEBERGS. [CHAP. XL. 

questions had excited the curiosity of the captain 
and officers of the ship, who assured me they had 
never seen any stones on a berg, observing, at the 
same time, that they had always been so eager to 
get out of their way, and in such a state of anxiety 
when near them, that such objects might easily have 
been overlooked. I had scarcely gone below ten 
minutes, when one of the passengers came to tell me 
that the captain had seen a black mass as large as a 
boat on an iceberg, about 150 feet high, which was 
very near. By aid of a glass, it was made out dis- 
tinctly to be a space about nine feet square covered 
with black stones. The base of the berg on the side 
towards the steamer was 600 feet long, and from the 
dark spot to the water's edge, there was a stripe of 
soiled ice, as if the water streaming down a slope, as 
the ice melted, had carried mud suspended in it. In 
the soiled channel were seen two blocks, each about 
the size of a man's head. Although I returned in- 
stantly to the deck when the berg was still in sight, 
such was then the haziness of the air, and the ra- 
pidity of our motion, that the dark spot was no 
longer discernible. Such instances of the transporta- 
tion of rocks by ice, occurrences most interesting to 
geologists, were first recorded by Scoresby, in the 
northern hemisphere ; but from the accounts given 
me by Sir James Ross and Dr. Joseph Hooker, they 
are evidently much more common in the icebergs 
drifted from the Antarctic than from those of the 
Arctic regions. 

When we were among the ice, the temperature oi 
the water was 45 Fahrenheit. On the day before 



CHAP. XL.] AURORA BOREALIS. 369 

we came up with it, the passengers had already 
begun to look out warmer clothing, and shawls and 
great coats were in requisition. Occasionally we 
were steering amongst small pieces of ice, and the 
wheel at the helm was turned first one way and then 
another, reminding me of the dangers of the Missis- 
sippi, when we were avoiding the bumping against 
logs. In the fore part of the vessel the watch was 
trebled, some aloft and others below, and we went on 
at the rate of nine miles an hour, and once in the 
night came within less than a ship's length of a large 
berg. A naval officer on board declared to me next 
morning that the peril had been imminent; that he had 
weathered a typhoon in the Chinese seas, and would 
rather brave another than sail so fast in the night 
through a pack of icebergs. He now thought it 
most probable that the President steam-ship had been 
lost by striking a berg. He reminded me that we 
had seen a pinnacle of ice, distant 100 yards or more 
from the main body of a berg, of which it was evi- 
dently a part, the intervening submerged ice being 
concealed under water. How easily, therefore, might 
we have struck against similar hidden masses, where 
no such projecting pinnacle remained to warn us of 
our danger. 

At half-past nine o'clock on the evening of the 8th 
June, it being bright moonlight, some hours after 
we had lost sight of the ice, when we were in a 
latitude corresponding to the South of France, we 
saw in the north a most brilliant exhibition of the 
Aurora Borealis ; the sky seemed to open and close, 
emitting, for a short period, silvery streams of light like 
R 5 



370 AUROKA BOKEALIS. [CHAP. XL. 

comets' tails, and then a large space became over- 
spread with a most delicate roseate hue. The occur- 
rence of this phenomenon in the summer season, and 
in so southern a latitude, seemed to point to its 
connection with the ice which was drifting over the 
sea between us and Newfoundland, now to the N. W. 
of us. We learn from Sir James Ross's narrative 
of the late antarctic expedition, the highly interest- 
ing fact, that when the Aurora Borealis was playing 
over the great barrier of coast ice on the shores of 
the antarctic land, it partook distinctly of the irre- 
gular and broken shape of the icy cliffs over which 
it hovered.* 

June 12. A pilot came on board from Ireland, 
with English newspapers, filled with debates on the 
repeal of the corn- laws. Among the foreign news, 
a considerable space was occupied with the affairs of 
France, Germany, Italy, India, China, and there was 
only a short paragraph or two about America, North 
and South. I had been travelling long enough in the 
New World to sympathise fully with the feelings of 
some of my American fellow-passengers, who were 
coming abroad for the first time, when they expressed 
their surprise at the small space which the affairs of 
the United States occupied even in English journals. 
It is a lesson which every traveller has to learn when 
he is far from home, and seeks in a foreign news- 
paper to gain some intelligence of his native land. 
He is soon accustomed to find that day after day 
even the name of his country is not mentioned. 

* Vol.11, p. 221. 1842. 



CHAP. XL.] RETURN TO LIVERPOOL. 371 

The speed of our steamer had been constantly 
increasing as the weight of coal diminished. The 
length of the voyage, therefore, to America might 
be considerably abridged if the quantity of coal were 
lessened by a day and a half's consumption, the 
steamer starting from the West of Ireland, to which 
passengers might be conveyed in a few hours, by 
steam-boat and railway, from Liverpool. 

June 13., Saturday. Anchored off Liverpool at 
half-past ten o'clock in the evening, having made 
the passage from Boston in twelve days and a half, 
it being nine months and nine days since we left 
that port. 



R 6 



INDEX. 



A. 

ABOLITIONIST "wrecker," ii. 38. 

Abolitionists, i. 319. 322. ; ii. 
163. 

, coloured, i. 126. 

Absenteeism in Southern States, 
ii. 82. 

Acquia Creek, ii. 330. 

Actors in steamer, ii. 216. 

Advocates and attorneys, i. 47. 

African Tom, i. 359. 

Age of delta of Mississippi, ii. 
251. 

Agelaius phseniceus, i. 328. 

Alabama geology, ii. 89. 

, travelling bad, ii. 82. 

, coal-field, ii. 80. 

Alatamaha river, i. 326. 344. 

Albany, excursion to, ii. 348. 

Alcseus, ii. 123. 

Alleghany Mountains, ii. 320. 

Alligators, i. 317. 336. ; ii. 203. 

Alligator's nest, i. 337. 

Alluvium of Mississippi, ii. 242. 

Alpine plants, i. 79. 

American oratory, i. 182. 

Antarctic ice, i. 36. 

Anthracite coal, i. 247. 

Anti-British antipathies, ii. 289. 

Anti-Corn-Law-League, ii. 224. 

Anti-English feeling, i. 299. 

Anti-negro feeling, ii. 160. 

Anti-renters, N. Y., ii. 349. 

Arbitration, i, 261. 

Arctic Flora on Mount Washing- 
ton, i. 78. 

Arisaig, i. 133. 



Artesian wells, ii. 90. 

, near Montgomery, ii. 

42. 

Arundo phragmitis, ii. 149. 
Ateuchus volvens, ii. 328. 
Attakapas, ii. 175. 
Audubon, Mr., visit to, ii. 334. 
Augusta, in Maine, i. 45. 
Aurora Borealis, ii. 369. 



B. 

Bachman, Dr., i. 302. 
Backwoods, inconveniences of, 



Bald region of Mount Washing- 
ton, i. 77. 
Balize, ii. 143. 147. 

, houses on piles, ii. 149. 

look-out, ii. 148. 



Bankruptcies, i. 160. 
Baptist and Atheist, i. 178. 

and Methodists, i. 363. 

Barn moved, i. 121. 
Bartram, i. 335. 351.; ii. 177. 
Basking shark, i. 147. 
Baton Rouge, ii. 122. 176. 
Battle-ground, New Orleans, ii. 

155. 
Bayou Liere, ii. 145. 

la Fourche, ii. 175. 

Plaquemine, ii. 176. 

Sara, ii. 191. 

St. John, ii. 234. 

Bear in New England, i. 66. 
Beaufort, i. 308. 
Beetle, ball-rolling, ii. 328. 
Beetles called bugs, ii. 206. 



374 



INDEX. 



Bequests, i. 201. 

Berkeley, Sir William, i. 207. 

Bibles distributed, i. 365. 

Big Black River, ii. 209. 

Bone Lick, ii. 257. 

Birds, i. 316. 

on Mount Washington, i. 75. 

of Indiana, ii. 269. 

Bishop of St. Asaph, i. 23. 

Black Baptist church, ii. 2. 

mechanics, i. 360. 

Methodist church, ii. 283. 

Blanco White, i. 241. 

Blind asylum, i. 1 68. 

Blocks of granite and gneiss, ii. 21. 

Bluff of St. Stephen's, ii. 91. 

Bluffs, fossils of, ii. 50. 

, shipping cotton at, ii. 49. 

Bonaventure, i. 319. 

Bony pike used for manure, ii. 329. 

Boott factory, i. 109. 

Boston, i. 16. 152. 

, public buildings, i. 21. 

militia, i. 22. 

, environs of, i. 25. 

, suburbs of, i. 111. 

, lodgings in, i. 152. 

, mode of living, i. 156. 

Boulders, i. 103. 

Bowie knives, ii. 275. 

Brazilian caves, i. 349. 

Bridgeport, repudiation, ii. 323. 

Bringier, Mr., ii. 137. 231. 

British aggrandisement, i. 256. 

Brown, Mr. A., ii. 254. 

Brumby, Mr., professor of che- 
mistry, ii. 79. 

Brunswick Canal, i. 347. 

Buffalo Island, ii. 237. 

Bunker Hill monument, i. 16. 

Buried trees, ii. 137. 177. 181. 
192. 

Butler's Island, i. 333. 



C. 

Cabbage-palm, i. 314. 
Cairo on the Ohio, ii. 266. 



Campbell, life of, i. 144. 

, Gertrude of Wyoming, ii. 

321. 

Canadian legislature, i. 262. 
Canadians, ii. 159. 
Canal cut through ice, i. 18. 
Canes on bank of river, ii. 79. 
Cannon's Point, i. 338. 
Cape Cod, i. 113. 
Capitol, i. 265. 
Captains of steamers, ii. 223. 
Caravel of Columbus, i. 1. 
Carlyle, Mr., ii. 316. 
Carnival, ii. 112. 

at New Orleans, ii. 112. 

Carolina, North, i. 289. 
Carpenter, Dr., ii. 134. 140. 178. 

249. 

Carriages, i. 157. 
Carthage Crevasse, ii. 169. 
Carver, Governor, i. 120. 
Gary a aquatica, ii. 145. 
Cass, General, i. 260. 
Cathedral, Catholic, New Orleans, 

ii. 114. 

Cattle, miring of, ii. 105. 
Cercis canadensis, ii. 200. 
Chamserops adansonia, ii. 134. 

palmetto, i. 315. 

Chambersburg, ii. 321. 
Channing, Dr., i. 172. 196. 

on Milton, i. 203. 

on Slavery, i. 323. 

Channing's Works, i. 176. 
Charleston, i. 293. 

, gardens, i. 305. 

, society in, i. 296. 

Charlevoix, ii. 151. 
Charlottesville, ii. 173. 
Chatahoochie, Fall of, ii. 33. 
Cheapness of books in U. S., ii. 

338. 

Cheirotherium of Saxony, ii. 310. 
in coal of Pennsylvania, ii. 

306. 

Cherokee rose, ii. 199. 
Chicken-thieves, ii. 168. 
Children, spoilt, ii. 22 1. 
Christians, sect so called, i. 173. 
Christmas Day, i. 293. 



INDEX. 



375 



Christians, i. 173. 
Churches in Maine, i. 58. 

in New York, i. 238. 

, none in New Harmony, ii. 

272. 

Cincinnati, progress of, ii. 290. 
Civilisation among negroes, i. 361. 
Claiborne, fossil remains at, ii. 58. 

, landing at, ii. 58. 

Clapp, Dr., ii. 278. 

Clay, Mr., ii. 129. 

Clergy, pay of, i. 228. 

Climate of Boston, i. 154. 

, change of, affecting plants, 

i. 83. 

of New England, i. 154. 

Clipper Steamer, ii. 297. 
Coal-fields, i. 286. 

of Alabama, ii. 80. 

seams, i. 283. 

strata, foot-prints of reptiles 

in, ii. 308. 

, vegetable structure, i. 284. 

measures, origin of, ii. 246. 

Cobblers, i. 121. 
Cockburn, Admiral, i. 359. 
Cocoa-grass, ii. 156. 
Cogswell, Mr., ii. 335. 
Cold, indifference to, ii. 12. 
Coloured race, exclusiveness of 

whites towards, ii. 57. 

servants, i. 265. 

domestics, ii. 84. 

Coluber constrictor, i. 137. 

Columbus, ii. 33. 

Competition of negro and white 

mechanics, ii. 34. 
Complaint of the Captive, ii. 128. 
Concord, town of, i. 107. 
Congregationalists, i. 212. 
Consumption, common in Maine, 

i. 62. 

Converts to Rome, i. 240. 
Coolies in W. Indies, i. 12. 
Copyright, international, ii. 339. 
Coral reef, fossil, ii. 277. 
Cottagers of Glenburnie, ii. 221. 
Cotting, Dr. J. R., ii. 21. 
Cotton, ii. 167. 
Cotton- wood, ii. 194. 233. 



Cotton Mather on Day of Doom, 
i. 52. 

Couper, Mr. Hamilton, i. 327. 

Couthuoy, Captain, i. 7. 

Cowley, i. 204. 

Crackers, i. 326. 

Creeds, variations in, i. 216. 

Creek Indians, departure of, ii. 
33. 

Creole ladies, ii. 115. 

Crescent city, ii. 133. 

Cretaceous strata near Mont- 
gomery, ii. 42. 

Crevasses, ii. 169. 

Crimes among negroes, i. 358. 

Croton water, ii. 335. 

water-works, i. 236. 

Cupressus disticha,i. 327.; ii. 254. 

Curfew at Montgomery, ii. 43. 

Currents, oceanic, i. 7. 

Custom-house officers, i. 19. 

Cyperus hydra, ii. 156. 

Cypress trees, i. 327. 

roots, ii. 245. 

knees, ii. 180. 

, deciduous, age of, ii. 253, 

254. 



D. 

Dana, i. 197. 

Darby, on mud of Red river, ii. 

255.' 

Darien, i. 326. ; ii. 2. 
Darwin, Mr., i. 36. 350. 

, Pampean formation, i. 346. 

Date palms, i. 339. ; ii. 138. 
Davy, Sir Humphrey, ii. 362. 
Dawson, J. W., i. 132. 
Day of Doom, poem, i. 51.. 
De Candolle, i. 330. 
Declaration of independence, i. 

23. 

Decomposition of gneiss, ii. 22. 
Decoy pond, i. 121. 
Delta, advance of, ii. 152. 

, subsidence of, ii. 183. 

Democracy and Romanism, ii. 

291. 



376 



INDEX. 



Democrats, coalition of, with 

slave-owners, i. 96. 
Devil's Punch Bowl, ii. 200. 

Swamp, ii. 188. 

Dewey, Dr., sermon against war, 

ii. 345. 

Dickeson, Dr., ii. 196. 254. 
Diplomatists, i. 270. 
Diron, Sieur, ii. 153. 
Dirt-eating, ii. 7. 
Dissenters' Chapels Bill, i. 217. 
Division of property, i. 63. 
Divorced man, ii. 220. 
Dog-wood in Virginia, ii. 326. 
Domestic tea, ii. 210. 
Donaldsonville, ii. 123. 175. 
Dreissena, ii. 135. 
Dressmakers, i. 165. 

at Boston, i. 166. 

Drift, Northern, relative age of, 

ii. 264. 

Drift-wood, ii. 171. 
Driver, black, i. 357. 
Drunkenness in Alabama, ii. 67. 

92. 

Duelling, new law against, ii. 68. 
Dunbar, Mr., ii. 153. 
Dwarf firs, i. 76. 



E. 

Je, i. 312. 
Earthquake at New Madrid, ii. 

229. 

Echo, mountain, i, 72. 
Education of ladies, i. 158. 

, popular, ii. 317. 

, secular, i. 191. 

Educational movement, i. 195. 
Eldon, Lord, i. 107. 
Election, i. 183. 

at Boston, i. 183. 

Electoral franchise, i. 257. 
Electric telegraph, i. 242, 243. 

245. 

Elliott, Dr., i. 363. 
Ellis's Cliffs, ii. 194. 
Eloquence, inflated, i. 263. 



Emancipation, effects of, ii. 100. 
Emigrants, ii. 222. 

to the West, ii. 72. 

Eminent preachers, i. 175. 
Emmons, Dr., ii. 352. 
Engine room, i. 10. 
Engine, revolutions of, i. 11. 
Engines, high pressure, ii. 47. 
English newspapers, ii. 224. 

pronunciation, ii. 117. 

turn, ii. 155. 



Envy in a democracy, i. 99. 
Episcopal churches, i. 172. 

clergymen in steamer, ii. 86. 

Episcopalian asceticism, i. 178. 
Equality, ii. 223. 240. 

, social, i. 91. 

in society, ii. 73. 

Eulalie, lake, ii. 233. 
Evansville, Indiana, ii. 277. 
Everett, Mr. i. 22. 

on cheap literature, ii. 339. 

Eye-glass, ii. 218. 



F. 



Factories, Lowell, i. 109. 
Fanaticism of New England, i. 

91. 

Faneuil Hall, i. 21. 
Faraday, Mr., ii. 361. 
Fashion in the back-woods, ii. 

240. 

Fashionists, ii. 15. 
Faulkner, Mr., ii. 185. 
Fausse Riviere, ii. 185. 
Ferry boat, i. 27. 
Fire, alarms of, i. 167. 
Fire-clays of coal, ii. 245. 
Fires, i. 291. 

at New York, i. 237. 

Firs, dwarf, ii. 75. 

First juvenile, ii. 216. 

Fish, fossil, i. 29. 

Fissures during earthquake, ii. 

234. 

Flat boats, ii. 167, 168. 
Fleming, Dr., i. 147. 
Fletcher, Mr., ii. 238. 



INDEX. 



377 



Flint, the geographer, ii. 230. 
Fog off Halifax, ii. 366. 
Fogs, ii. 174. 

on river Piscataqua, i. 34. 

Fontania, ii. 185. 
Food for negroes, i. 356. 
Forefather's Day, i. 114. 
Forest scenery, ii. 239. 
Forshey, Mr., ii. 155. 176. 203. 

243. 
Fort Adams, ii. 194. 

Jackson, ii. 144. 

" Forty-five or fight," ii. 303. 
Foot-prints, fossil, of Greensburg, 

ii. 304. 
Fossil-trees, i. 282. 

human bone, ii. 197. 

remains, i. 348. 

Fossils in drift, i. 30. 

at Gardiner, i. 44. 
Fox, Mr., i. 268. 
Franconia, i. 102. 
Free school, i. 189. 

visit to a, i. 189. 

schools, i. 205. 

Free trade and protectionism, ii. 

325. 

French Creoles, ii. 156. 
" French settlements," ii. 237. 
Freshwater loam, ii. 194. 
Frost, severe, at Boston, i. 17. 
Funeral of Northern man, ii. 15. 



G. 

Gale off Great Bank, i. 2. 
Gallatin, Mr., on Indian corn, ii. 
343. 

, on Oregon question, ii. 342. 

Gallows Hill, i. 124. 
Gardenia, ii. 199. 
Gardens at Mobile, ii. 106. 
Gar-fish, ii. 187. 
Gas, explosion of, i. 285. 
Gas-works, New Orleans, ii. 136. 
Geese, i. 121. 
Gelasimus, ii. 145. 
Gelsemlum nitidum, ii. 188. 



1 General Jackson's log cabin, ii. 
226. 

Geological epoch of White Moun- 
tains, i. 83. 

Geology, prejudices opposed to, 
ii. 314. 

of Georgia, ii. 9. 

round Portsmouth, i. 29. 

, Alabama, ii. 89. 

Georgia, Bishop of, i. 363. 

German baker, ii. 227. 

baker's wife, ii. 240. 

Germans in Cincinnati, ii. 290. 

Gertrude of Wyoming, ii. 321. 

Giant's Grave, i. 73. 

Grammar school for boys, i. 190. 

Gravel terraces, ii. 299. 

Gifford, Mr. A. F., i. 279. 287. ; 
ii. 327. 

Gist, Dr., ii. 209. 

Glacial grooves, i. 34. 

Glynn county, i. 365. 

Gnathodon, ii. 150. 

cuneatus, ii. 134. 

Gneiss, decomposition of, ii. 22. 

Goldfuss, Professor, on reptiles in 
coal, ii. 313. 

Goldsmith, Vicar of Wakefield, 
ii. 316. 

Gordonia pubescens, i. 351. 

Governesses, i. 297. 

Governor's lady, ii. 19. 

Grand Gulf, ii. 205. 

Greenland, subsidence of, ii. 259. 

Greensburg, Pennsylvania, ii. 302. 

Gulf of Mexico shells, ii. 104. 

Gum tree, i. 332. 



H. 

Hale, Sir Matthew, i. 124. 
Half breeds, i. 130. 
Halifax, i. 14. 

, lighthouse, ii. 366. 

Hall, Captain Basil, ii. 129. 

, Mr. James, ii. 353. 

Halsvdrus Pontoppidani, i. 143. 
Hand-car on railway, ii. 8. 
Harlanus Americanus, i. 348. 



378 



INDEX. 



Harper's printing establishment, 

ii. 336. 

Harrisburg, ii. 322. 
Hawkes, Dr., ii. 129. 
Hay, vessels laden with, i. 42. 
Hayes, Mr. J. L., i. 28, 33. 
Head, Sir Francis, ii. 360. 
Health in New England, i. 155. 

in U. S., i. 155. 
Heavenly witnesses, i. 222. 
Helderberg war, ii. 349. 
Hitchcock, Professor, i. 8. ' 
Hockmar or shark, i. 145. 
Hogarth's Election Feast, i. 225. 
Home, Sir Everard, i. 144. 
Hooker, Dr. Joseph, i. 38. ; ii. 368. 
Horticultural show, i. 2 1 . 
Hospitality in South, i. 329. 
Hotel St. Louis, at New Orleans, 

ii. 112. 

Hotels, Boston, i. 153. 
House of Commons, i. 262. 
Howe, Dr., i. 169. 
Hoyt, Jesse, letters of, ii. 351. 
Huguenots, ii. 159. 
Humboldt, ii. 230. 
Humming-bird, migration of, ii. 

331. 

Hunter, Mr., ii. 233. 
Hurst Castle, i. 113. 
Hydrarchos, ii. 74. 

I. 

Ice of Wenham Lake, ii. 361. 
, antarctic, enclosing whale, 

i. 37. 

Iceberg, i. 5. 
Icebergs, i. 38. 

, rocks transported by, ii. 368. 

, danger of collison with, ii. 

369. 

, drifting of, i. 8. 

on homeward voyage, ii. 367. 

Iberville river, ii. 176. 
Illegitimate children, i. 366. 
Immersion in baptism, i. 363. 
Income tax, i. 254. 
Independence day, i. 184. 
Independents, i. 219. 



India tree, pride of, i. 290. 308. 

Indian blood, ii. 222. 

carvings of foot-prints, ii. 

313. 

mound, Wheeling, ii. 299. 

mounds, ii. 200. 

mounds near Macon, ii. 14. 

corn, uncertain crop, ii. 72. 

shell mound, i. 338. 

Indiana, fossil erect trees in coal 

strata, ii. 273. 
Inflated oratory, ii. 123. 
Initial letters, i. 182. 
Inns of Southern States, ii. 64. 
Inquisitiveness, ii. 219. 
Inundations, ii. 169. 
Ipswich, i. 157. 
Irish repeal meeting, i. 187, 188. 

voters, i. 249. 

servants, ii. 121. 

emigrants, i. 186, 187. 

Island Eighty-four, ii. 215. 

J. 

; j 
Jackson, ii. 208. 

, hotel at, ii. 210. 

, Dr. John, ii. 363. 

Jealousy of wealth, ii. 69. 
Jefferson College, ii. 173. 
Jeffrey, Lord, works reprinted in 

U. S., ii. 301. 

Johnson on Milton, i. 203. 
Judas-tree, ii. 200. 
Judges at Tuscaloosa, ii. 88. 

cashiered, ii. 125. 

elected, ii. 213. 

Julian calendar, i. 224. 
Juniata river, ii. 321. 

K. 

Kean, Mr. and Mrs., ii. 117. 

, Mrs., ii. 217. 

Kendall, Captain, i. 36. 

Kennebec river, i. 42. 

King, Dr., on fossil footprints in 

coal strata, ii. 305. 
Kingfisher, i. 332. 
Koch, i. 131. 



INDEX. 



379 



Ladies, educated, i. 158. 

' ordinary, ii. 119. 

Laing, Malcolm, i. 142. 144. 

Lake Solitude, ii. 185, 186. 

Pontchartrain, ii. 110. 133. 

135. 

Ooncordia, ii. 203. 

Eulalie, ii. 233. 

Lalaurie, Madame, ii. 163. 

Land tortoises, ii. 293. 

quadrupeds, chiefly noc- 
turnal, ii. 335. 

crabs, ii. 145. 

Landed proprietors, i. 64. 

Landslip, ii. 182. 

Language, i. 161. 

, peculiarities of, i. 161, 162. 

Laura Bridgeman, i. 168. 

Law against black mechanics, ii. 
97. 

Lay teachers, i. 226. 

Le Conte, Dr., i. 317. 

Lectures, i. 198. 

Leg " bitten off," ii. 220. 

Legal profession, i. 45. 

Legislators, paid, i. 98. 

Legislature of Louisiana, ii. 122. 

Lending libraries, i. 199. 

Lepidosteus, ii. 187. 

Levee, New Orleans, ii. 131. 

Levees, artificial, ii. 170. 

Levelling up and down, ii. 223. 

Leyden Street, i. 115. 

Liberia, ii. 322. 

Liebig, i. 330. 

Lightning, i. 316. 

Lighthouse, Halifax, guns fired 
at, ii. 366. 

Lighthouse near Mobile, ii. 103. 

Lightwood, i. 291. . 

Lignite, ii. 232. 

Linnaea borealis, i. 72. 

Literary clerk of steamer, ii. 190. 

tastes, i. 164. 

Little Prairie, ii. 230. 

Live oaks, i. 319. 

Liverpool, landing at, ii. 371. 



Liverpool, voyage from, i. 1. 
Living, cost of at Boston, i. 165. 
Loam, ii. 225. 229. 

or loess, ii. 208. 

Loblolly pine, i. 316. 
Loess, ii. 195. 

Long Island Railway, ii. 356. 
Louisiana, ii. 157. 
, loess of, ii. 256. 
Louisville, Kentucky, ii. 279. 
Love, Mr., ii. 235. 
Lowell Factories, i. 109. 
Loxia cardinalis, i. 331. 
Luxury of New Orleans, ii. 124. 
Luzenberger, Dr., i. 337. 
Lynch Law in Florida, ii. 28. 

M. 

Macaulay's History, sale of, in 

U. S., ii. 338. 
Maclarty, Mrs., ii. 221. 
Macon, Georgia, ii. 14. 

, Alabama, ii. 65. 

M'Connell, i. 188. 
M'Cormack, Dr., ii. 134. 
Madam, use of term, i. 162. 
M'llvaine, Mr. William, i. 139. 
Mackenzie letters, ii. 351. 
Maclean, Rev. Donald, i. 145. 
M'Quhae, Captain, i. 151. 
Magnolia steamer, ii. 165. 207. 
Mai, Cardinal, L 223. 
Mallotus, i. 29. 
Mammoth ravine, ii. 196. 
Man shot in a brawl, ii. 27. 
Manchester, i. 108. 
Manners, familiar, ii. 218. 
Marriage between coloured and 

white, ii. 287. 

Marriages in Boston, i. 159. 
, early, i. 159. 



Marine shells, i. 113. 
Market at New Orleans, ii. 130. 
Marsh blackbird, i. 328. 
Martineau, Miss, ii. 163. 
Martins killed by storm, i. 33. 
Mastodon, skeletons of, ii. 363. 

, food of, ii. 364. 

Maximilian, Prince, ii. 271. 



380 



INDP:X. 



Mayflower, i. 114. 

, table of, i. 119. 

Medical students, ii. 281. 
Megatherium, i. 347. 
Melville, Dr., i. 148. 
Memphis, ii. 225. 
Mendicity, i. 343. 
Merigomish, i. 132. 
Merrimack river, i. 108. 
Metairie ridge, ii. 135. 
Methodist church, black, ii. 283. 

prayer meetings, i. 364. 

church,Montgomery,ii.284. 

sermon, i. 104. 

Mexico, war with, ii. 344. 
Michaud on the age of cypress, 

ii. 254. 

Migration of plants, i. 80. 
Mill Creek, geology of, ii. 292. 
Milledgeville, ii. 18. 
Millerite movement, i. 87. 
Mississippi, banks of, ii. 214. 

river, ii. 131. 

water, ii. 207. 

coast, ii. 166. 

, bank caving in, ii. 229. 

, delta of, ii. 243. 

sediment, ii. 154. 

, age of delta, ii. 248. 

Missouri, slavery in, ii. 241. 
Mixture of races, i. 366. 
Mob of gentlemen, i. 295 
Mobile built on bed of shells, ii. 

106. 

, gardens at, ii. 106. 

Mocking birds, ii. 239. 
Montgomery, j ourney to, ii. 35. 4 1 . 
Mormons, i. 90. 

and Stephanists, ii. 55. 

Morals of Puritans, i. 159. 
Morlot on Subsidence in Adriatic, 

ii. 248. 
Morse, i. 244. 

geography, ii. 336. 

Moss, Spanish, i. 292. 
Mount Auburn, i. 171. 

Vernon, ii. 266. 

Washington, i. 74. 

Mountains of New Hampshire, i. 

65. 



"Movers" to Texas, ii. 61. 109. 
Mud cracks, casts of, ii. 307. 
Mulattos, i. 366. 
Museum, Salem, i. 123. 
Musk rats, ii. 237. 

, habitations of, ii. 329. 

Musquitos, ii. 121. 175. 



N. 

Nahant, i. 139. 

Napoleon, ii. 215. 

Natchez, country houses, ii. 199. 

, ii. 194. 

, tornado, ii. 198. 

National fair at Washington, ii. 

325. 

Nativism, i. 250. 
Naval arsenal, ii. 226. 
Names of negroes, i. 354. 
Negro Baptists, ii. 3. 

brain, i. 129. 

houses, i. 333. 355. 

episcopal clergyman, ii. 324. 

prayer, ii. 5. 

hospital, i. 356. 

slaves, ii. 32. 

children, ii. 18. 

maid-servants, i. 342. 

names, i. 354. 

porters, i. 326. 

preacher, Louisville, ii. 285. 

intelligence, ii. 5. 

and white mechanics, ii. 34. 

shot by overseer, ii. 92. 

instruction, i. 275. 

mistaken for white, ii. 217. 

Negroes, i. 297. 

, civilisation of, ii. 96. 

, emancipation of, i. 13. 

, increase of, ii. 95. 

in Louisiana, ii. 162. 

in mines, i. 287. 

, intelligence of, ii. 9. 

, kindness to, i. 278. 



, more progressive in upper 

country, ii. 10. 
on sale, ii. 161. 



INDEX. 



381 



Negroes, position of, in the South, 

ii. 98. 

, prejudices against, i. 294. 

, progress of, i. 362. ; ii. 83. 

, runaway, i. 294. 

, treatment of, ii. 93. 

Neill, Mr. i., 142. 
New Albany, ii. 277. 
New Harmony, ii. 269. 
New Jersey, i. 251. 
New London, ii. 356. 
New Madrid, ii. 226. 

, departure from, ii. 266. 

, earthquake, ii. 229. 

New Orleans, French appearance 

of, ii. 111. 

, Hotel St. Louis, ii. 112. 

, Catholic cathedral, ii. 114. 

, theatres, ii. 117. 

, tombs at, ii. 118. 

, shops at, ii. 118. 

, ladies' ordinary, ii. 119. 

, procession at, ii. 119. 

, salubrity of, ii. 120. 

Newberne, i. 348. 
Newfoundland, i. 9. 
Newhaven, i. 235. 
Newman, Mr., i. 240. 
Newsboys, ii. 40. 
Newspaper press, ii. 41. 
Newspapers, i. 59. 

distribution of, i. 19. 

from England, ii. 224. 

New York, gay dresses in, ii. 332. 

, omnibuses in, ii. 333. 

, naming of streets, ii. 334. 

Nicol, Mr. J M ii. 251. 

North and South split, i. 365. 

Northern prices, ii. 121. 

Norton, Mr., i. 174. 

Nothingarians, i. 177. 

Novels, sale of by newsboys, ii.41 

Nuttall, i. 348. 



O. 

Oakes, Mr. William, i. 71. ; ii. 

359. 
Obion, ii. 238. 



Observatory, Cincinnati, ii. 294. 
Ocmulgee river, i. 344. ; ii. 16. 
Oconee river, i. 344. 
Ogilthorpe, i. 339. 
' Old Virginia," i. 361. 
Omnibuses in New York, ii. 333. 
Oolitic coal, i. 280. 
Opossum, ii. 7. 
Oregon, ii. 224. 

, war about, i. 253. 
Organic remains in ice, i. 35. 
Oscillation of level, ii. 263. 
Ostracism of wealth, i. 96. 
Owen, Professor, i. 44. 
, Mr., i. 129. 

, Robert, of Lanark, ii. 270. 
Oxenstiern, i. 102. 
Oysters, i. 312. 



P. 

Pacific, whale fishery in, ii. 357. 
Palenque, i. 267. 
Palisades, i. 251. 
Palmetto, i. 314. 
Parker, Theodore, i. 242. 
Patent Office, i. 265. 
Pauperism, absence of, i. 186. 
Peace Association, i. 23. 
Pearl River fossils, ii. 209. 
Peltier, i. 301. 
Peltries, ii. 237. 

Pemigewasset river, i. 103. 105. 
Pendleton, Capt. Benj., i. 36. 
Pere Antoine, ii. 139. 
Perkins, Colonel, i. 117. 138. 
Peytona steamer, ii. 205. 
Philadelphia, ii. 323. 
Physical science, i. 221. 
Pilgrim relics, i. 116. 
Pilgrim fathers, names of, i. 115. 
Pilots, ii. 151. 228. 
Pine-trees, age of, ii. 36. 
Pine-barrens, want of elbow- 
room in, ii. 13. 
Pinus tseda, i. 316. 
Piscataqua river, i. 34. 
Pittsburg, fire at, ii. 300. 
Place-hunter, disappointed, ii. 28. 



382 



INDEX. 



Placentia Bay, ii. 366. 

Planters, i. 329. 352. 

Plants, i. 56. 

, Alpine, i. 79. 

at New Orleans, ii. 134. 

in Virginia, ii. 327. 

, migrations of, i. 80. 

near Saratoga, ii. 353. 

, spring flowers of Indiana, 

ii. 270. 

, wild, N. Hampshire, i. 32. 

Plassy, ii. 156. 

Pledges at elections, i. 100. 

Plymouth Beach, i. 112. 

, Massachusetts, i. 111. 

, New Hampshire, i. 102. 

Politics in Massachusetts, i. 183. 

Polk, i. 267. 

Pontoppidan, i. 135. 

Popular education, i. 200. ; ii. 
317. 

instruction, i. 229. 

Populus angulata, ii. 194. 233. 

Pork merchant, ii. 276. 

Porpoises, i. 4. 

Person, i. 222. 

Port Hudson, ii. 165. 177. 238 

Portland in Maine, i. 40. 48. 

Portsmouth, N. Hampshire, i. 28. 

Post-office abuses, i. 107. 

Potter, Bishop, i. 109. 

Preachers, eminent, i. 175. 

Prejudices opposed to geology, 
ii. 314. 

Preston, Mr., ii. 173. 

Primogeniture, opinion of, i. 64. 

Proclamation of Thanksgiving 
Day, i. 185. 

Procession at New Orleans, ii. 
119. 

Protectionist doctrines, i. 160. 

Protectionists, i. 160. 

Protracted meetings at Mont- 
gomery, ii. 44. 

Pond, Mr., ii. 33. 

Powers the sculptor, ii. 296. 

Public meetings, want of, i. 184. 

Purgstall, Countess, ii. 129. 

Puritans, i. 49. 159. 



Q. 

Quadroons, ii. 116. 217. 
Quadrupeds, extinction of, i. 349. 
Quicksand, Plymouth,!. 114. 
Quincey, i. 111. 



R. 

Races, mixture of, i. 366. 
Raccourci cut-off, ii. 193. 
Railway cars, i. 26. ; ii. 37. 

travelling, i. 27. 

Railways, i. 233. 

in U. S., ii. 337. 

Rattle-snakes, i. 304. 
Ravine near Milledgeville, ii. 25. 
Ravines, modern, ii. 23. 
Recruiting in U. S., facility of, 

ii. 345. 

Red-bird, i. 331. 
Red maple, ii. 188. 
Red river, red mud of, ii. 194. 

255. 

Redfield, Mr., i. 7. 
Reelfoot, ii. 238. 
Relics, authenticity of, i. 118. 
Religion and politics, i. 179. 

, progress in, i. 211. 

Religious toleration, i. 49. 

Rennie, Mr. G., ii. 251. 

Repeal of English corn laws, ii. 

29. 

meeting, i. 188. 

Reptile, fossil, air-breathing, in 

coal strata, ii. 312. 
Repudiation, i. 255. 
Revival at Bethlehem, i. 85. ; 

ii. 5. 

Rice plantations, i. 353. 
Richmond, i. 271. 

coal-field, i. 280. 
Riddell, Dr., ii. 135. 
, on sediment of Mississippi, 

ii. 249. 

Rise of Sweden, ii. 258. 
River-fogs, ii. 143, 144. 
Robin drunk with berries, ii. 60. 



INDEX. 



383 



Robinson, Pastor, i. 210. 
Rogers, Prof. W. B., i. 272. 280. 
Roman law, ii. 122. 

Catholics, i. 232. 

Romanism and democracy, ii. 

291. 

Ross, Sir James, i. 6. 38. ; ii. 368. 
Rotation of trees, i. 330. 
Ruggles, Mr., ii. 250. 



S. 



Saco, valley of the, i. 70. 
Sailing, rate of, i. 1 1. 
Salem Museum, i. 122. 
Salt marshes, i. 334. 
Salubrity of New Orleans, ii. 120. 
San Francisco, ii. 357. 
Sand-bursts, ii. 232. 
Saratoga, plants near, ii. 353. 
Savage, Mr., i. 120. 
Savannah, i. 313. ; ii. 1. 
Schlegel, A. W., Prof., ii. 284. 
Schools, common, i. 58. 

in New York, i. 246. 

Scoliophys atlanticus, i. 138. 
Sea-serpent, Norwegian, i. 131. 

134. 140. 

, Cape Ann, i. 137. 

Section, geological, from Darien 

to Vicksburg, ii. 262. 
Sects, equality of, i. 48. 
Secular education, i. 247. 
Sellick, Captain, ii. 180. 
Sensitiveness, American, i. 165. 
Servants, i. 156, 157. 354.; ii. 

219. 

, position of, i. 94. 

, scarcity of, ii. 303. 

Shark, basking, i. 147. 

Shells, i. 341. 

on shore of Gulf of Mexico, 

ii. 104. 

Shell-road, ii. 134. 
Shepard, Professor, i. 304. 
Shock of earthquake, ii. 236. 
Shops at New Orleans, ii. 118. 
Shrike, i. 332. 
Sidell on Mississippi, ii. 250. 



Silicified shells and corals, ii. 17.. 
Silliman, Professor, i. 234. 
Sink-holes, ii. 232. 
Skiddaway, i. 313. 
| Slave, marriage of, with white, 

Kentucky, ii. 287. 

labour, i. 274. ; ii. 84. 

States, i. 309. 

dealers, 5. 277. 

whip, i. 358. 

, runaway, ii. 37. 

Slaves, sale of, Macon, ii. 66. 
selling at Montgomery, 

ii. 42. 

Slave-trade, i. 311. ; ii. 322. 
Slave-dealer on steamer, ii. 110. 
Slavery, i. 323. 352. 

in Southern States, ii. 94. 

party against extension, i. 

183. 

Smith, Sydney, ii. 4. 
Smoke, absence of, i. 247. 
Snag-boats, ii. 171. 
Snake and dog, ii. 328. 
Snapping turtle, ii. 203. 
Soap, home-made, ii. 20. 
Social equality, i. 93. 
Southern steamboat, ii. 46. 

planters' superior political 



tact, i. 95. 
Spanish moss, i. 326. ; ii. 130. 
Species, creation of, i. 304. 
Specific centres, theory of, i. 81. 
Spiritual boulanger, i. 364. 
Split, north and south, i. 365. 
Spoilt children, ii. 221. 
Squalus maximus, i. 144. 
Squirrels, i. 303. 
Stage-coach, ii. 319. 
from Macon to Columbus, 

ii. 32. 

Stage -travelling, ii. 17. 
State debts, ii. 62. 

education, i. 191. 

Statehouse at Jackson, ii. 211. 
Steamboats, ii. 48. 
Steamboat passengers, ii. 53. 

, collision with trees, ii. 51. 

accidents, ii. 141. 

Steamer in Maine, i. 41. 



384 



INDEX. 



Steamer to Tuscaloosa, ii. 77. 

Steamers safest in storms, i. 3. 

Steam ships, ii. 131. 

Stephanists, ii. 54. 

Stewardess, German, ii. 53. 

Storer, Dr., on fish, i. 202. 

Story, Judge, i. 14. 

Stoves, i. 234. 

Stronsa animal, i. 142. 

St. Charles Hotel, New Orleans, 
ii. 132. 

St. Francis River, ii. 230. 

St. Mary's Hall, i. 252. 

St. Rosalie, ii. 200. 

St. Simon's Island, i. 338. 340. 

Submarine forest, i. 31. 

Subsidence of Delta of Missis- 
sippi, ii. 183. 

of land, i. 30. 

Sumner, Mr. Charles, i. 23. 

Sunday schools for negroes, ii. 
286. 

Supreme Court, i. 264. 

Courts, i. 47. 

Swallows at Portsmouth, i. 33. 

Swamp rabbit, i. 303. 

Swamps of Mississippi, ii. 244. 

Sweden, rise of, ii. 258. 



Tabernacle at Boston, i. 89. 
Taconic system of rocks, age of, 

ii. 354. 

Tapir fossil in Texas, ii. 261. 
Tariff, i. 253. 

Tasso, love and madness, ii. 128. 
Taxodium distichum, ii. 192. 
Teachers, pay of, i. 192. 

, position of, i. 193. 

, their social position, i. 193. 

Telescope, i. 201. 
Temperance hotel, i. 58. 
" hotels, i. 153. 
Ten Hour Bill, ii. 300. 
Tennessee, ii. 238. 
Terraces, succession of, i. 346. 

of gravel, ii. 299. 

Texas, i. 259. 



Texas, fossil bones in, ii. 261. 

volunteers, ii. 365. 

Thanksgiving day, i. 184. 
Theatre at New Orleans, ii. 117. 

in Boston, i. 197. 

Theological discussion, i. 105. 

colleges, i. 227. 

Thermometer low at Tuscaloosa, 

ii. 102. 
Third House, thanks voted to, at 

Albany, ii. 351. 

Three Heavenly Witnesses, i. 222. 
Tillandsia, ii. 351, 130. 

usneoides, i. 292. 

Timber trade, i. 42. 
Tobacco, chewing of, ii. 358.' 
Tombeckbee river, ii. 78. 
Tombs at New Orleans, ii. 118 
Tortoises, i. 305. 

, land, ii. 293. 

Tractarians, i. 241. 
Trapper, ii. 237. 
Travelling roads, bad, ii. 82. 

, rough, ii. 32. 

, New England, rate of, i. 40 



Trees, rotation of, i. 330. 

, on banks of Kennebec, i. 43 

and plants, i. 70. 

on banks of river, ii. 51. 

, fossil, erect, of coal, in In 

diana, ii. 272. 
Trinity Church, i. 239. 
Turkey buzzards, i. 305. 
Tuscaloosa judges, ii. 88. 

, acquaintances at, ii. 85. 

, college of, ii. 79. 

, churches at, ii. 86. 



U. 

Unio spinosus, i. 333. 
Unitarian Church, i. 48. 

congregations, i. 173. 

Unitarians, i. 173. 

, cause of their influence, 

ii. 349. 

Universal suffrage, 5. 101. 
University at Louisville, ii. 281. 
Ilpotoy Creek, ii. 33. 



INDEX. 



385 



V. 

Vanessa atalanta, ii. 293. 
Vegetation near Tuscaloosa, ii. 80. 

of Gulf of Mexico, ii. 103. 

of Mount Washington, i. 75. 

Vicksburg, ii. 208. 214. 

Vidalia, ii. 202. 

Vine, cultivation of, ii. 295. 

Virginia, i. 273. 

Vitreous tubes at Areola, ii. 90. 

Vote by ballot, ii. 212. 

Voters, bribery of, ii. 6. 

Voyage from Mobile to New Or- 

leans, ii. 108. 
to Mobile, ii. 76. 



W. 

Wailes, Colonel, ii. 196. 

Walhalla, i. 164. 

Wandering Jew, by Eugene Sue, 

ii. 340. 

, great sale of, ii. 340. 

, tendency of the work, -ii. 

341. 
War, demonstration against, ii. 

341. 365. 

panic, i. 298. 

, preaching against, ii. 345. 

spirit abating, ii. 30. 

with England, i. 95. 325.; ii. 

63. 

with Mexico, ii. 344. 

Warren, Dr., ii. 364. 
Washington, i. 258. 265. ; ii. 195. 

, Mount, i. 74. 

Museum, i. 266. 

, national fair at, ii. 325. 

Wealth, ostracism of, i. 96. 
Webster, Mr., i. 180. 263. 
, Daniel, i. 180. 



Wenham Lake ice, ii. 361. 
West Point, ii. 222. 
Wey mouth, East, i. 120. 
Whale discovered in iceberg, i. 37. 

fishery in Pacific, ii. 357. 

Wheatland, Dr., i. 122. 
Wheatstone, i. 244. 
Wheeling Indian mound, ii. 299. 
Whig Caucus, i. 180. 
White, Blanco, i. 241. ; 

Mountains, i. 26. 

, age of, i. 83. 

, Peregrine, i. 116. 

Water, ii. 236. 

Wilde, Mr., ii. 165. 

, Richard Henry, ii. 122. 

Wilde's poetry, ii. 128. 
Wilkes, Captain, i. 38. 
Willey Slide, i. 67. 
Willows on Mississippi, ii. 146. 
Wilmington, i. 290. 
W T euthrop, L 243. 259, 260. 264. 
Witches, i. 124. 

, Salem, i. 123. 

Wood, cords of, ii. 174. 
Woodpecker boring trees, ii. 269, 
Woolly hair, ii. 218. 
Wyman, Dr., excursion with, ii. 
327. 



Y. 

Yandell, Dr., ii. 280. 
Yellow fever, ii. 107. 121 
jessamine, ii. 188. 



Z. 

Zeuglodon, bones of, ii. 9. 

in Alabama, ii. 74. 

Zoology, i. 303. 



THE END. 


