

POOR JACK. 



BY 



CAPTAIN MARRYAT, C.B 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

BY CLARKSON STANFIELD. R.A. 



LONDON: 
LONGMAN, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS.. 

PATERNOSTER ROW. 
1840. 



London 

Printed by A. SromswooDi 

New- Street- Square. 



M3L 






CONTENTS 



CHAPTER I. 

In which, like most People who tell their own Stories, 1 begin 
with the Histories of other People - Page 3 

CHAP. II. 

My Father does what most Sailors do — he makes a foolish Mar- 
riage, one of the Consequences of which is brought to Light at 
the End of the Chapter - - - - - S 

CHAP. III. 

In which my Mother proves herself a tender Wife, and at the same 
Time shows her Patriotism and Devotion to her Country - 13 

CHAP. IV. 

In which I tell the Reader all I can recollect about myself, and 
moreover prove the Truth of the old Adage " That it is a wise 
Child who knows its own Father"' - - - - 16 

CHAP. V. 

My Father and Mother meet after an Absence of Six Years. She 
discovers that he is no longer a Coxswain but a Boatswain's 
Mate - - - - - - -20 

CHAP. VI. 



A bright pleasant Evening after a Squall, in which the Art of 
Angling is introduced in a Way which would have added to the 
Knowledge of Izaac Walton himself - _ -24 

CHAP. VII. 

In which my Mother gives my Father a Scriptural Lesson. My 
Father's Grief at parting with an old Friend. He expostulates 
with my Mother and quits the House - - - 37 

CHAP. VIII. 

In which the Doctor pays a Visit and receives no Fee ; and I am 
obliged to work very hard to procure myself a Livelihood - \ 1 

CHAP. IX. 

In which I take a Cruise contrary to the received Rules of Navi- 
gation. On my Return from a cold Expedition, I meet with a 
cold Reception - 49 



r>«~ 



50 



iv CONTENTS. 

CHAP. X. 

In which I narrate what I consider the most fortunate Incident in 
my Life ; and Ben the Whaler confides to me a very strange 
History - Page 54 

CHAP. XI. 

In which the Doctor lets out some very novel Modes of medical 
Treatment, which are attended with the greatest Success - 65 

CHAP. XII. 

I prefer a Suit to Old Nanny, and procure a new Suit of Clothes. 
The Advantage of being well dressed — you may walk out with 
the Ladies - - - - " -73 

CHAP. XIII. 

I am so unfashionable as to pay my Debts. Ben's Opinion as to 
my Father's Return. The Chances exemplified in the List of 
killed and wounded. The FOrient blowing up, and the Royal 
George going down - - - - - SO 

CHAP. XIV. 

My Father makes his Appearance, having left his Leg, but not his 
Tail, behind him. My Father is pensioned off by my Mother 
as well as by his Country - - - - - 97 

CHAP. XV. 

In which is proved the Truth of the Proverb " when your own 
House is made of Glass, you never should be the first to throw 
Stones" 102 

CHAP. XVI. 

Showing how Old Nanny fell sick and got well again - - 106 

CHAP. XVII. 

A Morning Concert — in which the Opposition is as great as Black 
to White - - - - " - u4 > 

CHAP. XVIII. 

I get into very doubtful Company. I am tempted, and, like a 
.true Son of Adam, I fall - - - - -122 

CHAP. XIX. 

I am tempted again. My Pride is roused, and my Course of 
Life is changed in consequence - - - 129 

CHAP. XX. 

Much ado about Nothing ; or a Specimen of modern Patronage - 139 



CONTENTS. V 

CHAP. XXI. 

A most important Present is made to me ; and, as it will eventu- 
ally appear, the Generosity of the Giver is rewarded - Page 147 

CHAP. XXII. 

In which a Story is begun, and. not finished, which I think the 
Reader will regret as much as, at the Time, I did. - - 153 

CHAP. XXIII. 
" Recollect,' 5 says the Fellow, " you have thrown overboard a 
black Tom Cat !"- - - - - - l6l 

CHAP. XXIV. 

Bramble's Method of Education proves very effective. He also 
points out a Position in which you may prefer your Enemies to 
your Friends ------ 16? 

CHAP. XXV. 
In which Bramble points out to me that singing is Part of the 
Profession of a Pilot - - - - -174 

CHAP. XXVI. 
In which I go afloat, and obtain some Knowledge of the English 
Channel - - - - - - - 179 

CHAP. XXVII. 

Showing the Importance, on board Ship, of a Rope's End well 
applied - - - - - - -18-1 

CHAP. XXVIII. 

Some little Difference in the Proceeds of this Chapter, and my 
former " Copper for Poor Jack, your Honour" - - 193 

CHAP. XXIX. 

In which I learn the History of Old Nanny - 203 

CHAP. XXX. 

Strong Symptoms of Mutiny, which is fortunately quelled by 
granting a Supply - 209 

CHAP. XXXI. 

In which my Father proves he can give good Advice as well as 
Peter Anderson - - - - - -21-1 

CHAP. XXXII. 

In which there is a Hop, Skip, and a Jump - 225 



VI CONTEXT?. 

CHAP. XXXIII. 

In which the sine qua non of all Novels is, for the first Time, in- 
troduced - - - - - Page 233 

CHAP. XXXIV. 
More Cry than Wool. — Bramble would dig a Pit for another, and 
tumbles in along with him - - - - 239 

CHAP. XXXV. 

We have great Hopes of not seeing the Inside of a French Prison, 
but we are disappointed - - - - -247 

CHAP. XXXVI. 

With those powerful Agents, Fire and Water, we contrive to es- 
cape from a French Prison - 257 

CHAP. XXXVII. 
Another Escape, more fortunate than the one recorded in the pre- 
ceding Chapter _..--- 264 

CHAP. XXXVIII. 

Which is all about Love. Bramble confides to me all his ac- 
quaintance with the tender Passion - - - - 273 

CHAP. XXXIX. 

In which I receive a very severe Blow from a Party or Parties 
unknown ------ 283 

CHAP. XL. 

Showing the great Advantages to be derived from Patronage - 289 

CHAP. XLI. 

In which it is proved that Sailors have very correct Ideas as to 
Metempsychosis ------ 294 

CHAP. XLII. 

A heavy Gale, a Wreck and a Rescue - 301 

CHAP. XLIII. 

A Scene in the Hospital, and a strange Discovery - - 308 

CHAP. XLIV. 

Spicer discloses strange Matters - - - - 317 

CHAP. XLV. 
Spicer's Death - - - - - - 321 



CONTENTS. Vil 

CHAP. XLVI. 
In which Mrs. St. Felix refuses a splendid Offer, which I am duly 
empowered to make to her - Page 326 

CHAP. XLVII. 

In which a new Character appears upon the Stage, and I play the 
Part of a Pilot on Shore - - - - - 338 

CHAP. XLVIII. 

My Sister Virginia is at last placed in a Situation which is satis- 
factory to my Mother as well as to herself - - - 347 

CHAP. XLIX. 

My Father, much to his Surprise, has a Bit of Land to put his 
Foot upon, and say, (t This is my own " - - 35?> 

CHAP. L. 

An Adventure which at first promised to be the most unfortunate, 
and eventually proved the most fortunate in my Life - -358 

CHAP. LI. 

Being the last Chapter, the Reader may pretty well guess the Con- 
tents of it - - - - - - 372 

Finale __.---- 377 



LIST OF ENGRAVINGS. 



Engraved by 
Poor Jack Branston.. 

Greenwich Hospital s Do. 

Fisher's AUey Do. " 

The Yarn Do - " 

Whale Fishing Do. " 

Tailpiece — Table, &c Do. •• 

Jack in the Ice Vizetelly.. 

Anderson reading the Bible to Jack Do. 

Doctor Tadpole's House Do. 

Jack helping Freeman the Fisherman Do. 

Anderson reading the News of the Battle of the Nile.. Do. .. 

Loss of the Royal George at Spithead Do. .. 

Jack's Father landing after the Battle of the Nile ... Do. .. 

Jack in Nanny's Room Do. 

Dick Harness and Opposition Bill Do. 

Jack in Old Grumble's Boat Do. .. 

Jack and his Father meeting Sir Hercules Do. 

Tailpiece — Compass, &c Do. 

Jack and Bramble aboard the Indiaman Do. 

The Fore-peak Yarn Do. 

'< How's her Head, Jack ? " Do. 

Bramble saving Bessy Do. 

Jack heaving the Lead Do. 

Tailpiece — Jack and Bessy in Cottage Do. 

Nanny relating her Story Do. 

Jack and his Father under the C olonnade Do. 

A Surprise Do. 

Tailpiece — Apothecary's Boy Do. 

Bramble and Jack carried into a French Port Do. 



Page 
1 
3 
. 16 
. 24 
. 30 
. 36 
. 52 

56 
. 65 
. 74 

84 
. 89 

97 
. 110 
. 116 
. 122 
. 140 
. 152 
. 153 
. 156 
. 171 
. 177 
. 180 
. 192 
. 204 
. 214 
. 222 
. 224 
,. 248 



LIST OF ENGRAVINGS. 



Engraved by 

The French Privateer engaging the Cutter Vizetelly 

The Arrival of the Privateer at Lanion Do. 

Tailpiece — French Soldier, &c Do. 

The Prison Br anston 

Jack a Prisoner L andells 

The Escape Br anston 

Wreck of the Galley L andells 

The Rescue Br anston 

Bessy in Bed Do. 

Tailpiece — Vessel in Gale Do. 

The Euphrosyne in the Downs Landells 

Sir J. O'Connor and Tom Branston 

Sir J. O'Connor and Mrs. St. Felix Do. 

Tailpiece — Boat on Beach Do. 

Tom beating down the Frenchmen Do. 

The Prize at Sheerness Landells 

Deal Beach Branston 



P.ige 
252 
253 
256 
257 
260 
262 
304 
305 
306 
307 
338 
34-0 
347 
351 

36g 

370 

374- 



POOR JACK. 



You hav 'n 't got never a copper for Poor Jack your honour ? " 




HIS FA IER TOJDE] " HE t INNADE 



--— 




GREENWICH HOSPITAL. 



CHAPTER I. 



BEGIN 



IN WHICH, LIKE MOST PEOPLE WHO TELL THEIR OWN STORIES, 
WITH THE HISTORIES OF OTHER PEOPLE. 

I have every reason to believe that I was born in the year of our 
Lord 1786, for more than once I put the question to my father, 
and he invariably made the same reply: "Why, Jack, you were 
launched a few months before the Druids were turned over to the 
Melpomene." I have since ascertained that this remarkable event 
occurred in January 1787. But my father always reckoned in this 
way : if you asked him when such an event took place, he would 
reply, so many years or months after such a naval engagement or 
remarkable occurrence ; as, for instance, when I one day inquired 
hew many years he had served the king, be responded, « I came 
into the Barvice a little afore the battle of Bunker's Hill, in which 

b 2 



4 POOR JACK. 

we licked the Americans clean out of Boston."* As for Anno 
Domini, he had no notion of it whatever 

Who my grandfather was. I cannot inform the reader, nor is it, 
perhaps, of much consequence. My father was a man who in- 
variably looked forwards and hated anything like retrospection : 
he never mentioned either his father or his mother; perhaps he 
was not personally acquainted with them. All I could collect 
from him at intervals was, that he served in a collier from South 
Shields,, and that a few months after his apprenticeship was out, 
he found himself one fine morning on board of a man-of-war, 
having been picked up in a state of unconsciousness, and hoisted 
up the side without his knowledge or consent. Some people may 
infer from this,, that he was at the time tipsy ; he never told me so ; 
all he said was, " Why, Jack, the fact is when they picked me up, 
I was quite altogether non pompus." I also collected at various 
times the following facts, — that he was put into the mizen-top, and 
served three years in the West Indies ; that he was transferred to 
the main-top, and served five years in the Mediterranean ; that 
he was made captain of the foretop, and sailed six years in the 
East Indies ; and, at last, was rated captain's coxswain in the 
Druid frigate, attached to the Channel fleet cruising during the 
peace. Having thus condensed the genealogical and chrono- 
logical part of this history, I now come to a portion of it in 
which it will be necessary that I should enter more into detail. 

The frigate in which my father eventually served as captain's 
coxswain was commanded by a Sir Hercules Hawkingtrefylyan, 
Baronet. He was very poor and very proud, for baronets were not 
so common in those days. He was a very large man, standing 
six feet high, and with what is termed a considerable bow-window 
in front ; but at the same time portly in his carriage. He wore his 
hair well powdered, exacted the utmost degree of ceremony and 
respect, and considered that even speaking to one of his officers 
was paying them a very high compliment : as for being asked to 
his table, there were but few who could boast of having had that 

* I have since heard a different version of the result of this battle. 



POOR JACK. O 

honour, and even those few perhaps not more than once in the 
year. But he was, as I have said, very poor ; and moreover he 
was a married man, which reminds me that I must introduce his 
lady, who, as the ship was on Channel service, had lodgings at 
the port near to which the frigate was stationed, and occasionally 
came on board to take a passage when the frigate changed her 
station to the eastward or to the westward. Lady Hercules, as 
we were directed to call her by Sir Hercules, was as large in 
dimensions, and ten times more proud than her husband. She was 
an excessive fine lady in every respect ; and whenever she made 
her appearance on board, the ship's company looked upon her 
with the greatest awe. She had a great dislike to ships and 
sailors ; officers she seldom condescended to notice ; and pitch and 
tar were her abomination. Sir Hercules himself submitted to 
her dictation ; and, had she lived on board, she would have com- 
manded the ship : fortunately for the service, she was always very 
sea-sick when she was taking a passage, and therefore did no mis- 
chief. " I recollect," said my father to me, " once when we were 
running down to Portsmouth, where we had been ordered for pro- 
visions, that my Lady Hercules, who was no fool of a weight, being 
one night sea-sick in her cot, the laynyard of the cot gave way, 
and she came down with a run by the head. The steward was 
called by the sentry, and there was a terrible shindy. I, of course, 
Avas sent for, as I had the hanging up of the cot. There was Sir 
Hercules with his shirt flapping in the wind, and a blanket over 
his shoulders, strutting about in a towering passion ; there was the 
officer of the watch, who had been sent for by mistake, and who 
was ordered to (jUit the cabin immediately ; and there was I, ex- 
pecting to be put in irons, and have seven dozen for my breakfast. 
As for Sir Hercules, he didn't know what to do ; he did nothing 
but storm at even' body, for my lady, with her head under the 
clothes, was serving him out at no small rate. She wouldn't, she 
declared, allow any man to come into the cabin to hoist her up 
again. So indecent, so indelicate, so shocking, — she was 
ashamed of Sir Hercules, — to send for the men ; if they didn't 
leave the cabin immediately, she'd scream and she'd faint, — that 

b 3 



6 POOR JACK. 

she would — there was no saying what she wouldn't do ! Well, there 
we waited just outside until at last Sir Hercules and my lady 
came to a parley. She was too sick to get out of bed, and he 
was not able to hoist her up without assistance ; so being as I sup- 
pose, pretty well tired of lying with her head three feet lower 
than her heels ; she consented, provided that she was properly 
kivered up, to allow us to come in and put all to rights. Well, 
first she made Sir Hercules throw ovei her his two boat cloaks, 
but that would'nt do ; so he threw the green cloth from off the 
table, but that warn't enough for her delicate sensibility, and she 
hollowed from under the clothes for more kivering ; so Sir Her- 
cules sent for two of the ship's ensigns, and coiled away the bunt- 
ing on her till it was as high as a haycock, and then we were 
permitted to come in and hoist her ladyship up again to the 
battens. Fortunately it was not a slippery hitch that had let her 
down by the run, but the laynyard had given way from my lady's 
own weight, so my back was not scratched after all. Women 
ain't no good on board, Jack, that's sartain." 

But I must now introduce a more important personage than 
even Lady Hercules, which is my mother. They say " like 
master, like man," and I may add, " like lady, like maid." Lady 
Hercules was fine, but her maid was still finer. Most people when 
they write their biography, if their parents were poor, inform you 
that they left them a good name and nothing else. Some parents 
cannot even do that ; but all parents can at all events leave their 
children a pretty name, by taking a little trouble at their baptism. 
My mother's name was Araminta, which, as my father truly ob- 
served, was " a touch above the common." She had originally 
gone into service as a nursery maid, living in her first situation one 
year and nine months ; in her second, she remained two years and 
four months ; then she left to better herself, and obtained the 
situation of nurse in a family where she remained two years and 
one month ; after which Lady Hercules then having a child of a 
year old, she was received into her service. At three years old 
the child died, and my mother was promoted to the situation of 
ladies maid This advancement quite spoiled her; she was 



POOR JACK. 



prouder than her mistress, and gave herself ten times more airs, 
and when, at first, my father, (who a, coxswain was constantly up 
at the house,) offered to speak to her, she turned away from him 
in most ineffable disdain. Now my father was at that time about 
thirty years of age, and thought no small beer of himself, as the 
Having goes. He was a tall, handsome man, indeed so good look- 
in. that the, used to call him " handsome Jack" on board of the 
Druid, and he had, moreover, a pigtail of most extraordinary size 
and length, of which he was not a little proud, as it hung down 
far below the waistband of his trousers. His hair was black and 
glossv, and his lovelocks, as the sailors term the curls which they 
wear' on their temples, were of the most insinuating description. 
Now, as my father told me, when he first saw my mother with her 
sky scraping cap at the back of her head, so different from the 
craft in general, he was very much inclined to board her; but 
when she boomed him off in that style, my father, who was quite 
the rage and fancy man among the ladies of Sally Port ana 
Castle Rag, hauled his wind in no time, hitching up his white 
trousers, and turning short round on his heel, so as to present his 
back to her whenever they happened to meet. For a long time he 
gave her a wide berth. Now this fact of my father returning her 
disdain had the usual effect. At first she was very savage, and 
when she spoke of him to Lady Hercules, she designated him as 
« that proud coxswain, who seemed to think himself a greater man 
than Sir Hercules himself- with his filthy pig-tail indeed! 
My father also, when he spoke of her to the boat's crew, termed 

her « that proud of a lady's maid," the word not ment.onable, 

being both canine and feminine. Thus matters went on for some 
time, until my mother, by a constant survey of my father s hand- 
some proportions, every day thought him to be a more proper 
man, and a few advances on her part at last brought them to a 
mutual understanding. 



B 4 



POOR JACK. 



CHAP. II. 

MY FATHER DOES WHAT MOST SAILORS DO HE MAKES A FOOLISH 

MARRIAGE, ONE OF THE CONSEQUENCES OF WHICH IS BROUGHT TO 
LIGHT AT THE END OF THE CHAPTER. 

I have observed at the finale of my first chapter, that at last my 
mother and father came to a good understanding ; but, at the 
same time Madam Araminta (for so my mother insisted upon being 
called) took good care to let my father understand that she con- 
sidered that she was lowering herself by surrendering up her charms 
to a captain's coxswain. She informed him that her father might 
be said to have been royally connected, being a king's messenger 
(and so, indeed, he might be considered, having been a two-penny 
postman) ; and that her mother had long scores against the first 
nobles in the land (she was a milk-woman), and that she had dry- 
nursed a young baronet, and was now, not merely a ladies' maid, 
but a lady's ladies' maid. All this important and novel com- 
munication sunk deep in my father's mind, and when he heard it 
he could hardly believe his good fortune in having achieved such 
a conquest ; but, as the sequel will prove, his marriage did not turn 
out very happily. He used to say to me, " Jack, take my advice, 
and never marry above your condition, as I did ; nothing would 
please me, but a lady's ladies maid ; I had no right to look up to 
even a ladies maid, and had your mother only been a simple maid, 
all might have been right." But these were after-reflections when 
it was too late. I do not wonder at my poor father's senses being 
dazzled, for, as he said to me, " You see, Jack, after being used 
to see nothing but Point women, all so slack in stays and their 
rigging out of order, to fall aboard of a craft like your mother, so 
trim and neat, ropes all taut, stays well set up, white hammock- 
cloths spread every day in the week, and when under weigh, with 
a shawl streaming out like a silk ensign, and such a lakish gaff 
topsail bonnet, with pink pennants ; why, it was for all the world as 



POOR JACK. y 

if I was keeping company with a tight little frigate after rolling 
down channel with a fleet of colliers : but howsoniever, fine 
feathers don't make fine birds, and handsome is. as handsome 
does.' 

My father's marriage was, however, precipitated by circum- 
stances. One afternoon, after he had been accepted, he had taken 
his quid out of his cheek, wiped his mouth with the back of his 
hand, and was in the act of giving and receiving a chaste salute, 
when Lady Hercules happened to come down into the kitchen, — a 
most rare occurrence, and wholly unexpected from a lady of her 
refined and delicate ideas. She caught my father and mother in 
the very fact ; and, (as my father expressed it,) with an exclamation 
of horror, K She 'bout ship, and sculled up stairs like winkin." A 
loud peal of the bell summoned up my mother, leaving my father 
in a state of no pleasant suspense, for he was calculating how far 
Sir Hercules could bring in ' ; kissing a lady's ladies' maid" 
under the article of war as :i contempt of superiors," and, if so, 
how many dozen kisses his back might receive from the cat in 
return. While he was absorbed in this pleasing speculation, Lady 
Hercules was pouring out anathemas against my mother's want of 
delicacy and decency, informing her that it was impossible she 
could submit the decoration of her person to one who has so con- 
taminated herself with a tobacco-chewing seaman, — who was all 
pigtail within and without ; for, as the Scripture says, u Who can 
touch pitch without being defiled ? " 

Although my mother had made up her mind, that if it was to 
be a question between a place and a husband, she should decide 
upon retaining the latter, still she thought it advisable, if it were 
possible, to conciliate my lady. She therefore pulled out a 
cambric handkerchief, and while her ladyship scolded, she 
covered up her face and wept. Lady Hercules continued to scold 
until she was out of breath, and thereby compelled to stop. My 
mother then replied with deep humility and many tears, '•' that 
indeed she had been so persuaded (sob) that she at last promised 
to (sob) marry ; but only on one condition — yes, indeed — (sob) 
that her ladyship gave her consent — positively on no other (sob) 



10 POOR JACK. 

— no, indeed, upon her honour ! Mr. Saunders was — (sob) — 
excellent young man — (sob) —so attached to Sir Hercules (sob), 
and had such a great respect for her ladyship, that — (sob — sob 
— sob — ) he had won her heart." 

By this time her ladyship had regained her breath, and she 
interrupted my mother by pointing out to her, that allowing all 
she said to be correct, yet still that was no reason why she should 
allow such indecent liberties ; that Sir Hercules had never ob- 
tained such favours from her until after the ring had been put on 
her finger. Then, indeed, such things might be — that is, occa- 
sionally ; but the kitchen of all places! — And, besides, how did 
she know how many wives the coxswain had already ? She 
shouldn't be surprised, if, with that long pigtail of his, he had five 
at least — nay, perhaps, six or seven. Here my mother replied, 
that " it was out of gratitude to her (sob) for having consented 
to permit him to (sob) speak to Sir Hercules (sob), who would 
plead with her ladyship (sob), which had occasioned Mr. Saunders 
(sob) to take — such — a — liberty (sob — sob — sob) — which 
he had never — done before (sob) — No ! — never — upon her 

honour — never! " And here my mother's sobs choked her 

utterance. 

This explanation somewhat pacified, and a little subsequent 
humility and flattery gained the mistress, who consented to settle 
the matter with Sir Hercules, alleging, as one principal reason 
for so doing, that after the familiarity which had taken place 
between them, the sooner they were married the better. The 
wishes of her ladyship were tantamount to commands. Sir 
Hercules pronounced my father to be a fool, and they were 
married. 

My mother was a good-looking person, perhaps two or three 
years older than my father ; she was of a very bad temper, very 
vindictive and revengeful, and in every way she had a pleasure 
in annoying other people, and when she succeeded she invariably 
concluded her remarks with "There — now you're vexed!" 
Whenever out of humour herself from the observations of others, 
she attempted to conceal her vexation by singing ; and having been 



POOR JACK, 11 

so many years of her life in the nursery, her songs were usually 
those little ditties used to pacify or amuse children in arms. 
" Saunders, ' she would cry out, " if you arn't the biggest fool 
that ever walk'd on two legs — to look at that long tail of yours 
you're so proud of, one would think I'd married a monkey, a 
hourcmg-hoictang, instead of a man. There — now you're vexed ! 
One can't open one's mouth." My mother knew where to strike; 
and this attack upon his pig-tail was certain to provoke my father, 
who would retort in no measured language, till she, in her turn, 
lost her temper, and then out she would sing, in a sort of scream — 

" Hey diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, 
The cow jumped over the moon," &c. 

And thus she continued to sing (or squeel) until her wrath cooled 
down. 

The consequences of forming a matrimonial alliance with a 
captain's coxswain soon became visible. Six months after they 
had been married, Lady Hercules pronounced my mother's appear- 
ance to be quite indecent, and declared her no longer fit for the 
office of lady's maid to a lady of her exquisite delicacy ; and my 
mother, who became less active every day, received notice to quit, 
which she did, when her month was up, in great wrath, packing 
up her boxes, and slamming the door as she left the house, singing 
at the very highest pitch of her voiee, 

" Dickory, dickory, dock ; the mouse ran up the clock," &c. 

My father wished her to come and live with him on board the 
frigate ; but to that my mother would not consent, saying, that 
she had, it was true, degraded herself and her family by marrying 
a coxswain, but she was not going to further contaminate herself 
by mixing with the vulgar creatures on board. In this resolve 
I think my mother was right ; but her dismissal and disgrace was 
followed up by my father being disrated and turned into the 
main-top, for no other reason in the world than such being the 
will and pleasure of Lady Hercules. 

Her ladyship considered that she had lost a good servant 



12 POOR JACK. 

through my father's intervention; and having therefore taken a 
dislike to him, did not choose that he should, as coxswain, come 
up to the house as usual ; and, as he no longer did the duty of 
coxswain, she asserted that he was not entitled to the rating. 
Thus, seven months had hardly passed away before my father's 
marriage became a source of vexation and annoyance ; his pay 
was decreased, and he was no longer a petty officer. My mother's 
pride was hurt ; and if she was resolute in not going on board to 
remain with him when he was captain's coxswain, she was still 
more so, now that he was reduced to a common seaman. As for 
my father, he was the picture of misery, — he had no consolation 
except turning his quid and tying his pig-tail. 

But every thing changes in this world, and among other changes 
was that of the station of the frigate, which was ordered foreign. 
Sir Hercules took leave of his lady, who retired to Tonbridge Wells. 
My father took leave of my mother, who retired to Woolwich. She 
had saved some money in service, and my father handed over to 
her all the pay which he received, when the ship's company were 
paid previous to the sailing of the ship. It is but justice to observe, 
that the moment he was out of soundings and away from the in- 
fluence of her ladyship, Sir Hercules reinstated my father, and 
gave him back his rating as coxswain. My father was indeed the 
smartest and best seaman in the ship ; he could do his work from 
stem to stern, — mouse a stay, pudding an anchor, and pass a gam- 
moning, as well as he could work a Turk's head, cover a manrope, 
or point a lashing for the cabin table. Besides which, he had 
seen service, having fought under Rodney, and served at the siege 
of Gibraltar. 

But I must return to my mother, who, w r hen she first went to 
Woolwich, which she did in a transport that was ordered round, 
took lodgings in the outskirts of the town ; and not wishing to ac- 
knowledge that she had married a common sailor, as she supposed 
my father still to be, asserted that she was the wife of a captain of 
a merchant vessel, which had been taken up as a k-ansport to 
convey troops to the West Indies. On this supposition, being re- 
ceived into a society above her real station, she was compelled to 



POOR JACK. 13 

spend more money than she could afford, and her finances rapidly 
wasted away. In the meantime I was born — a fine baby; but 
with nothing to look up to but a pennyless mother, an absent (if 
existing) father, the workhouse, and the sky 



CHAP. III. 

IN WHICH MY MOTHER PROVES HERSELF A TENDER WIFE, AND AT THE 
SAME TIME SHOWS HER PATRIOTISM AND DEVOTION TO HER COUNTRY. 

I had almost unconsciously arrived at the age of two years before 
there were any tidings of my father. All the information that my 
mother could obtain was, that the ship's company of the Druid 
had been turned over to another frigate called the Melpomene, 
the former having been declared not seaworthy, and in con- 
sequence condemned and broken up at Port Royal. 

But no letter had been received from my father, who indeed 
was not much of a scholar ; he could read, but he could not write. 
By this time my mother's savings were expended, and she was in 
great tribulation lest the deceit she had practised should be ex- 
posed. Indeed, there were already many surmises as to the truth 
of her story, it being so long that her husband had been absent. 
At last, when she had changed her only remaining guinea, a letter 
arrived from my father, dated from Portsmouth, stating that the 
ship was to be paid off in a few days, and then " he would clap 
on all sail and be on board of his old woman in no time." 

My mother, although not a little disgusted at being called an 
old woman, — an affront which she determined to revenge upon a 
more fitting occasion, — was in raptures with the contents of the 
letter : she therefore returned a kind answer, informing my father 
what a promising child he was blessed with, and giving him a 
direction to meet her at Greenwich, as she had resolved upon not 
receiving him at Woolwich, where her false assertions would have 
been exposed. Going round to all her acquaintances, she bade 
them farewell, telling them that her husband had returned well. 



{4- POOR JACK. 

and ivett to do, and had ordered her to meet him at Greenwich. 
Having thus satisfactorily, as she imagined, got out of this little 
difficulty, she packed up and hastened to Greenwich, where she 
sunk her assumed rank and waited very impatiently for her 
husband. He came at last, seated with many others on the out- 
side of a stage coach,— his hat bedecked with ribands, a pipe in one 
hand and flourishing a pewter pot in the other. It hardly need be 
added that he was more than half tipsy. Nevertheless, even in this 
state, he was well received ; and after he had smothered her with 
kisses, dandled me on his knee, thrown into her lap all the pay he 
had left, and drank three more pots of porter, they went very 
peaceably and lovingly to repose. 

I regret to say that this amity did not last long. My father's 
manners, which perhaps had been softened down by the awe 
which he had of Lady Hercules when he first imide my mother's 
acquaintance, were now more coarse, and so was his language ; and 
the neatness and cleanliness of person which he was obliged to 
maintain while performing the duties of a coxswain to a married 
captain were not so observable. Besides which, being no longer 
under discipline, he was almost every night intoxicated ; and being 
so, was more self-willed and regardless of his wife's injunctions : 
the consequences were, that having received from my father fifty 
pounds, my mother first locked that up, and then " unlocked her 
iaw." Disputes were now hourly occurring ; and it was " now 
you 're vexed," and " hey diddle diddle," from morning till 
night. 

My father would repair to the grog-shops to have a dance and 
carouse with his messmates, and my mother would not accompany 
him to such a vulgar place : consequently he went alone, was out 
very late, coming home very drunk, if indeed he came home at 
all. Moreover, the wives and companions of the other seamen 
would insult her when she walked out, for pretending to be better 
than they were. 

One day when she was walking out arm in arm with my father, 
unluckily she was met by one of her Woolwich acquaintances. This 
was the severest stroke of all, as she had intended to return to 



POOR JACK. 15 

Woolwich ; but now she was discovered, and avoided by one party, 
as well as insulted by the other. I cannot defend my mother's 
conduct ; nor indeed was she deserving of pity, as her treatment 
had been brought about by her own folly and pride. The effect 
of all this was, however, that of souring her temper still more ; and 
the constant vituperation poured out upon my father so roused 
his indignation, that one evening, when more than usually in- 
toxicated, the " lady's ladies' maid " received such a severe box 
on the ear, that the one candle turned to a general illumination. 
This blow was never forgotten nor forgiven, although my father 
was very sorry for it, and begged her pardon the next day, with 
promises of amendment. 

Just at this time the French revolution commenced, and there 
was expectation of a war with France ; the press-gangs were 
ordered out, and the seamen, aware of it, remained concealed until 
they should leave the town. But my mother had made up her 
mind ; she found out an officer who commanded one of the press- 
gangs, gave her address, and having supplied my father with spirits 
until he was stupified, she let in the gang, and before morning my 
father was safe on board of the tender lying off the Tower. This 
treachery on her part my father did not discover until some time 
afterwards ; and it was the occasion of a scene between them, as I 
shall hereafter show. The next day my mother went on board of 
the tender to visit my father, put her cambric handkerchief to her 
eyes, pressed his hand between the iron bars, and lamented his 
hard fate, and her hard fate ; but when requested by him to 
smuggle a little liquor in a bladder to comfort him with, she 
tossed up her head and declared, that " nothing could induce her to 
do any thing so ungenteel." Whereupon my father turned away, 
lamenting the day that ever he had married a lady's ladies' maid. 

A day or two afterwards my mother brought my father his kit 
of clothes, and two pounds of his own money. As a war was ex- 
pected, my mother would nave persuaded my father to give her 
his " will and power " to receive his prize money ; but my father, 
grown comparatively wiser, positively refused. He turned away 
on his heel, and they parted. 



16 POOR JACK. 

I shall, for the present, leave my father to his fortunes, and 
follow those of my mother. Convinced by his refusal to sign the 
deed, which she had brought ready prepared with her, that she 
had little in future to expect from my father, and aware probably 
of the risk incurred by a seaman from " battle, fire, and wreck/' 
she determined this time to husband her resources, and try if she 
could not do something for herself. At first she thought of going 
again into service and putting me out to nurse ; but she discovered 
that my father's return was not without its consequences, and that 
she was again to be a mother. She therefore hired rooms in 
Fisher's Alley, a small street still existing in Greenwich, and 
indeed still a general thoroughfare. Here, in due time, she was 
brought to bed of a daughter, whom she christened by the name 
of Virginia ; not so much out of respect to her last mistress, who 
bore that name, as because she considered it peculiarly ladylike 
and genteel. 



CHAP. IV. 

IN WHICH I TELL THE READER ALL I CAN RECOLLECT ABOUT MYSELF, 
AND MOREOVER PROVE THE TRUTH OF THE OLD ADAGE " THAT IT IS A 
WISE CHILD WHO KNOWS ITS OWN FATHER." 

My readers must not expect me to tell them much of what 
passed during the first four years of my existence. I have a 
recollection of a deal board put at the door of our house, which 
opened into Fisher's Alley, to prevent me, and afterwards my 
sister, from crawling out. Fisher's Alley is a very narrow street, 
and what was said in a room on one side of it can be heard on 
the other, and I used to hang over the board and listen : there 
were drunken men and drunken women, and occasionally scolding 
and fighting. My mother, having made up her mind to be saving, 
had taken a lease of the house and furnished it ; and every day I 
heard her saying at the door, "Walk in, gentlemen; I've a nice 
clean room and boiling hot water — for the seamen used to come 




FISHER'S ALLEY. 



__ 



POOR JACK. 17 

in to take tea, drink, and smoke ; and so did the old pensioners 
occasionally, for my mother had made acquaintance with several 
of them. I was always very ragged and dirty, for my mother 
neglected and ill-treated me : as soon as my sister was born she 
turned all her affections over to Virginia, who was always very 
much petted, well dressed, and a very beautiful child. 

All this I recollect, but little more, except that my mother gave 
me several beatings for calling my sister " Jenny," which I had 
learnt to do from others who knew her ; but when my mother 
heard them, she was always very angry, and told them that her 
child had not such a vulgar name : at which many would laugh, 
and make a point of calling out "Jenny" to Virginia whenever 
they passed and saw her at the door. When I was a little more 
than four years old I would climb over the board, for I had no 
pleasure at home. As I grew older, I used to hasten down to 
the landing steps on the beach, where the new inn called the 
"Trafalgar" now stands, and watch the tide as it receded, and 
pick up anything I could find, such as bits of wood and oakum ; 
and I would wonder at the ships which lay in the stream, and the 
vessels sailing up and down. I would sometimes remain out late 
to look at the moon and the lights on board of the vessels passing ; 
and then I would turn my eyes to the stars, and repeat the lines 
which I had heard my mother teach little Virginia to lisp : 

" Pretty little twinkling star, 
How I wonder what you are ; 
All above the earth so high, 
Like a diamond in the sky : " 

and when I did stay out late I was sure of having no supper, and 
very often a good beating ; and then Virginia would wake and 
cry, because my mother beat me, for we were fond of each other. 
And my mother used to take Virginia on her knee, and make her 
say her prayers every night ; but she never did so to me : and I 
used to hear what Virginia said, and then go into a corner and 
repeat it to myself. I could not imagine why Virginia should be 
taught to pray, and that I should not. 

c 



18 POOR JACK. 

As I said before, my mother let lodgings, and kept the ground- 
floor front room for people to drink tea and smoke in ; and I used 
to take my little stool and sit at the knees of the pensioners who 
came in, and hear all their stories, and try to make out what they 
meant, for half was to me incomprehensible ; and I brought them 
fire for their pipes, and ran messages. Old Ben the Whaler, as 
they called him, was the one who took most notice of me, and said 
that I should be a man one of these days, which I was very glad 
to hear then. And I made a little boat for my sister, which cost 
me a great deal of trouble and labour ; and Ben helped me to 
paint it, and I gave it to Virginia, and she and I were both so 
pleased ; but when my mother saw it, she threw it into the fire, 
saying it was " so ungenteel," and we both cried ; and old Ben was 
very angry, and said something to my mother, which made her 
sing, " High diddle diddle," for the whole day afterwards. 

Such are the slight reminiscences, which must content the 
reader, of my early existence. 

When I was eight years old (about six years after his last visit), 
my father made his appearance ; and then, for the first time, I 
knew that my father was alive, for I was but two years old when 
he left, and I remembered nothing about him, and I had never 
heard my mother mention his name, as if he still existed. 

My father came in one clay very unexpectedly, for he had given 
no notice of his return ; and it so happened that as he came in, 
my mother was beating me with the frying-pan, for having dipped 
my finger in the grease, in which she had been frying some slices 
of bacon. She was very angry, and as she banged me with it, 
Virginia was pulling at her skirts, crying and begging her to 
desist. "You little wretch," cried my mother, '-'you'll be just 
such a sea-monster as your father was — little wulgar animal, you 
must put your finger into the frying-pan, must you ? There, 
now, you've got it."' So saying, she put down the frying-pan, and 
commenced singing as loud as she could, " Hush-a-by baby, 
Pussy's a lady" — "Ay — now you're vexed I dare say," continued 
she, as she walked into the back kitchen. 

All this time, my father had been at the door looking on, which 



POOR JACK. 



L9 



she had not perceived. My father then came in. " What 's your 
name, my lad ?" said he. 

"Tommy Saunders," replied I, rubbing myself; for the frying- 
pan was very hot, and my trowsers very much out of repair. 
" And who is that little girl ? " said he. 

" That's my sister Virginia ;— but," continued I, « who are you ? 
Do you want my mother ? " 

" Not very particularly just now." said my father, taking up 
my sister and kissing her, and then patting me on the head. 

" Do you want any beer or baccy ? " said I — "I 11 run and get 
you some, if you give me the money, and bring back your change 
all right." 

"Well, so you shall, Jack, my boy," replied he ; and he gave me 
a shilling. I soon returned with the pipes, tobacco, and beer, and 
offered him the change, which he told me to keep, to buy apples 
with it. Virginia was on the knee of my father, who was coaxing 
and caressing her, and my mother had not yet returned from the 
back-kitchen. I felt naturally quite friendly towards a man, who 
had given me more money than I ever possessed in my life ; and I 
took my stool and sat beside him ; while, with my sister on his 
knee, and his portei before him, my father smoked his pipe. 

" Does your mother often beat you, Jack ? " said my father, 
taking the pipe out of his mouth. 

" Yes, when I does wrong," replied I. 
" Oh ! only when you do wrong — eh ! " 
" Well, she says I do wrong; so I suppose I do." 
" You're a good boy," replied my father. Does she ever beat 
you, dear?" said he to Virginia. 

" Oh ! no," interrupted I ; " she never beats skter, she loves 
her too much ; but she don't love me." 
My father puffed away, and said no more. 

I must inform the reader, that my father's person was very 
much altered from what I have described it to have been at the 
commencement of this narrative. He was now a boatswain's 
mate, and wore a silver whistle hung round his neck by a lan- 
vard, and with which little Virginia was then playing. He had 

c 2 



20 



POOR JACK. 



grown more burly in appearance, spreading, as sailors usually do, 
when they arrive to about the age of forty; and moreover, he had 
a dreadful scar from a cutlass wound, received in boarding, which 
had divided the whole left side of his face, from the eyebrow to 
the chin. This gave him a very fierce expression ; still he was a 
fine-looking man, and his pig-tail had grown to a surprising length 
and size. His ship, as I afterwards found out, had not been paid 
off, but he had obtained a fortnight's leave of absence, while she 
was refitting. We were all very sociable together, without there 
being the least idea, on the part of my sister and myself, with 
whom we were in company, when in rolled old Ben the Whaler. 

" Sarvice to you," said Ben, nodding to my father. " Tommy, 
get me a pipe of 'baccy." 

" Here 's pipe and 'baccy too, messmate," replied my father. 
" Sit down, and make yourself comfortable, old chap." 

"Won't refuse a good offer," replied Ben, " been too long in the 
sarvice for that — and you've seen sarvice too, I think," con- 
tinued Ben, looking my father full in the face. 

" Chop from a French officer," replied my father ; after a 
pause, he added, " but he didn't live to tell of it." 

Ben took one of the offered pipes, filled, and was soon very busy 
puffing away, alongside of my father. 



CHAR V. 

MY FATHER AND MOTHER MEET AFTER AN ABSENCE OF SIX YEARS. 
SHE DISCOVERS THAT HE IS NO LONGER A COXSWAIN BUT A BOAT- 

swain's MATE. 

While my father and Ben are thus engaged, I will give the reader 
a description of the latter. 

Ben was a very tall, broad-shouldered old fellow, but stooping 
a little from age : I should think he must have been at least sixty, 
if not more ; still, he was a powerful, sinewy man. His nose, 
which was no small one, had been knocked on one side, as he told 
me by the flukes (i. e. tail) of a whale which cut in half a boat, 



POOR JACK. 21 

of which he was steersman. He had a very large mouth, with very 
few teeth in it, having lost them by the same accident ;• which, to 
use his own expression, had at the time " knocked his figure-head 
all to smash." He had sailed many years in the whale fisheries, 
had at last been pressed, and served as quarter-master on board 
of a frigate for eight or nine years, when his ankle was broken by 
the rolling of a spar in a gale of wind. He was in consequence 
invalided for Greenwich. He walked stiff on this leg, and usually 
supported himself with a thick stick. Ben had noticed me from 
the time that my mother first came to Fisher's Alley ; he was the 
friend of my early days, and I was very much attached to him. 

A minute or two afterwards my father pushed the pot of porter 
to him. Ben drank, and then said — 

"Those be nice children, both on 'em — I know them well." 
" And what kind of a craft is the mother ? " replied my father. 
" Oh ! why, she's a little queer at times — she's always so mighty 
particular about gentility." 

"Do you know why ?" replied my father. Ben shook his head. 
" Then I'll tell you — because she was once a lady's ladies' maid." 
" Well," replied Ben, " I don't understand much about titles 
and nobility, and those sort of things; but I'm sorry she's gone 
down in the world, for though a little particular about gentility, 
she's a good sort of woman in her way, and keeps up her 
character, and earns an honest livelihood." 

" So much the better for her," replied ray father, who refilled 
his pipe, and continued to smoke in silence. 

My mother had gone into the back kitchen to wash, which 
was the cause, (not having been summoned,) of her being so long 
absent. 

Virginia, who had become quite sociable, was passing her little 
fingers through my father's large whiskers, while he every now 
and then put his pipe out of his mouth to kiss her. I had the 
porter pot on my knees, my father having told me to take a swig, 
when my mother entered the room. 

"Well, Mr. Benjamin, I shouldn't wonder — but — Oh! mercy, 
it's he ! " cried my mother. " Oh ! be quick — Sal-wolatily !" 

c 3 



22 POOR JACK. 

" Sail who ? What the devil does she mean ? " said my father, 
rising up, and putting my sister off his knee. 

" I never heard of her," replied Ben, also getting up — " but 
Mistress Saunders seems taken all aback, anyhow. Jack! run and 
fetch a bucket of water " 

" Jack, stay where you are," cried my mother, springing from 
the chair on which she had thrown herself. " Oh, dear me ! — the 
shock was so sudden — I'm so flustered — who'd have thought to 
have seen you ?" 

" Are you her brother ? " inquired Ben. 
" No ; but I'm her husband," replied my father. 
" Well, it's the first time I've heard that she had one — but I'll 
be off, for Mistress Saunders is too genteel to kiss, I see, before 
company." Ben then took up his stick, and left the house. It 
may be as well here to remark, that during his absence, my father 
had fallen in with one of the men who had been employed in the 
pressgang, and from him he learnt that a woman had given the 
information by which he was taken. He made the man, who was 
present when my mother called upon the officer, describe her 
person ; and the description in every point was so accurate, that 
my father had no doubt in his mind, but that it was my mother 
who had betrayed him : this knowledge had for years rankled in 
his breast ; and he had come home, not only from a wish to see how 
things were going on, but to reproach my mother with her treachery. 

Whether my mother's conscience smote her, or that she per- 
ceived by my father's looks that a squall was brewing, I know 
not ; but as soon as Ben had left the house, she shut the street- 
door that the neighbours might not hear. Having so done, she 
turned to my father, who had resumed his seat and his pipe. 

"Well," said she, putting her apron to her eyes, "you have 
been away a good six years, and left me to get on how I could 
with these two poor orphanless children." 

" You know best why I went," replied my father, " and by 
whose means I was walked off in such a hurry." 

"Me?" replied my mother. 

" Yes, you," responded my father. 



: 



POOR JACK. 



"Well, what next?" cried she. 

« I'll tell you what next," said my lather rising, and taking about 
eighteen inches of inch-and-a-half rope, out of his pocket. " Look 
you, ma'am, when I first found out that it was by your peaching 
that I was sent on board of the Tender, I made up this colt ; and I 
vowed that I would keep it in my pocket till I served you out — 
now the time 's come." 

Here my father flourished his rope's end. My mother would 
have flown to the door, but my father was beforehand with her: 
he turned the key, and, to the astonishment of Virginia and me, 
he seized my mother, and, holding her at arm's length, gave her 
several blows — not severe ones, I must acknowledge, indeed they 
could not have hurt her. 

"There," said my father; "it's well for you, my Lady lady's 
maid, that I did not fall in with you, when I first made up this 
colt; and it's well for you that I've heard a good character of 
you 'from the old chap who has just now left the house, or 
you'd have smarted for the false trick you played upon me. How- 
some ver, I've kept my oath, and you may thank your stars that 

it 's not worse." 

My mother, who had not uttered a cry during the punishment, 
but only looked very indignant, now that my father had finished 
his speech and was rolling up his colt, to put it in his pocket, sud- 
denly threw herself down on the floor, screaming murder with all 
her might: the noise summoned the neighbours — all Fisher's 
Alley was in an uproar, and our house was besieged with people, 
who attempted to force their way in — for my mother continued 
her screams, and poor little Virginia became so frightened, that 
she also roared as loud as her mother. 

« I've more than two minds," said my father, taking the rope's 
end out of his pocket again -« but howsomever, since you wish 
it, all the world shall know it." 

My father put his colt into his pocket, and went to unlock the 
door: my mother, perceiving what he was about, immediately 
rose and hastened up stairs to her own room. My father then 
told the neighbours what had occurred, and why my mother had 

c 4 



24 



POOR JACK, 



been punished, and the verdict of Fisher's Alley was, « sarved her 
right." Ben the Whaler, who was outside with the others, es- 
poused my father's cause ; and as soon as the people dispersed, 
my father invited him to join him in his pipe and pot. 

Little Virginia, still terrified, had crept up to her mother. I, on 
the contrary, felt the highest respect for one who could dare to 
punish my mother, who had so often punished me ; and the know- 
ledge that be was my father inspired me with a feeling of tender- 
ness towards him, which I could not repress. I was old enough 
to understand why my mother had received such treatment, and I 
could not feel angry with my father ; 1 therefore stayed below, 
and went for the porter as was required. 

I believe that at first it had been my father's intentions to have 
administered a much severer castigation to my mother, and then 
to have left the house, taking me with him, for he had not been 
apprised of the birth of Virginia ; but whatever were his intentions 
before he came, or for the morrow, it is certain that he continued 
to smoke and talk with old Ben the Whaler till a very late hour, 
while I sat by and listened. 



CHAP. VI. 

A BRIGHT PLEASANT EVENING AFTER A SQUALL, IN WHICH THE ART OF 
ANGLING IS INTRODUCED IN A WAY WHICH WOULD HAVE ADDED TO 
THE KNOWLEDGE OF IZAAC WALTON HIMSELF. 

" I beg pardon, messmate," said Ben, as he and my father became 
more sociable ; " but may I make so bold as to ask you how you 
contrived to get that seam across your figure-head ? You did say 
something about a Frenchman, if I heard right ; and as the war is 
now of two years' standing, I suppose you've had a rap or two at 
Mounseer." 

" 'Xpect I have," replied my father. " Well, old chap, I'll just 
wet my whistle, and then I'll tell you all about it, — and it won't 
take long neither. The boats were ordered away " 




THE Y.VRN. 



POOR JACK. 25 

" Of what ship, messmate?" 

iC Very true, I began in the middle. Well, it was in the ship I 
now belongs to, the ' Oudacious ' — we were with the squadron 
off Ferrol ; — signal made to chase south-east — clapt every stitch 
on her after two gun-boats, who were running down in-shore. 
Light winds — got well in for the land, and then it fell calm. 
Gun-boats four miles off, using their sweeps — out boats in chase, 
— I was coxswain of the first pinnace, — a devilish fast boat, 
messmate, I can tell you, with a smart brass gun, — pulled two 
feet to their one, and came up with them hand-over-hand — both 
cutters and the other pinnace well up with us — the old launch, 
half a mile astern. Now you see, sir, I Ve got the picture for 
you, havn't I?" 

" Just exactly," replied old Ben. 

" Well, then, it was a long pull ; and that reminds me that I '11 
have a long pull now, so hand me the porter, messmate." My 
father took a tremendous long pull at the pewter, and then handing 
it to Ben, he recommenced. 

" We were soon within gun-shot; and they turned their heads 
towards us, and blazed away : very pretty shot they fired, for 
they cut away three of our starboard oars, before we were near 
enough to return the fire with our small gun. However, the second 
pinnace and cutters came up, and shared the shot with us ; and at 
last the old fat launch came grunting along, for all the world like 
an old boar, pitching into them round and grape. Now the first 
lieutenant was in the launch, and, of course, commanded, and he 
ordered the boats to separate more, which was very right, as it 
divided the shot ; and then he passed the word that when he 
sounded the bugle, we were all to pull to the headmost gun-boat 
and board her. D'ye understand, messmate ?" 

" Perfectly," replied Ben, taking his pipe out to reply. 

" Well, then, just hand me the pot." My father drained it this 
time, and told me to go for another. 

" Then I shall lose the story," replied I. 

" No, boy, you won't," replied Ben ; "I '11 answer for it your 
father will heave-to till von come back." 



26 



POOK JACK. 



" So I. will, Jack," replied my father ; and having with every 
expedition executed my task, my father then continued — 

" Well, there we all were, waiting for the bugle, each boat 
creeping on a little every moment, so as to have a fair start, 
as they do in a race ; when at last the signal was given, 
and away we all went like smoke, with our oars bending double. 
The first pinnace reached the gun-boat first ; then the cutters 
banged alongside of her, — all three of us to windward, — while 
the second pinnace and launch took her to leeward. There 's not 
much climbing in getting on board of a gun-boat ; indeed, we 
were at it before we were out of the boat, for the Frenchmen had 
pikes as long as the spanker boom ; but we soon got inside of their 
points, and came to close work. They stood a good tustle, I will 
say that, and so they always do ; we may laugh at 'em, and call 
'em Johnny Crapows, but they are a right brave nation, if they 
ar'n't good seamen; but that I reckon 's the fault of their lingo, 
for it 's too noisy to carry on duty well with, and so they never 
will be sailors till they Lara English." 

" I never heard them carry on duty in French," said Ben ; " it 
quite beats my comprehension how they can do it at all." 

" Well, I have," replied my father; "" and every word they use 
is as long as the main-top bowling ; and the mast is over the side 
before they can get them out. Why, would you believe it ? I 
once asked one of those fellows what he called the fore-mast in his 
language ; and what d'ye think he said ? Why, I'm blowed if he 
didn't call it a s Mar-darty-marng* (and that's the only bit of 
French I know) ; but how is it possible to work a ship in such 
gibberish ? " 

" Quite unpossible," replied Ben. 

" Well, as I've yawed a little out of my course, suppose we have 
another swig before I takes a fresh departure?" 

Afttr they had both drank, my father proceeded — 

" Well, messmate, I was on the gunnel as soon as the others ; 
and a sword came down upon me like a flash of lightning. I had 
just time to lift my cutlass, and save my head ; and then I found 
that it was the sword of the French lieutenant, who commanded 



POOR JACK. 27 

the gun-boat. He was a tall, clean-built chap, with curls hanging 
down like a poodle dog's — every curl not thicker than a rope 
yarn, and mayhap a thousand of them, — and he quite foamed at 
the mouth : (that's another fault in these Frenchmen, — they don't 
take things coolly, but puts themselves in a passion about nothing:) 
so thinks I to myself, it won't do for you to go on chopping at that 
rate ; for when I fended off, he made my whole hand tingle with 
the force of his blow ; so I darts at him, and drives the hilt of my 
cutlass right into his mouth ; and he fell, and his own men trod 
him under foot ; and on we went, hammer and tongs. By this 
time the boarding of the launch and pinnace to leeward, for they 
could not get up as soon as we did, created a divarsion, and 
bothered the Frenchman, who hardly knew which way to turn : 
however, as there were more of our men on the other side, they 
most on 'em faced about ; and the French officer was then able to 
get on his knees again ; and while I was busy, and did not see 
him, he just give me this cut across the figure-head, which don't 
add to my beauty any how. Well, it was cut for cut, messmate ; 
I just took one look at the beggar, and I drove my cutlass into his 
skull, just as he was rising up; and he never rose again. — That 's 
my story." 

" I suppose you took the craft?" 

" Yes ; and her consort too. But many lost the number of 
their mess; and I lost all my beauty. — Just hand me the 'baccy, 
messmate ; and, Jack, go for the next pot of beer." 

I found them both smoking in silence when I returned ; but, 
after a few minutes, my father said, " Messmate, as I have told 
you how I got this chalk, suppose you tell me in return how you 
got that nose of yours fixed so hard a starboard ? That J s fair 
play." 

" Exactly so," replied Ben. " Why, d'ye see? I sarved most 
of my early life in the whaling line. I was three voyages to the 
north ; but taking the black whale counts for nothing ; you must 
go south arter the spermacitty, if you wish to see sport." 

" I never was in that line," replied my father ; " but I've heard 
fellows spin the devil's own yarns about it." 



28 POOR JACK. 

" And so they may, and tell the truth, that 's sartain, shipmate. 
You see, the sparmacitty don't take the harpoon quite so quietly as 
the black whale does ; he fights hard to the last, and sometimes 
is very free with his jaws. The very large ones are the most easy 
to kill ; so we always look out for them, when we can, as they give 
less trouble, and more oil : the most dangerous are the half- 
grown, which we call " forty-barrel bulls," as that 's about what 
oil we get out of them." 

" Well," said my father, " I'm blessed if ever I knew whales 
were called bulls, before this night." 

" Yes, that 's our term," replied Ben, " and now to ray story. 
We were down off the coast of Japan ; when, about one hour after 
daybreak, the man looking out at the mast-head gave the usual 
word when he sees a whale blowing, — ' There she spouts.' And 
this he repeats every time the fish rises. We had a clean hold at 
the time, for we had but just come to our fishing-ground, and 
we were mighty eager. The boats were down in a jiffy, and away 
we pulled. We were within a quarter of a mile of the whale, 
when, to our disappointment, he peaked his flukes " 

" What's that, messmate?" inquired my father. 

" Why, you see, it 's the right term after all, for the tail of 
soarmacitty is like the flukes of an anchor ; and, of course, now 
you understand me." 

" Yes, you mean to say he went down, I suppose." 

" Of course ; for how could he go down head-foremost, with 
peaking his tail in the air?" 

" One lives and larns as long as one lives/' observed my father. 
" Heave ahead again, old boy." 

" Well, as you can't know what you hav'n't heard any thing 
about, I must now tell you that these animals be as regular as the 
bells in a man of war ; and whenever they goes down to feed, they 
always stays exactly about the time allowed for dinner in a comfort- 
able ship ; that is, seventy minutes exactly. An hour, you see, is 
the regular time allowed ; and the other ten minutes are by favour 
of the officer of the watch, or first lieutenant. We knew that we 
must wait that time for him, so we tossed up our oars, and laid by." 



POOR JACK. 29 

" I suppose them sparmacitty chaps have a watch in theii 
pockets," said my father, smiling. 

" It 's a true bill, nevertheless, messmate, and they never alter : 
how and why they keep to their time, the Lord who gave them the 
sense to do so only knows. It is one of the wonders of the deep, 
which they only who go on the great waters can bear witness to." 

" It beats my comprehension quite entirely," replied my father; 
" and yet I have seen animals with a great deal of sense. In one 
ship, we had a sheep who would chew tobacco and drink grog ; — 
now, go ahead again." 

** Well, we had waited about half an hour, when we saw a whiff 
at the mast-head of the ship ; we knew that it was to direct our 
attention to some other point, so we looked round the horizon, 
and perceived that there was a 'school' of young bulls, about 
three miles from us. We were four boats in all ; and the first 
mate desired my boat and another to go in chase of them, while 
he remained with the other two, for this old whale to come up 
again. Well, off we went, and soon came up with the school : 
they are the most awkward part of whale fishing ; for they are 
savage, and, moreover, easily 'gallied,' that is, frightened. I 
picked out one, and tried to come up with him; but he was very 
shy, and at last he raised his head clean out of the water, and set 
off at the rate of ten miles an hour ; this showed that he was aware 
of danger. I had just thought of giving him up, and trying for 
another, when he suddenly turned round, and came right towards 
the boats. That we knew meant mischief; but, in coming towards 
us, he passed close to the other boat, and the steersman gave him 
the harpoon right well into him. This made him more savage, and 
he stood right for my boat, ploughing up the sea as he rushed on. 
I was all ready in the bow with the harpoon, and the men were 
all ready with their oars to pull back, so as to keep clear of him. 
On he came, and when his snout was within six feet of us, 
we pulled sharp across him ; and as we went from him, I gave him 
the harpoon deep into the fin. ' Starn all !' was the cry as usual, 
that we might be clear of him. He « sounded' immediately, that 
is, down he went, head foremost, which was what we were afraid 



30 



POOR JACK. 



of, for you see we had only two hund ed fathoms of line in each 
boat ; and having both harpoons in him, we cmld not bend one 
to the other, in case he 'sounded' deep, for sometimes they will 
go down right perpendicular, and take four lines, or eight hun- 
dred fathoms with them ; so we expected that -we should this time 
lose the whale as well as our lines, for when they were run out, 
we must either cut, or go down with him. Well, the lines ran 
out so swift, that we poured water on them that they might not 
fire — and we thought that it was all over, for the lines were two- 
thirds out, and he was going down as fast as ever, when all of 
a sudden he stopped. We were hauling in the slack lines, when 
we saw him rise again, about a quarter of a mile off. It was a 
hurrah, for we now thought that we had him. Off he set with his 
nose up, right in the wind's eye, towing the two boats at the rate of 
twelve miles an hour ; our steins cleaving through the sea, and 
throwing off the water like a plume of feathers on each side of the 
bows, while the sun's rays pierced through the spray and formed 
bright rainbows. We hoped soon to tire him, and to be able to 
haul in upon our lines, so as to get near enough to give him our 
lances; but that was only hope, as you'll hear. Of a sudden, he 
stopped, turned round, and made right for us, with his jaws open ; 
then, all we had to do was to baulk him, and give him the lance. 
He did not seem to have made up his mind which boat he would 
attack — we were pretty near together, and he yawed at one, and 
then at the other. At last he made right for the other boat, and 
the boatsetter dodged him very cleverly, while we pulled up 
to him, and I put the lance up to the stock into his. side. He 
made a plunge as if he were going to 'sound' again ; and as he 
did so, -with his flukes he threw our boat into the air, a matter of 
twenty feet, cutting it clean in half, and one of the boat's thwarts 
came right athwart of my nose, and it never has been straight 
since. So now you have it, messmate ; and I shouldn't mind if 
you passed the beer this way, for this long yarn has made my 
throat somewhat dry." 

" When you've had your swig, old chap, you may as well tell 
us how the matter ended," observed my father. 



POOR JACK. 31 

<; Why, it just ended in our losing the whale in the first place, 
and the boat with her gear in the second. We were picked up by 
the other boat, and there was no time to be lost, for the sharks 
were brought together by the scent of the whale's blood ; the 
whale sounded again, and we were obliged to cut the line, and 
return on board. But God bless you, messmate, T could tell you 
many a longer yarn than that, and mayhap I shall some day or 
another." 

" Well, I hope you will," replied my father ; " but your fishing 
story has put me in mind of rather a curious fish, caught by a lad 
on board of a man of war: and suppose I finish what's at the 
bottom of this here pot ; send Jack for another, and when he 
comes back, I'll tell you all about it." 

" There 's nothing gives me more satisfaction,'' replied Ben, 
u than to pass away the evening in a sober, quiet way, as we are 
doing now, telling and listening to long yarns. — A'n't you sleepy, 
Jack ? " 

"Oh! no," replied I, "not a bit. I'll run for the porter; 
and don't let father begin till I come back, Ben. The hou^e will 
be shut up soon : shall I get more than a pot ? " 

" Yes, Jack ; but not more beer," replied my father, putting 
some silver into my hand ; " get one pot of beer, and a bottle of 
rum ? We '11 have that by way of a nightcap, old boy."' 

I ran for the beer and liquor, and was soon back. My father and 
Ben refilled their pipes, and the former commenced as follows : — 

" When J. was quarter-master on board of the ' Melpoinene,' we 
had an an old chap for first lieutenant whose name was Fletcher. 
He was a kind-hearted man enough, as he never worried the ship's 
company when there was no occasion ; but, at the same time, he was 
what vou call a great stickler for duty — made no allowances for 
neglect or disobedience of orders, although he would wink at any 
little sky-larking, walking aft, shutting his eyes, and pretending 
not to see or hear it. His usual phrase was, < My man, you've 
got your duty to do, and I've got mine.' And this he repeated 
fifty times a day ; so at last he went by the name of " Old Duty." 
I think I see him now, walking up and down with his spy-glass 



32 POOR JACK. 

under his left arm, and the hand of the other pushed into his 
breast, as if he were fumbling for a flea. His hat was always split 
and worn in the front, from constantly taking it off, instead of 
touching it, when he came on the quarter-deck ; and, as soon as it 
was too far gone in front to raise the purchase off his head, he 
used to shift it end for end, bringing the back part in front, and 
then he would wear it, until, as the Yankees say, it was in ' tater- 
ations altogether ; ' and he was forced to bend a new one. 

" Now, we had a boy on board, who entered one day when the 
captain landed at Torquay to dine with a friend. His name was 
Jack Jervis : his father and his whole tribe had been fishermen for 
as long as could be remembered; and Jack himself had been 
drafted out of his cradle into a coble : and there he had continued 
day and night, from one year's end to another, helping his father 
to fish, — so, you see, it had become second nature to him ; and, 
after he came on board, his liking for his former calling still re- 
mained with him, and he never was so happy as when his line was 
overboard, or when he was snoocling a hook in some corner or 
another. He went by the name of Jack the Fisherman ; and a 
smart, active, willing lad he was, sure enough. 

" Now. there was a little difficulty between Old Duty and Jack 
the Fisherman. Old Duty would not allow the lines to be over- 
board when the ship was in harbour ; as he said it was untidy in 
appearance, and that there was always plenty of work, and no 
time for fishing. So Jack hadn't pulled up his line ten or a dozen 
times, before he was pulled up himself. < Whose line's that ? ' says 
Old Duty. ' Mine, sir,' says Jack, touching his hat. * I don't al- 
low fishing, young man,' said the first lieutenant. ' You under- 
stand me ? — I don't allow fishing. You've your duty to do, sir, 
and I 've got mine.' 

" Jack, who had only been two or three days on board, and 
who, I believe, would never have entered, had he known that there 
would have been such a ' weto,' as the boatswain used to call it, 
looked quite astonished, and said — 

" < What, mayn't I fish, sir ! 

" < No, my man, you must not fish without permission ; and 



POOR JACK. 33 

that I never give in harbour. If I catch you fishing again, you get 
two dozen at the gun; recollect that. You've got your duty to 
do, and I've got mine.' 

(i Well, Jack could not give up his habit, so he used to fish at 
night, and all night long, out of the fore-chains; but it so hap- 
pened that the ship's corporal caught Jack in the middle watch, 
and reports him to the first lieutenant. 

" ' So, you've been fishing again, sir,' says Old Duty. ; No, 
sir,' replied Jack, ( not fishing, — only laying night lines.' 

" •' Oh ! that's it,' replied the first lieutenant ; ' only laying night 
lines ! Pray, what's the difference ? ' ' Please, sir,' said Jack, touch- 
ing his hat, ' the difference is that it's not the same thing.' 

" ; Well, sir, I see but one difference, and I'll meet it accord- 
ingly. You've your duty to do, and I've got mine.' 

" The boys' heads and ears having been jDulled about and exa- 
mined by the master-at-arms, they were dismissed ; and Jack 
thought that he had got off, — but he was mistaken. 

" After the hammocks had been piped down, and it was dark, 
the boys were ordered up by the master-at-arms ; Jack was seized 
to the gun, and had his two dozen. ' There, sir,' said Old Duty, 
as they cast the seizings off, ' if fishing at night is not fishing, 
punishment at night is not punishment. Xow we're quits. 
You've your duty to do, and I've got mine.' 

'•' I don't think that Jack perceived any more difference in the 
two dozen at night-time than the first lieutenant did between day 
and night fishing ; however, Jack did not fish for some time after- 
wards. But it so happened, that the first lieutenant was asked 
on shore to dine with the port-admiral ; and, although he seldom 
left the ship, he could not refuse such a compliment, and so he 
went. As soon as it was dark, Jack thought his absence too good 
an opportunity not to have a fish ; so he goes into the mizen- 
chains, and drops his line. Well, he fished (but I don't know 
whether he caught any) till the boat was hailed in which the 
first lieutenant was coming on board, and then Jack thought it 
time to haul in his line ; but, just at that moment, there was a 
jerk ; and Jack, who knew that a fish was at the bait, could not 

D 



34 POOR JACK. 

for the life of him pull up his line — for, you see, he was a fisher- 
man heart and soul; so Jack trusted to Providence and the first 
lieutenant's going down below as soon as he came on deck. 

" Now, you see, the ship was lying at the time 'cross the tide, 
the wind blowing against the current : the starboard side (being 
to leeward, as to the wind, but to windward, as to the tide) had 
been cleared away, and manned for the boat, and Jack made sure 
that the first lieutenant would pull to that side ; but he was mis- 
taken. Whether it was that the first lieutenant wished to have a 
look round the ship or not, I do not know, but he pulled across the 
bows, and went round the stern, passing the larboard side : as he 
passed, Jack shrunk under the lee of the dead eyes and laynyards, 
hoping he might not be seen ; but the' first lieutenant, having the 
clear horizon on the other side, perceived the line which Jack had 
half-hauled up, and, having an eye like a cat, makes out Jack 

also. 

" < I see you, sir — I see you, Mr. Jervis, fishing again, sir. 
Very well,' cried the first lieutenant, from the stern sheets of the 
boat, as he passed by. ' You 've your duty to do, and I 've got 
mine.' ' That's as good as two dozen to-morrow morning at 
muster,' thought Jack, who cursed his luck, and, in a very melan- 
choly mood, began to haul up his line, which, as soon as he had 
been discovered, he had let go down to the bottom again. Now, 
it so happened, that, as Old Duty went up the other side, his 
foot slipped ; and, how it was, I can't tell, for they say he wasn't 
the least groggy, but down he fell, between the boat's gunnel and 
the ship's side, just like a deep sea lead, and disappeared. There 
being so few men on deck, there was not much of a bustle — 
there was a dive or two for him with the boat-hook, but all in 
vain — Old Duty was gone. 

" In the mean time, Jack on the other side was slowly hauling 
up his line ; but he had not got it half way up when he felt a heavy 
strain, and he thought that a large conger eel had followed the 
bait up, as they do sometimes, and he hauled and hauled with all 
his might. At last, who should he bring to the surface of the 
water but Old Duty, who had been sucked under the ship's bot- 



roon jack. 35 

torn by the tide, and had been hooked by Jack, as he was pulling 
up. When Jack saw it was the first lieutenant, as he told me, 
his first idea was to let him down again ; but that was only for a 
moment. The words of the first lieutenant still rang in his ears, 
1 You've your duty to do, and I've got mine' — so Jack did his duty. 
He hollows out that he had caught Old Duty ; and the boat shifted 
round and took him on board. The old fellow was quite senseless ; 
but, as he had been but a short time in the water, he was put to 
bed, and resuscitated by the surgeon. The next morning he was 
all just as if nothing had happened, walking the deck with his right 
hand in his breast, and his spy-glass under his left arm, as usual. 

u Well, we all told Jack that he was safe this time, but Jack 
seemed to think otherwise. He shook his head — and now you and so did I. At last I exclaimed, " Well ! 
father thought he'd killed her." 

"Yes," cried my mother, and he's gone away with it on his 
conscience, that's some comfort; — he won't come back in a 
hurry — he thinks he has committed murder, the unfeeling brute ! 
— Well, I *ve had my revenge." 

And as she twisted up her hair, my mother burst out screaming — 

11 Little Bopeep, she lost her sheep, 
And couldn't tell where to find him — 
She found him, indeed, but it made her heart bleed, 
For he left his tail behind him." 

" Why then, doctor, it was all sham," exclaimed I. 
" Yes — and the doctor's come on a fool's errand : — 

" Goosey, Goosey Gander, 
"Whither dost thou wander ? 
Up stairs and down stairs, 
And in a lady's chamber." 

The doctor shrugged up his shoulders so that his head dis- 
appeared between them; at last he said, "Your mother don't 
-vant me, Jack — that's very clear. Good morning, Mrs. Saunders." 

"Avery good morning to you, Doctor Tadpole," replied my 
mother with a profound courtesy — "You'll oblige me by quitting 
this room, and shutting the door after you, if you please." 

As the doctor and I went down, my mother continued the song : 

" And then I met a little man, 
Couldn't say his prayers, 
I took him by the left leg 
And sent him down stairs." 

As soon as we were in the parlour, I acquainted the doctor with 
what had happened — "I'm sure I thought she was dead," said 
I, when I had finished the story. 

" Jack, when I asked you where your mother was bad, external 
or internal, you replied both, and a great deal more besides. So 
she is — internally, externally, and infernally bad," said the doctor 
laughing. " And so she amputated your father's pigtail, did she — 
the Dalilah ! Pity one could not amputate her head, it would make 



44 POOR JACK. 

a good woman of her. — Good bye, Jack, I must go and look after 
Tom— he's swallowed a whole yard of stick liquorice by this time." 

Soon afterwards, Ben the Whaler came in to inquire after my 
father, and I told him what had occurred ; he was very indignant 
at my mother's conduct, and, as soon as the affair was known, so 
were all the tenants of Fisher's Alley. When my mother went out, 
or had words with any of her neighbours, the retort was invariably, 
"Who sent the press-gang after her own husband?" or, "Who 
cut off the tail from her husband's back? — wasn't that a genteel 
trick ? " All this worried my mother, and she became very morose 
and ill-tempered; I believe she would have left the alley, if she 
had not taken a long lease of the house. She had now imbibed a 
decided hatred for me, which she never failed to show upon every 
occasion ; for she knew that it was I who had roused my father, 
and prevented her escape from his wrath. The consequence was, 
that I was seldom at home, except to sleep. I sauntered to the 
beach, ran into the water, sometimes rowed in the wherries, at 
others hauling them in and holding them steady for the passengers 
to land. I was beginning to be useful to the watermen, and was 
very often rewarded with a piece of bread and cheese or a drink of 
beer out of their pots. The first year after my father's visit, I was 
seldom given a meal, and continually beaten — indeed sometimes 
cruelly so ; but as I grew stronger,' I rebelled and fought, and with 
such success, that although I was hated more, I was punished less. 

One scene between my mother and me may serve as a specimen 
for all. I would come home with my trowsers tucked up, and my 
high-lows unlaced and full of water — sucking every time that I 
lifted up my leg, and marking the white sanded floor of the front 
room, as I proceeded through it to the back kitchen. My mother 
would come down stairs, and perceiving the marks I had left, would 
get angry, and as usual commence singing, 

" A frog he would a wooing go, 
Heigho, says Rowly." 

I S ee — there's that little wretch been here, — 

" "Whether his mother would let him or no, 
Heigho, says Rowly." 



POOR JACK. 45 

I'll rowly him with the rowling pin, when I get hold of him. 
He 's worse than that beastly water-spaniel of Sir Hercules', who 
used to shake himself over my best cambrick muslin. Well, we'll 
see. He'll be wanting his dinner; I only wish he may get it 

" Little Jack Horner sat in a corner, 
Eating his Christmas pie ; 
He put in his thumb and pull'd out a plum, 
And cried, what a good boy am II" 

'Good boy am I!' good-for-nothing brat, just like his father. 

dear ! — if I could but get rid of him ! 

" There was an old woman who lived in a shoe, 

She 'd so many children she didn't know what to do ; 

She gave them some broth without any bread, 

She whipped them all round, and sent them to bed." 

And if I don't whip him, it's my fault, that's all. Virginia, my 
love, don't spit — that's not genteel. It's only sailors and Yankees 
who spit. — Nasty little brute ! — oh ! here you are, are you?" cried 
my mother, as I entered. "Do you see what a dirty mess you 
have made, you little ungrateful animal? Take that, and that, and 
that," continued she, running the wet bristles of the long broom 
into my face, with sufficient force to make my nose bleed. I stood 
the first push, and the second; but the third roused my indig- 
nation — and I caught hold of the end of the broom towards me, 
and tried to force it out of her hands. It was push against push ; 
for I was very strong — she, screaming as loud as she could, as she 
tried to wrest the broom from my clutches ; — I, shoving at her with 
all my force — like Punch and the devil at the two ends of the 
stick. At last, after she had held me in a corner for half a minute, 

1 made a rush upon her, drove her right to the opposite corner, so 
that the end of the handle gave her a severe poke in the body, 
which made her give up the contest ; and exclaim as soon as she 
recovered her breath, — " Oh ! you nasty, ungrateful, ungenteel 
brute ! You little viper ! Is that the way you treat your mother — 
and nearly kill her ? Oh, dear me I" 

" Why don't you leave me alone, then ? you never beats Jenny." 

" Who's Jenny, you wicked good-for-nothing boy — you mean 

your sister Virginia. Well, you'll have no dinner, I can tell you." 



46 POOR JACK. 

I put ray hand in my pocket, took out a sixpence which I had re- 
ceived, and held it up between my thumb and finger. " Won 't 
I?" 

"You oudacious boy! — that's the way you're spoiled by 
foolish people giving you money." 

" Good bye, mother." So saying, I leaped over the board fixed 
up at the door, and was again down at the beach. Indeed I was 
now what is termed a regular 3Iud-Iarker, picking up halfpence by 
running into the water, offering my ragged arm to people getting 
out of the wherries, always saluting them with, " You havn't got 
never a halfpenny for poor Jack, your honour?" and sometimes I 
did get a halfpenny, sometimes a shove, according to the temper 
of those whom I addressed. When I was not on the beach, I was 
usually in company with Ben the Whaler, who, after my father's 
visit, was more kind to me than ever: and there were several 
other pensioners who were great friends of mine ; and I used to 
listen to their long yarns, which were now becoming a source of 
great delight to me ; at other times, I would be with the water- 
men, assisting them to clean out their wherries, or pay the seams. 
In fact, I was here, there, and every where except at home — always 
active, always employed, and, I may add, almost always wet. My 
mother used to scold whenever I came in ; but that I did not 
mind : her greatest punishment was refusing me a clean shirt on 
a Sunday ; at last, I picked up halfpence enough to pay, not only 
for my food, such as it was, but for my own washing, and every- 
day I became more independent and more happy. 

There were other ways by which money was to be obtained 
during the summer season ; which were from the company who 
used to come down to the white bait parties at the Ship and other 
taverns. There were many other boys who frequented the beach, 
besides me ; and we used to stand under the windows, and attract 
attention by every means in our power, so as to induce the com- 
pany to throw us halfpence to scramble for. This they would do 
to while away their time until their dinner was ready, or to amuse 
themselves and the ladies by seeing us roll and tumble one over 
the other. Sometimes they would throw a sixpence into the river, 
where the water was about two feet deep, to make us wet ourselves 



POOR JACK. 47 

through, in groping for it. Indeed, they were very generous when 
they wished to be amused ; and every kind of offer was made to 
them which we thought suited to their tastes, or likely to extract 
money from their pockets. 

u Dip my head in the mud for sixpence, sir ? " would one of us 
cry out ; and then he would be outbid by another. 

" Roll myself all over and over in the mud, face and all, sir — 
only give me sixpence ! " 

Sometimes I would perceive a lovely countenance, beaming 
with pity and compassion at our rags and apparent wretchedness ; 
and then the money thrown to me gave me much more pleasure : 
but the major portion of those who threw us silver for their own 
amusement would not have given us a farthing, if we had asked 
charity for the love of God. 

It must not, however, be supposed that I gained the enviable 
situation of Poor Jack until I had been some time on the beach. 
There are competitors for every place, even the most humble ; and 
there was no want of competitors for this office among the many 
idle boys who frequented the beach. When I first plied there, I 
was often pushed away by those who were older and stronger than 
mvself, with a " Go along with you ! He's not poor Jack — I'm 
poor Jack, your honour." This, at first, I submitted to ; taking my 
chance for a stray halfpenny, which was occasionally thrown to me; 
trusting to my activity in being the first down to the boat, or to my 
quickness in a scramble. I never quarrelled with the other boys, 
for I was remarkable for my good temper. The first idea I had 
of resistance was from oppression. One of the boys, who Mas 
older and taller than myself, attempted to take away a sixpence 
which I had gained in a scramble. Before that, I had not resented 
being pushed away, or even when they threw water or mud at 
me ; but this was an act of violence which I could not put up 
w ith : — the consequence was a fight ; in which, to my surprise 
(for I was not aware of my strength), as well as to the surprise of 
the bystanders, I proved victorious, beating my opponent, until 
he reeled into the water, following him up until he tumbled, and 
then holding his head down in the mud, until he was almost 



4-8 POOR JACK. 

stifled. I then allowed him to get up ; and he went home crying 
to his mother. For this feat, I was rewarded with the plaudits of 
the old pensioners and others who were looking on, and with a 
shilling which was thrown to me from the window of the inn. 
Ben the Whaler, who had witnessed the fray, told me, the next 
day, that I handled my fists remarkably well ; and that I had but 
to keep a higher guard, and I should fight well. He was an old 
pugilist himself, and he gave me a few directions which I did not 
forget. I soon had occasion to put them into practice ; for, two 
days afterwards, another boy, bigger than myself, as I was plying 
as " Poor Jack," pushed me back so hard that I fell off the steps 
into the deep water, and there was a general laugh against me. 
I did not care for the ducking, but the laugh I could not bear ; 
as soon as I gained the steps again, I rushed upon him, and 
threw him off, and he fell into the wherry, and, as it afterwards 
appeared, he strained his back very much ; nevertheless he came 
out to thrash me ; and this time it was a regular fight, as the pen- 
sioners and watermen interfered, taking us both up on the higher 
ground, and seeing that it was fair play. Ben the Whaler acted as 
my second, and we set to. The boy was too powerful for me, had it 
not been for the hurt he had received, and the instructions I ob- 
tained from Ben every time that I sat on his knee between each 
round. Still it was a very hard fight, and I was terribly beaten, — 
but I could not give up, for so many betted upon my winning ; and 
Ben told me, at the end of every round, that, if I only stood up one 
more, I should be certain to beat him ; and that then I should be 
Poor Jack for ever ! The last inducement stimulated me to im- 
mense exertion ; we closed and wrestled, and my antagonist was 
thrown ; and, in consequence of the strain he had before received, 
he could not stand up any more. Poor fellow ! he was in great 
pain ; he was taken home, and obliged to have a doctor, and an 
abscess formed in his side. He was a long while getting well, and, 
when he came out of doors again, he was so pale, — I was very 
sorry for him, and we were always the best friends afterwards, 
and I gave him many a halfpenny, until I had an opportunity of 
serving him. 



POOR JACK. 49 

I mention these two fights, because they obtained for me a 
greater reputation than I deserved ; this reputation perhaps saved 
me a great deal more fighting, and obtained me the mastery over 
the other boys on the beach. Indeed, I became such a favourite 
with the watermen, that they would send the other boys away : 
and thus did I become, at last, the acknowledged, true, lawful, and 
legitimate " Poor Jack of Greenwich. '' 



CHAP. IX. 

IN WHICH i take" a cruise contrary to the received rules of 

NAVIGATION. ON MY RETURN FROM A COLD EXPEDITION, I MEET 
WITH A COLD RECEPTION. 

As soon as I was fairly in possession of my office, I gained suf- 
ficient money to render me almost entirely independent of my 
mother. Occasionally I procured an old jacket or trowsers, or a 
pair of shoes, at the store of an old woman, who dealt in every 
thing that could be imagined ; and, if ever I picked up oakum, or 
drifting pieces of wood, I used to sell them to old Nanny, — for that 
was the only name she was known by. My mother, having lost her 
lodgers by her ill temper, and continual quarrelling with her neigh- 
bours, had resorted to washing and getting up of fine linen, at 
which she was very expert, and earned a good deal of money. To 
do her justice, she was a very industrious woman, and, in some 
things, very clever. She was a very good dress-maker, and used 
to make up the gowns and bonnets for the lower classes of people, 
to whom she gave great satisfaction. She worked very hard for 
herself and my sister, about whose dress and appearance she was 
more particular than ever; indeed, she showed as much affection 
for her as she did ill will towards me. To look at me, with my 
old trowsers tucked up above my knees, my ragged jacket, and 
weather-beaten cap ; and then to see Virginia, so neatly, and even 
expensively, dressed, no one could have believed that we were 

E 



50 POOR JACK. 

brother and sister. My mother would always try to prevent Vir- 
ginia from noticing me, if we ever met when she was walking out 
with her. But my sister appeared to love me more and more ; and, 
in spite of my mother, as soon as she saw me, would run up to me, 
patting my dirty jacket with her pretty little hand ; and., when she 
did so, I felt so proud of her. She grew up handsomer every day, 
and so sweet in disposition, that my mother could not spoil her. 

It was in the autumn that I gained undisputed possession of the 
office of " Poor Jack ;" and that winter I had an adventure which 
nearly occasioned my making a vacancy for somebody else ; and 
which, the reader will agree with me, was anything but pleasant. 

It was in the month of January, — the river was filled with float- 
ing ice, for it had frozen"hard for several days ; and, of course, 
there were but few people who trusted themselves in wherries, — 
so that I had little employment, and less profit. One morning, as 
I was standing on the landing-steps, the breath coming out of my 
mouth like the steam of a tea-kettle, — rubbing my nose, which 
was red from the sharpness of the frost, — and looking at the 
sun, which was just mounting above a bank of clouds, a water- 
man called to me, and asked me whether I would go down the river 
with him, as he was engaged to take a mate down to join his ship, 
which was several miles below Greenwich ; and, if so, he would 
give me sixpence and a breakfast. I had earned little for many 
days, and, hating to be obliged to my mother, I consented. 

In an hour we started ; there was no wind, — the water was 
smooth, and the sun's rays glittered on the floating patches of ice, 
which grated against the sides of the wherry, as we cut through 
them with our sharp prow. Although we had the tide with us, 
it was three hours before we gained the ship. The mate paid the 
fare, and gave us something to drink ; and we passed an hour or 
more warming ourselves at the caboose, and talking with the sea- 
men. At last a breeze sprung up, and the captain ordered the men 
to get the ship under weigh. We shoved off, the tide having 
flowed some time, expecting to be back to Greenwich before dark. 

But it clouded over ; and a heavy snow-storm came on, so that 
we could not see in what direction we were pulling ; the wind 
blew very fresh, and it was piercing cold ; however, we pulled as 



POOR JACK. 



51 



hard as we could, not only to get back again, but to keep ourselves 
from freezing. Unfortunately, we had lost too much time on board 
of the vessel ; and, what with that, and the delay arising from the 
snow-storm preventing us pulling straight back, the ebb-tide made 
again before we had gained more than two thirds of our way. We 
were now nearly worn out with the severe cold and fatigue, but 
we pulled hard, keeping as close in-shore as we could. It was 
necessary, at the end of one reach, to cross over to the other side 
of the river ; and, in so doing, we were driven by the tide against 
a large buoy, when the wherry filled and upset in an instant. We 
both contrived to cling on to her, as she was turned bottom up ; 
and away we were swept down among the drifting ice, the snow- 
storm still continuing to beat down on our heads. I was nearly 
frozen before I could climb on the bottom of the wherry ; which I 
at last contrived to do, but the waterman could only hold on. There 
we both were, shivering and shaking ; the wind piercing through 
our wet clothes, — the snow beating down on us, and our feet freez- 
ing among the drifting ice — borne away with the tide towards the 
mouth of the river — not able to see two yards before us, or likely 
to be seen by any one, so as to be assisted. We were too cold to 
speak, but remained in silence, looking at each other, and with no 
pleasant forebodings as to our fate. The ice now formed in large 
masses; the icicles hung from our clothes, and all sense was 
lost in our extremities. It was now dark as pitch ; and so feeble 
were we that it was with difficulty we could keep in our positions. 
At last the storm abated, the sky cleared up, and the bright full 
moon shone in the heavens ; but our case appeared hopeless, — we 
felt that before morning we must perish. I tried to say what prayers 
I had learnt by hearing my sister say them ; but my teeth chattered, 
and I could only think them. At last, I perceived a vessel at anchor 
— the tide was sweeping us past, — we were close to her, and I 
contrived to cry out; — but there was no reply. Again I 
screamed, but it was in vain. They were all in their warm beds ; 
while we floated past, freezing to death. My hopes, which had 
been raised, and which had occasioned my heart to resume its 
beating, now sank down again, and I gave myself up in despair. 

e 2 



52 POOR JACK. 

I burst into tears ; and, before the tears had rolled half way down 
my cheeks, they had frozen hard. " I am indeed < Poor Jack' 
now," thought I ; " I shall never see my father or Virginia any 
more." As I thought so, I saw another vessel ahead of us. I 
summoned all my strength, and called out long before we floated 
past her. The light wind bore my voice down ; there was a man 
on deck, and he heard it ; he walked forward, and I perceived him 
looking over the bows. I hallooed again, to direct his attention to 
where we were ; for our wherry was so incrusted with ice, that she 
might have been taken for a larger piece floating by. I saw him 
turn away, and heard him thump with a handspike on the deck. 
How my heart bounded ! I almost felt warm. As we were passing 
the vessel, I cried out again and again, and the man answered me — 
i( Ay, ay, hold on for a minute or two, and I'll send for you." 
"We are saved," I cried to the waterman ; but he was quite 
insensible, apparently frozen stiff where he was clinging. In a few 
minutes I heard the sound of oars, and then they stopped ; the 
boat came quietly alongside, that they might not by the shock 
throw us off into the water ; they dragged us both in, and took us 
on board, poured a glass of brandy down our throats, stripped off 
our frozen clothes, chafed our limbs, and put us between the hot 
blankets which they had just left. As soon as I was in bed, the 
mate made me drink a tumbler of hot grog, and left me. I soon 
fell into a deep sleep, long before they had ceased their attempts to 
restore vitality to my companion ; which at last they did. When I 
awoke the next morning, I was quite well ; and the waterman was 
also recovering, although not able to leave his hammock. The mate 
who had had the watch and had saved us, told me that the wherry 
was safe on board ; and, as the ship was bound up the river, that 
we had better remain where we were. I narrated our accident ; 
and my clothes having been dried at the caboose, I dressed myself, 
and went on deck. My companion, the waterman, did not escape 
so well ; his foot was frost-bitten, and he lost four of his toes, 
before he recovered. It was-singular that he, who was a man grown 
up, should suffer so much more than I did. I cannot account for 
it, except that my habit of always being in the water had hardened 



, 




POOR JACK. 53 

me more to the cold. We remained on board two days ; during 
which we were treated with great kindness. 

It was a fine bright morning, when, as the ship was passing the 
hospital, we shoved the wherry off, and landed at the steps ; and, 
when we jumped out, we were greeted by all who were standing 
there. We had very naturally been given up for lost. They sup- 
posed that we had perished in the snow storm. Old Ben was 
among those who were standing at the steps, and he walked up 
with me towards my mother's house. 

"I did go to the old woman and break the matter to her in a 
becoming way, Jack," said Ben ; " but I can't say that she ap- 
peared to take it much to heart, and that's the truth. Had it 
been little Jenny, she'd have cried her eyes out." 

I arrived at Fisher's Alley, and the neighbours looked out ; and 
as I nodded to them, they cried, " Why, here's Jack come back 
again. Where have you been to, Jack?" This passing from 
mouth to mouth, at last reached my mother's ears ; she looked out, 
and saw me and old Ben close to the door. 

" Here be your son, Misses," said Ben ; " so you may thank God 
for his mercy." 

But my mother did not appear to be very thankful. She turned 
round and went in ; I followed her, while Ben was standing at the 
door in amazement at her not flying to me and kissing me. On 
the contrary, she must have been angry at my return ; for she 
commenced singing — 

u Jack and Gill went up the hill 
To fetch a pail of water ; 
Jack fell down and broke his crown, 
And Gill came tumbling after." 

And then she broke out — u And where have you been, you good- 
for-nothing boy, all this time ? putting me to all this useless ex- 
pense that you have ; all my money thrown away for nothing." 
I looked at the table, and perceived that she had been making a 
black dress and bonnet, to put little Virginia into mourning ; for 
she never let slip an opportunity to dress out my sister. 

"Fifteen good shillings thrown away and lost — all by your 

e 3 



54f POOR JACK. 

coming back. Your sister would have looked so beautiful and 
interesting in it. Poor child ! and now she will be disappointed. 
Never mind, my darling, you may have to wear them soon yet, if 
he goes on this way." 

Virginia did not seem to mind it at all ; she was kissing and 
patting me, and was delighted to see me again. But my mother 
took her by the hand, and catching up the half-made dress and 
bonnet in her other, walked away up stairs to her room, singing — 

" There was an old man who lived under a hill, 
And if he's not dead, he lives there still." 

" So much for motherly love ! Dang it, what's her heart made 
of?" said a voice. I turned round ; it was old Ben, who had been 
an unobserved spectator of the scene. 



CHAP. X. 

IX WHICH I NARRATE WHAT I CONSIDER THE MOST FORTUNATE INCIDENT 
IN MY LIFE ; AND BEN THE WHALER CONFIDES TO ME A VERY STRANGE 
HISTORY. 

Among the pensioners, there was one with whom I must make the 
reader acquainted ; as he will be an important person in this nar- 
rative. His name was Peter Anderson, a north countryman, I be- 
lieve, from Greenock : he had been gunner's mate in the service 
for many years ; and, having been severely wounded in an action, 
he had been sent to Greenwich. He was a boatswain in Green- 
wich Hospital ; that is, he had charge of a ward of twenty-five 
men ; and Ben the Whaler had lately been appointed one of the 
boatswain's mates under him. He was a very good scholar, and 
had read a great deal. You could hardly put any question to him, 
but you would get from him a satisfactory sort of an answer; and 
he was generally referred to in all points of dispute, especially in 
matters connected with the service, which he had at his fingers' 
ends ; and, moreover, he w 7 as a very religious, good man. I never 



POOR JACK. 55 

heard him swear, but correct all those who did so in his presence. 
He had saved some money in the service; the interest of which, 
with his allowances as boatswain, enabled him to obtain many 
little comforts, and to be generous to others. Before Ben was 
shifted over to Anderson's ward, which he was when he was 
appointed boatswain's mate under him, they had not been well ac- 
quainted ; but, since that time, they were almost always together ; 
so that now I knew Anderson, which I did not before, except by 
sight. He was a very venerable-looking old man, with grey locks 
curling down on his shoulders, but very stout and hearty ; and, as 
Ben had told him all about me, he took notice of me, and appeared 
also to take an interest. When I came back, after the providen- 
tial escape I have mentioned in the last chapter, Ben had narrated 
to him the conduct of my mother ; and a day or two afterwards, 
when the frost had broken up, and they were both sitting down, 
basking in the sun, which was shining bright, I went up to them. 

« Well, Jack," said old Ben, " are you ready for another trip 
down the river ? " 

" I hope I shall earn my sixpence at an easier rate, if I do go," 
replied I. 

" It was wonderful that you were saved, boy," said Peter An- 
derson ; " and you ought to be very thankful to the Omniscient." 

I stared ; for I had never heard that term applied to the Deity. 

« You mean God, don't you?" said I, at last ; for I thought he 
couldn't mean any other. 

" Yes, boy ; has not your mother taught you that name ? " 

« She never would teach me anything. All the prayers I know 
I have stolen from my sister." 

" And what do you know, Jack ? " 

" I know ' Our Father,' and ' Now I lay me down to sleep,' and 
I believe that is all." 

" How old are you now, Jack ? " 

« I am three years older than Virginia ; she, I heard my mother 
say, was six the other day, — then I suppose I'm nine." 

" Do you know your letters ? " 

« Yes, some of them ; I learnt them on the boats." 

E 1 



56 POOR JACK. 

u But you cannot read ? " 

u No, not a word." 

" Has your mother ever told you of the Bible ? " 

" Not me ; but I've heard her tell Virginia about it." 

" Don't you ever go to church? " 

» No, never. Mother takes little Virginia ; but she says I'm 
too ragged and ungenteel." 

" Why does your mother neglect you ? I suppose you are a 
bad boy ? 

" That he's not," interrupted Ben ; " that's not the reason. 
But we must not talk about that now ; only, I must take Jack's 
part. Go on, Peter." 

"Would you like to learn to read, Jack?" said Anderson; 
" and would you like to hear me read the Bible to you, until you 
can read it yourself? " 

u Indeed I would/' replied I. " There's many of the boys 
on the beach, smaller than me, who can both read and write/' 

Peter Anderson then told me that he would teach me, provided 
I behaved myself well. He desired I would come to his cabin 
every afternoon at six o'clock, a time which interfered little with 
my avocation of " Poor Jack," and that he would give me a les- 
son. Before he had finished talking, one of the lieutenants of the 
hospital sent for him ; and Ben remained behind, to point out to 
me how valuable my knowing how to read and write might one 
day prove to me. 

" I've no laming myself, Jack," said he ; " and I know the loss 
of it. Had I known how to read and write, I might have been 
something better than a poor Greenwich pensioner ; but, never- 
theless, I'm thankful that I'm no worse. Ever since I've been a 
man grown I've only regretted it once, — and that's been all my 
life. Why, Jack, I'd give this right arm of mine — to be sure, it's 
no great things now ; but once it could send a harpoon in, up to 
the hilt — but still a right arm is a right arm to the end of your 
davs ; and I'd give it with pleasure, if I only knew how to read 
and write ; — nay, I wouldn't care about the writing ; but, if I 
could only read print, Jack, I'd give it ; for then I could read the 
Bible, as Peter Anderson does. Why, Jack, when we do go to 







- : :c- tee bible to jack. 



POOR JACK. 57 

chapel on Sunday, there's not one in ten of us who can follow the 
parson with his book ; all we can do is to listen ; and when he has 
done speaking, we are done also, and must wait till he preaches 
ao-ain. Don't I feel ashamed, then, Jack, at not being able to 
read ; and ought not they to feel proud who can ; — no, not 
proud, but thankful ? * We don't think of the Bible much in 
our younger days, boy ; but, when we are tripping our anchor 
for the other world, we long to read away our doubts and mis- 
givings ; and it's the only chart you can navigate by safely. I 
think a parent has much to answer for, that don't teach its child 
to read ; but I must not blame my father or mother, for I never 
knew them." 

" Never knew them ? " 

" No, boy, no. My father and mother left me when I was one 
year old ; he was drowned ; and my mother — she died too, poor 
soul ! " 

" How did your mother die, Ben ? " 

" It's a sad, sad story, Jack, and I cannot bear to think of it ; it 
was told me long afterwards, by one who little thought to whom 
he was speaking." 
" Do tell me, Ben." 

" You're too young, boy, for such a tale — it's too shocking." 
" Was it worse than being froze to death, as I nearly was the 
other day? " 

" Yes, my lad, worse than that ; although, for one so young as 
you are, that was quite bad enough." 

" Well, Ben, I won't ask you to tell me, if it pains you to tell it. 
But you did not do wrong ? " 

" How could a baby of two years old do wrong ? and five thou- 
sand miles off at the time, you little fool ? Well, I don't know if 
I wo'n't tell you, Jack, after all ; because you will then find out 
that there's a comfort in reading the Bible — but you must pro- 
mise me never to speak about it. I'm a foolish old fellow to tell 
it to you, Jack, I do believe ; but I'm fond of you, boy, and I don't 

* Ben's observations were true at the time he spoke : but this is no longer 
the case. So much more general has education become, that now, in a ship's 
company, at least five out of seven can read. 



58 POOR JACK. 

like to say 'no' to you. Now come to an anchor close to me. 
The bells are ringing for dinner. I shall lose my meal, but you 
will not lose your story, and there will be no fear of interruption. 

" My father was brought up to the sea, Jack, and was a smart 
young man till he was about thirty ; when a fall from the main- 
yard disabled him from hard duty, and going aloft: but still he 
had been brought up to sea, and was fit for nothing on shore. So, 
as he was a clean likely fellow, he obtained the situation of purser's 
steward in an Indiaman. After that, he was captain's steward on 
board of several ships. He sailed originally from Yarmouth ; and, 
going home, after a voyage, to see his relations, he fell in with my 
mother, and they were spliced. He was very fond of his wife ; 
and I believe she was a very true and good woman, equally fond 
of him. He went to sea again, and I was born. He made another 
voyage to India ; and, when he came back, I was two years old. 
I do not recollect him or my mother. My father had agreed to 
sail to the West Indies as captain's steward, and the captain, with 
whom he had sailed before, consented that he should take his wife 
with him, to attend upon the lady passengers; so I was left at Yar- 
mouth, and put out to nurse till they came back, — but they never 
came back, Jack ; and, as soon as I can recollect, I found myself 
in the workhouse, and, when old enough, was sent to sea. I had 
been told that my father and mother had been lost at sea, but no 
one could tell me how, — and I thought little more about it, for I 
had never known them ; and those we don't know we do not love 
or care for, be they father or mother. 

" Well, I had sailed four or five voyages to the north, in the 
whalers, and was then about twenty-five years old, when I thought 
I would go back to Yarmouth and show myself ; for I was * har- 
pooner and steersman' at that early age, and not a little proud. I 
thought I would go and look at the old workhouse, for it was the 
only thing I could recollect ; and see if the master and mistress were 
still alive ; for they were kind to me when I was living with them. 
I went to Yarmouth, as I said : there was the workhouse ; and the 
master and mistress both alive ; and I made myself known to them, 
and the old people looked at me through their spectacles, and 



POOR JACK. 59 

could not believe that I could possibly be the little Ben, who used 
to run to the pump for water. I had money in my pocket ; and 
I liked the old people, who otfered me all they could give, 
without hopes of receiving anything in return j and, as I knew 
nobody else, I used to live much with them, and pav them 
handsomely ; I gave the old man some curiosities, and the old 
woman a teapot, and so on ; and I remained with them till it was 
time for me to sail again. Now you see, Jack, among the old folk 
in the workhouse, was a man who had been at sea ; and I often 
had long talks with him, and gave him tobacco, which he couldn't 
afford to buy, for they don't allow it in a workhouse, which is a 
great hardship ; and I have often thought that I should not like to 
go into a workhouse, because I never could have a bit of tobacco. 
This man's hair was as white as snow, much too white for his a°-e, 
for he was more decrepid and worn out than, perhaps, he was old. 
He had come home to his parish, and, being unable to gain his 
living, they had sent him to the workhouse. I can't understand why 
a place should be called a workhouse, where they do nothing at 
all. — Well, Charley, as they called him, got very ill ; and they 
thought he would not last long — and when the old people were 
busy, I used to talk a great deal with him ; he was generally very 
quiet and composed, and said he was comfortable, but that he 
knew he was going fast. 

" ' But,' says he, 'here's my comfort ;' and he pointed to a Bible 
that he had on his knees. « If it had not been for this book,' said 
he, * I do think, at times, I should have made away with myself.' 

" ' Why,' says I, ■ what have you done ? Have you been very- 
wicked ? ' 

■ ' We are all very wicked,' said he ; ■ but that's not exactly it— 
I have been haunted for so many years, that I have been almost 
driven mad.' 

" < Why,' said I, ■ what can you have done that you should have 
been haunted? — You hav'n't committed murder, have you?' 

" 'Well, I don't know what to say,' replied he; ■ if a man looks 
on and don't prevent murder, is it not the same ? I hav'n't long to 
live, and I feel as if I should be happier if I made a clean breast of 



60 POOR JACK, 

it ; for I have kept the secret a long while ; and I think that you, as 
a sailor, and knowing what sailors suffer, may have a fellow feeling ; 
and perhaps you will tell me (for I'm somewhat uneasy about it) 
whether you think that I am so very much to blame in the business? 
I've suffered enough for it these many years ; and I trust that it 
will not be forgotten that I have so, when I'm called up to be 
judged — as we all shall, if this book is true, — as I fully believe it 
to be." 

" Here he appeared to be a good deal upset ; but he took a drink 
of water, and then he told me as follows : — 

" < About twenty-three years ago, I was a seaman on board of 
the William and Caroline, West Indiaman, bound to Jamaica. 
We had two or three passengers on board, and the steward's wife 
attended upon them. She was a handsome tall young woman ; and 
when she and her husband came on board, they told me they nad 
one child, which they had left at home. Now Yarmouth, you see, 
is my native place ; and, although I did not know her husband, I 
knew her family very well ; so we were very intimate, an 1 used to 
talk about the people we knew, and so on. I mention this, in 
consequence of what occurred afterwards. We arrived very safe 
at Jamaica, and remained, as usual, some time at the island before 
the drogers brought round our cargo, and then we again sailed 
for England. 

" 'Well, we got clear of the islands, and were getting well north, 
when there came on a terrible gale of wind which dismasted us ; 
and for three weeks we were rolling about gunnel under, for we 
were very heavily laden ; and we lost our reckoning. At last w r e 
found out that we had been blown down among the reefs to the 
southward of the Bahama Isles. We had at one time rigged jury 
masts, but unfortunately the gale had blown up again, and carried 
them also over the side ; and we had no means of doing any thing, 
for we had no more small spars or sails, and all our hopes were, 
of falling in with some vessel which might assist us. 

" < But we had no such good fortune ; and one morning, w r hen a 
heavy sea was running, we discovered that it was bearing us down 
upon a reef of rocks, from which there was no chance of escape. 



POOR JACK. 61 

We had no resource but to get the boats out. and take our chance in 
them. The captain was very cool and collected ; he ordered every 
thing in which might be requisite; called up the men, and explained 
to them his intentions. All the water and provisions were put into 
the launch, for the sea ran so high that the small boats could not 
carry them ; and it was intended that all the boats should keep com- 
pany till it moderated, and then each boat should have its own sup- 
ply. When all was ready, we were told off to our respective boats. 
The steward and his wife were to be in the same boat with me ; 
and I had put her carefully in the stern sheets, for I was her great 
friend. Now the steward was called out by the captain to go for 
something which had been forgotten ; and while he was away the 
ship was struck by a heavy sea, which occasioned such a breach 
over her that all was in confusion, and, to prevent the small boats 
from swamping, they were pushed off. The launch still held on 
for the captain, who hastened in with the mate and the steward, for 
they were the only three left on board ; and away we all went. I 
mention this as the cause why the steward was separated (only for 
a time, as we supposed) from his wife. We had not been clear 
of the ship more than five minutes, before we found that we, in our 
boat, could hardly make head 'gainst the wind and swell, which 
bore down on the reef close to us ; the launch, which was a heavy 
pulling boat and deeply laden, could not ; and in a quarter of an 
hour we had the miseiy to see her in the breakers, swallowed up 
with all hands, together with all the provisions and water for our 
sustenance. I will not attempt to describe the agony of the 
steward's wife, who saw her husband perish before her eyes. She 
fainted ; and it was a long time before she came to again ; for no 
one could leave his oar for a minute to assist her, as we pulled for 
our lives. At last she did come to. Poor thing ! I felt for her. 
Towards night the wind lulled, and we had every appearance of fine 
weather coming on ; but we had nothing to eat, and only a barrico 
of water in the boat, and we were quite exhausted with fatigue. 

" 'We knew that we must pull to the northward, and try and fetch 
the Bahama Isles, or, perhaps, some of the small quays to the 
southward of them, where we might procure turtle, and, perhaps, 



62 POOR JACK. 

water ; and when the sea had gone down, which it did very fast, 
we put the head of our boat in that direction, pulling all night. 
At daybreak, the other boat was not to be seen ; it was a dead calm, 
but there was still a long heavy swell — we shared out some water 
and rested till the evening, and then we took to our oars again. 

"'We rowed hard till the morning, but when the sun rose it 
scorched us up ; it was impossible for us to keep to our oars 
without drinking, and, there being no one to take the command, 
our water was all gone ; and we had not gained fifty miles to the 
northward. On the third morning we laid down exhausted at the 
bottom of the boat — we were dying not only with thirst but with 
hunger ; we had agreed that when night came on we would take 
to the oars again ; but some would and some would not ; so that, 
at last, those who had taken to their oars would pull no longer. 

" « The steward's wife at times sang psalms, and at times wept ; 
she had a very sweet voice ; but her lips were soon glued together 
for want of water, and she could sing no longer. 

" e When the sun rose on the fourth day, there was no vessel to 
be seen : some were raving for water, and others sat crouched under 
the boat's thwarts in silent despair. But, towards evening, the sky 
clouded over, and there fell a heavy rain, which refreshed us. We 
took the gown from off the steward's wife, and spread it, and caught 
the water; and we all drank until our thirst was quenched, — even 
our wet clothes were a comfort to us ; — still we were gnawed with 
hunger. That night we slept ; but the next morning every man's 
eyes flashed, and we all looked as if we would eat each other ; and 
there were whisperings and noddings going on in the bow of 
the boat ; and a negro who was with us took out his knife, and 
sharpened it on the boat's gunnel. No one asked him why. We 
spoke not, but we all had our own thoughts. It was dreadful to 
look at our hollow cheeks, — our eyes sunken deep, but glaring 
like red hot coals, — our long beards and haggard faces, — every 
one ready to raise his hand against the other. The poor woman 
never complained or said a word after she left off singing, — her 
thoughts appeared elsewhere. She sat for hours motionless, with her 
eyes fixed on the still blue water, as if she would pierce its depth. 



POOR JACK. 63 

At last the negro caine aft ; and we were each upon our guard 
as he passed us, for we had seen him sharpen his knife. He went 
to the stern sheets, where the poor woman sat, and we all knew 
what he intended to do — for he only acted our own thoughts. 
She was still hanging over the gunnel, with her eyes fixed down- 
wards, and she heeded not his approach : he caught her by the 
hair, and dragged her head towards him. She then held out her 
arms towards me, faintly calling me by name ; but I — shame on 
me — remained sitting on the after thwart. The negro thrust his 
knife into her neck, below the ear ; and, as soon as he had divided 
the artery, he glued his thick lips to the gash, and sucked her blood. 
" ' When the deed was done, others rose up and would have 
shared ; but the negro kept his white eyes directed towards them 
— one arm thrust out, with his knife pointed at them, as he slaked 
his thirst, while, with his other round her waist, he supported her 
dying frame. The attitude was that of fondness, while the deed 
was — murder. He appeared as if he were caressing her, while 
her life's blood poured into his throat. At last we all drew our 
knives ; and the negro knew that he must resign his prey, or his life. 
He dropped the woman, and she fell, with her face forward, at my 
feet She was quite dead. And then— our hunger was relieved. 

" ' Three days passed away, and again we were mad for want 
of water,'— when we saw a vessel. We shouted, and shook hands, 
and threw out the oars, and pulled as if we had never suffered. It 
was still calm, and, as we approached the vessel, we threw what 
remained of the poor woman into the sea ; and the sharks finished 
what we had left We agreed to say nothing about her ; for we 
-were ashamed of ourselves. 

« < Now, I did not murder, but I did not prevent it ; and I have 
ever since been haunted by this poor woman. I see her and the 
negro constantly before me ; and then I think of what passed, and 
I turn sick. I feel that I ought to have saved her, — she is always 
holding out her arms to me, and I hear her faintly call < Charles,'— 
then I read my Bible — and she disappears, and I feel as if I were 
forgiven. — Tell me, what do you think, messmate ?" 

" « Why,' replied I, ' sarcumstances will make us do what we 



64; POOR JACK. 

otherwise would never think possible. I never was in such a pre- 
dicament ; and, therefore, can't tell what people may be brought 
to do — but tell me, messmate, *what was the name of the poor 
woman ? ' 

" ' The husband's name was Ben Rivers.' 

" < Rivers, did you say ? ' replied I, struck all of a heap. 

" < Yes,' replied he ; « that was her name ; she Mas of this 
town ; — but never mind the name, — tell me what you think, 
messmate ? ' 

" < Well,' says I, (for I was quite bewildered,) « 1 11 tell you what, 
old fellow — as far as I'm consarned, you have my forgiveness, 
and now I must wish you good bye — and I pray to God that we 
may never meet again.' 

" < Stop a little/ said he ; < don't leave me this way — Ah ! I see 
how it is — you think I 'm a murderer.' 

"'No I don't,' replied I; 'not exactly — still there'll be no 
harm in your reading your Bible.' 

" And so I got up, and walked out of the room — for you see, 
Jack, although he mayn't have been so much to blame, still I 
didn't like to be in company with a man who had eaten up my 
own mother /" 

Here Ben paused, and sighed deeply. I was so much shocked 
with the narrative, that I could not say a word. At last Ben 
continued : — 

"I couldn't stay in the room — I couldn't stay in the workhouse. 
I couldn't even stay in the town. Before the day closed, I was 
out of it — and I have never been there since. Now, Jack, I must 
go in — remember what I have said to you ; and larn to read your 
Bible." 

I promised that I would, and that very evening I had my first 
lesson from Peter Anderson — and I continued to receive them 
until I could read well. He then taught me to write and cipher ; 
but before I could do the latter, many events occurred, which must 
be made known to the reader. 



PpOR JACK. 



65 




DR. TADPOLE'S HOUSE. 



CHAP. XI. 



IN WHICH THE DOCTOR LETS OLT SOME VERY NOVEL MODES OF MEDICAL 
TREATMENT, WHICH ARE ATTENDED WITH THE GREATEST SUCCESS. 



Such a change has taken place since I can first recollect Green- 
wich, that it will be somewhat difficult for me to make the reader 
aware of my localities. Narrow streets have been pulled down, 
handsome buildings erected — new hotels in lieu of small inns — 
gay shops have now usurped those which were furnished only with 
articles necessary for the outfit of the seamen. Formerly, long 
stages, with a basket to hold six behind, and dillies which plied at 
the Elephant and Castle, were the usual land conveyances — now 
they have made place for railroads and omnibuses. Formerly, the 



66 POOR JACK. 

wherry conveyed the mariner and his wife with his sea-chest, down 
to the landing place — now steam-boats pour out their hundreds at 
a trip. Even the view from Greenwich is much changed, here and 
there broken in upon by the high towers for shot and other manufac- 
tories, or some large building which rises boldly in the distance ; 
while the Dreadnought's splendid frame fills up half the river, 
and she that was used to deal out death and destruction with her 
terrible rows of teeth, is now dedicated by humanity to succour 
and relieve. 

I mention this, because the house in which Dr. Tadpole formerly 
lived no longer exists ; and I wish particularly to describe it to 
the reader. 

When I left Greenwich in 1817 or 1818, it was still standing; 
although certainly in a very dilapidated state. I will however give 
a slight sketch of it ; as it is deeply impressed on my memory. 

It was a tall narrow building of dark red brick, much orna- 
mented, and probably built in the time of Queen Elizabeth. It 
had two benches on each side the door ; for, previous to Tadpole's 
taking possession of it, it had been an alehouse, and much fre- 
quented by seamen. The doctor had not removed these benches, 
as they were convenient, when the weather was fine, for those 
who waited for medicine or advice; and moreover, being a jocular 
sociable man, he liked people to sit down there, and would often 
converse with them. Indeed, this assisted much to bring him into 
notice, and made him so well known among the humbler classes, 
that none of them, if they required medicine or advice, ever 
thought of going to any one but Dr. Tadpole. He was very liberal 
and kind, and I believe there was hardly a poor person in the 
town, who was not in his debt, for he never troubled them much 
about payment. He had some little property of his own, or he 
never could have carried on such a losing concern, as his business 
really must have been to him. In early life, he had been a surgeon 
in the navy ; and was said, and I believe with justice, to be very 
clever in his profession. In defending himself against some act of 
oppression on the part of his captain — for in those times the service 
was very different to what it is now — he had incurred the dis- 



POOR JACK. 67 

pleasure of the navy board, and had left the service. His enemies 
(for even the doctor had his enemies) asserted that he was turned 
out of the service ; his friends, that he left the service in disgust ; 
after all a matter of little consequence. The doctor is now gone, 
and has left behind him in the town of Greenwich a character 
for charity and generosity of which no one can deprive him. 
He was buried in Greenwich churchyard ; and never was there, 
perhaps, such a numerous procession as voluntarily followed his 
remains to the grave. The poor fully paid him the debt of gra- 
titude, if they did not pay him their other debts ; and when his 
will was opened, it was found that he had released them all from 
the latter. Peace be to him, and honour to his worth. 

The shop of Doctor Tadpole was fitted up in a very curious 
manner, and excited a great deal of admiration. During his ser- 
vice afloat, he had collected various objects of natural history, 
which he had set up or prepared himself: the lower row of bottles 
in the windows were full of snakes, lizards, and other reptiles ; the 
second tier of bottles in the window were the same as are now 
generally seen — large globes containing blue and yellow mixtures, 
with gold hieroglyphics outside of them ; but between each of 
these bottles was a stuffed animal of some kind, generally a small 
monkey, or of that description. The third row of bottles was the 
most incomprehensible ; no one could tell what was in them ; and 
the doctor, when asked, would laugh and shake his head : this made 
the women very curious. I believe they were chiefly preparations of 
the stomach, and other portions of the interior of the animal frame ; 
but the doctor always said that it was his row of " secrets :" and 
used to amuse himself with evading the questions of the other sex. 
There were some larger specimens of natural history suspended 
from the ceiling, chiefly skulls and bones of animals ; and on the 
shelves inside a great variety of stones and pebbles and fragments 
of marble figures, which the doctor had picked up I believe in the 
Mediterranean ; altogether the shop was a strange medley, and made 
people stare very much when they came into it. The doctor kept 
an old woman to cook and clean the house, and his boy Tom, whom 

f 2 



68 POOR JACK. 

I have already mentioned. Tom was a good-natured lad, and, as his 
master said, very fond of liquorice ; but the doctor used to laugh 
at that (when Tom was not by), saying, "It's very true that Tom 
cribs my liquorice ; but I will say this for him, he is very honest 
about jalap and rhubarb, and I have never missed a grain." 

Next door to the doctor lived another person, who kept a small 
tobacconist's shop, which was a favourite resort of the pensioners 
and other poor people. She was an Irishwoman, with the strong 
accent of her country, a widow by her own account. Who her 
husband had been was not satisfactorily known : if the question 
was put, she always evaded it as much as possible. All she said 
was, that his name was St. Felix, and that he had been of no pro- 
fession. She was about twenty-two or twenty-three, very handsome, 
and very pleasing in her manners, which was perhaps one cause of 
the surmises and scandal which were continually afloat. Some 
said that her husband was still alive ; others, that he had been 
transported for seven years ; and many (and among them my 
mother) declared that she could not produce her " marriage lines." 
Indeed there was no end to ill-natured reports, as always will be 
the case, when men are so unfortunate as to have a reputation, or 
women so unfortunate as to be pretty. But the widow appeared 
to be verv indifferent to what people said : she was always lively 
and cheerful, and a great favourite with the men, whatever she may 
have been with the women. Doctor Tadpole had courted her ever 
since she had settled at Greenwich : they were the best of friends, 
but the doctor's suit did not appear to advance. Nevertheless the 
doctor seldom passed a day without paying her a visit, and she was 
verv gracious to him. Although she sold every variety of tobacco, 
she would not permit people to smoke, and had no seats either in 
the shop or at the door — but to this rule an exception was made 
in favour of the doctor. He seldom failed to be there every evening ; 
and although she would not allow him a chair, she permitted him 
to remain standing at the counter, and smoke his cigar while they 
conversed. It was this indulgence which occasioned people to think 
that she would marry the doctor ; but at last they got tired of wait- 
ing, and it became a sort of proverb in Fisher's Alley, and its 



POOR JACK. 69 

precincts, when things were put off to an indefinite period, to say, 
" Yes, that will be done when the widow marries the doctor." 

One evening, Ben had sent me to fill his tobacco box at Mrs. 
St. Felix's, and when I went in, I found the doctor in her shop. 

" Well, Master Tom Saunders, or Mr. Poor Jack," said the 
widow, " what may your pleasure be ? " 

" Pigtail," said I, putting down the penny. 

" Is it for your father, Jack, for report tells me that he's in want 
of it ? " 

"No," replied I, "it's for old Ben — father's a long way from 
this, I expect." 

"And do you intend to follow him, Jack? It's my opinion 
you'll be the very revarse of a good sailor if you cruize bottom up 
as you did on your first voyage." 

" It's not the pleasantest way of sailing, is it, Jack?" observed 
the doctor. 

" Xot in winter time," replied I. 

The widow measured the length of the pigtail, as milliners do 
tape, from the tip of the finger to the knuckle, and cut it off. 

"And now will you oblige me with a cigar?" said the doctor. 
"I think this is the sixth, is it not, Mrs. St. Felix? so here's 
my shilling." 

"Really, doctor, if it were not that the wry faces I make at 
physic would spoil my beauty, I'm almost in honour bound to 
send for something to take out of your shop, just by way of return 
for your patronage." 

" I trust you will never require it, Mrs. St. Felix ; I've no ob- 
jection to your sending for any thing you please, but don't take 
physic." 

" Well, my girl Jane shall have a dose, I declare, she is getting 
so fat and lumpy. Only don't let it be laudanum, doctor, she's 
so sleepy-headed already. I told her this morning that she was 
looking pale, just by way of preparing her." 

" Mrs. St. Felix, you must excuse me, but you've no right to in- 
terfere with my practice. I prescribe physic when I think it neces- 
sary, and Jane is perfectly well at present, and shall not have any." 

f 3 



70 POOR JACK. 

"And you've no right to interfere with my household, doctor. 
If I choose, I'll physic Jane, and the dog, and the cat, and the 
kitten, which I reckon to be the whole of my establishment, all 
four of them on the same day. Tell me, doctor, how much ipe- 
cacuanha will make a kitten sick ? " 

" Mrs. St. Felix, I am not a veterinary surgeon, and therefore 
cannot answer." 

" Veterinary ! Well, I thought they only doctored horses." 

" I beg your pardon, their practice extends further, as I can 
prove to you. I was once at the establishment of one in London, 
and I observed, in a large room, about a dozen little-lap dogs all 
tied up with strings. The poor little unwieldy waddling things 
were sent to him because they were asthmatic, and I don't know 
what all — and how do you think he cured them ?" 

" It 's for me to ask that question, doctor.'' 

" Well then, he told me his secret. He tied them all up, and 
gave them nothing to eat, only water to drink ; and in three weeks 
they were returned in as beautiful condition, and as frisky as young 
kids. Nothing but diet, Mrs. St. Felix." 

"■ I should rather think it was no diet, doctor. Well, I do de- 
clare, I'll tie up Jane for three weeks, and see if nothing but 
water will cure her complaints. — Well, Mr. Jack, why don't you 
take the tobacco to Ben ? " 

"Oh! he 'sin at supper now; there's no hurry," replied I; 
" and I like to hear you talk." 

" Well, there '11 be less scandal in your remaining to hear us 
than there would be if we sent you away, any how. How 's little 
Miss Virginia, sister to Poor Jack." 

" She 's quite well, and wants to come and see you ; only mother 
won't let her." 

" Many thanks to your sister for her compliment ; and not for- 
getting your mother for hers, also. So your mother has given up 
1 making tay on reasonable terms ' ? " 

" 'Cause people wouldn't come." 

" And that is a sufficient reason, even if she had not another; 
which is, that she 's never out of hot water, without boiling more. 



POOR JACK. 



71 



Doctor, you 're as mute as a fish. You told me how to cure Jane 
and the dogs ; now tell me what 's the dose for a cat and a 
kitten ? " 

u A ha'p'orth of liver, cut into small pieces." 

" There '11 be no difficulty in getting that down their throats, 
any how." 

<•' Talking about liver, Mrs. St. Felix, I once knew a friend of 
mine who cured some geese of a liver complaint." 

" Had they been long in the East Indies, poor creatures ? " 

" Xo, but they had been in a very hot climate. You see, he was 
over in France during the last peace, and he went to the baths at 
Montpellier for the benefit of his health. He lodged with an old 
Frenchman. Now, you see, Mrs. St. Felix, in the south of France 
they have a custom of making certain pies, which are much es- 
teemed, and are called pates de foie gras, — that means livers of 
geese, in French." 

" It don't sound much like livers in English, doctor ; but never 
mind that, go on with your story." 

" Here's a customer, Mrs. St. Felix ; serve him first, and then 
I will go on with my story." 

An old pensioner came in, and laying the coppers on the counter, 
asked for a ha'p'orth of returns, and a farthing of snuff. 

" That's a large ready money order, doctor," said the widow, as 
the man left the shop. " Ain't I making my fortune? Now go 
on ; I'm as eager about the liver as my own cat." 

" Well, the great object is to increase the size of the geese's 
livers, that is, to bring on a regular liver complaint ; and, to effect 
this, they put the poor animals in a hot closet, next the kitchen 
fire, _ cram the food into their mouths through a funnel, and give 
them plenty of ^vater to drink. This produces the disease ; and 
the livers of the geese, when they are killed, very often weigh 
three or four pounds, while the animals themselves are mere ske- 
letons." 

" And the French eat those liver complaints ? " interrupted the 
widow, making a face. 

" Yes, they do, and are as fond of it as my boy Tom is of liquo- 

f 4 



7 l 2 took jack. 

rice. Well, this doctor, who is a friend of mine, quarrelled with 
his host, who boasted of his geese having the largest livers in Mont- 
pellier, and was very proud of it. My friend knew that he could not 
annoy him more than by preventing his success : so. having a large 
quantity of Cheltenham salts with him, he used every morning to 
put a quantity of them in the water which the geese were given to 
drink. This had the same effect upon them as it has upon men 
and women ; and. instead of becoming more diseased every day, 
the geese recovered their health and spirits. The Frenchman 
crammed and crammed, made his closet still hotter, and sacre- 
bleu'd, and actually tore his hair, because his geese would be well 
and hearty ; but, the more he tried to make them ill, the more salts 
were given to them by the doctor, who gained his point and his 
revenge." 

< ; Well, that's a funny story, doctor; and, since you know how 
to cure it, the first time I meet with a sick goose, I '11 send him to 
you." 

" Manv thanks ; but, as it is, there's plenty of gee^e to send for 
the doctor." 

(i That's true enough ; and now Master Jack, you 've had quite 
enough for your penny, and I won't allow Ben to be kept waiting 
any longer." 

< f You are not going to tell any more stories, doctor ?'* said I. 
" "W 'hy, you mud-larking vagabond, you don't mean to say that 
I Ve told stories ? Be off with you ! And, I say, as you pass 
round the corner, just tell Tom that I 'in coming home directly." 

« Won't that be a story, doctor?'' said I, as I went out of the 
door. I heard them both laugh, but I did not hear what they 
said. 



POOR JACK. 



73 



CHAP. XII. 

I PREFER A SUIT TO OLD NANNY, AND PROCURE A NEW SUIT OF CLOTHES. 

THE ADVANTAGE OF BEING WELL DRESSED YOU MAY WALK OUT 

WITH THE LADIES. 

The reader must not give me too much credit, when I tell him 
that, ever since I had been under the tuition of Peter Anderson, I 
had quite a craving to go to church. Although what I had gained 
from his precepts and explanations had increased my desire, still 
I must acknowledge that the strongest reason for my being so 
anxious was, that my mother would not take me, and did take 
Virginia. Further, mv curiositv was excited by mv absolute 
ignorance of what the church service consisted ; I had heard the 
bells toll, and, as I sauntered by, would stop and listen to the 
organ and the singing. I would sometimes wait, and see the 
people coming out; and then I could not help comparing my 
ragged dress with their clean and gay attire. 

This wish continually worried me ; but the more I reflected, the 
more impossible it appeared to be that I should be able to gratify 
it. How could I possibly go to church in my tattered and dirty 
clothes — and what chance had I of getting others? I certainly 
gained. at an average, eighteenpence per week, but I saved nothing. 
Would my mother give me clothes? Xo, that I was sure she 
would not; for she grudged me even the little victuals which I did 
apply for. I thought this matter over and over as I lay in bed. 
Ben had no money. Anderson I could not ask for it. I thought 
that I would apply to Dr. Tadpole, but I was afraid. At last, it 
came into my head that I had better first ascertain how much 
monev I should require before I took further measures. The next 
morning I went to a fitting-out shop, and asked the lad who at- 
tended how much money I should have to pay for a pair of blue 
trowsers, waistcoat, and jacket. The lad told me that I might have 
a verv nice suit for twenty-two shillings. Twenty-two shillings ! 
What an enormous sum it appeared to me then ; and then there was 



74- POOR JACK. 

a straw hat to buy, and a pair of shoes and stockings. I inquired 
the price of these last articles, and found that my dress could not 
be made complete under thirty- three shillings. I was quite in 
despair, for the sum appeared to be a fortune. I sat down to cal- 
culate how long it would take me to save up so much money, at 
sixpence a week, which was all that I could afford; but, at that time, 
never having learnt any thing of figures, all I could make of it was, 
that it was so long a time as to be beyond my calculation. 

It was Saturday evening, — I sat down on the steps of the land- 
ing-place, very melancholy, thinking that to-morrow was Sunday, 
and abandoning all hopes of ever going to church, when a Thames 
fisherman, of the name of Freeman, who lived at Greenwich, and 
with whom I was acquainted — for I used to assist him on the 
Saturday night to moor his coble off the landing-place, and hang up 
his nets to dry — called out to me to come and help him. I did so ; 
we furled the sails, hauled on board his little boat for keeping the 
fish alive, hoisted the nets up to the mast, and made all secure ; 
and I was thinking to myself that he would go to church to-mor- 
row, and I could not, when he asked me why I was so sad. I told 
him. 

" Why, Jack," said he, " I can't help you, for it is bad times 
with me just now ; indeed, I could help you but little if times were 
ever so good ; I 've too many children of my own ; — but look ye, 
here 's a good long piece of four-inch, which I picked up, and it 's 
well worth a shilling. I'll give it you (for I do owe you some- 
thing), and do you take it to old Nanny. She 's a queer body ; 
but, suppose you try whether she '11 let you have the money. 
She can, if she chooses, and, as you have dealt with her so long, 
perhaps she will, if you promise to lay some by every week, and 
repay her." 

This idea had never occurred to me, for I knew old Nanny was 
very close, and drove very hard bargains with me; however, I 
thanked Freeman for his piece of rope and piece of advice, and 
when we landed, I determined, at all events, I would try. 

I have before mentioned old Nanny, who kept a marine store, 
and to whom I used to sell whatever I picked up on the beach. 



POOR JACK. 



75 



She was a strange old woman, and appeared to know every thing 
that was going on. How she gained her information, I cannot tell. 
She was very miserly in general ; but it was said she had done kind 
things in one or two instances. Nobody knew her history : all 
that any body knew was that she was Old Nanny. She had no kith 
or kin that she ever mentioned ; some people said she was rich, if 
the truth were known ; but how are we to get at the truth in this 

world ? 

I was soon at Old Nanny's store, with the piece of rope coiled 

over my arm. 

« Well, Jack, what have you got here ; a piece of good junk? 
no, it is not, for it is quite rotten. Why do you bring me such 
things ? What can I do with them? " 

"Why, mother," says I, "it 's new rope : not been used hardly ; 
it 's the very best of junk."' 

« Boy, boy ! do you pretend to teach me ? Well, what do you 

want for it ? " 

" I want a shilling," replied I. 

« A shilling ! " cried she, " where am I to find a shilling ? And 
if I could find one, why should I throw it away upon a thing not 
worth twopence, and which will only lumber my store till I die? 
The boy 's demented'/' 

* Mother," says I, ;i it 's worth a shilling, and you know it ; so 
give it to me, or I go elsewhere." 

" « And where will you go to, good-for-nothing that you are ? 
where will you go to ? 

" Oh ! the fishermen will give me more." 

« The fishermen will give you a couple of stale flat-fish, to take 
home to your mother." 

<• Well, 111 try that," said I, going. 

« Not so fast* Jack, not so fast ; if I make a penny by you one 
day, I suppose, to keep your custom, I must lose something by you 
the next. Now, I '11 give you sixpence : and how I 'm to get my 
money back, I don't know." 

« No, Nanny," said I, " I must have a shilling." 

« A shilling', you little cheat, I can't give it; but what do you 



76 POOR JACK. 

want? don't you want a key to your chest, or something of that 
sort ? " 

et I 've no chest, mother ; and therefore don't want a key." 

'•But you want something out of all the pretty things in my 
shop ; boys always fancy something." 

T laughed at the idea of " pretty things" in her shop; for it 
contained nothing but old iron, empty bottles, dirty rags and vials ; 
so I told her there was nothing that I wanted. 

" Well," says she, " sit down a little, and look about you ; 
there 's no hurry. So Mrs. East has got another boy, worse luck 
for the parish, with six children already ! — Look about you, and 
take your time. — Did you hear of Peter James giving his wife a 
black eye last night, because she wanted to get him out of the ale- 
house. I wonder who that letter was from that Susan Davis had 
from the post office. I think I could guess ; — poor girl ! she has 
looked rather peaking for some weeks. — Don't be in a hurry, 
Jack ; look about ; there 's plenty of pretty things in my shop. — 
So Davis the butcher has been pulled up for bad meat ; I thought 
it would come to that, and I 'in glad of it. — There 's a capital lock 
and key, Jack, to put to your chest, when you get one ; suppose 
you take that. — What 's the Doctor about ? They say he is always 
sitting with the widow. — Does your mother make plenty of 
money by clear-starching? I know your sister had a spotted 
muslin frock on last Sunday, and that must have cost something. 
— There ! s a spade, Jack ; very useful to dig on the beach ; you 
may find something — money perhaps, — who knows ? Take the 
spade, Jack, and then you '11 owe me sixpence. — So Bill Freeman 
pawned his wife's best gown last Saturday night. I thought it 
would be so. He may say it's because he's caught no fish this 
bad weather. But I know more than people think. — Here 's a 
nice glass bottle, Jack, wouldn't you like to give it to your mother, 
to put pickles in ; it 's white glass, you see. Look about, Jack ; 
there's plenty of pretty things, you see. — So the Governor's daugh- 
ter's going to be married ; at least I suppose so, for I met her riding 
with a young gentleman ; and now-a-days the quality always make 
love on horseback. —Well, Jack, have you found any thing ?" 



POOR JACK. 



77 



" No, mother, I hav'n't ; and 1 must have my shilling or go, 
Unless, indeed, you're inclined to help me to what I want, and 
then I'll give you the rope for nothing." 

" Give me the rope for nothing ! " replied old Nanny. " Sit 
down, Jack, and let me know what it is you want." 

I thought it was of little use to make the application, but I 
determined to try ; so I explained my wishes. 

;; Humph!" said she. after a minute's thought, '-'so you want 
thirty-three shillings to buy clothes — to go to church in. Your 
mother dresses your sister in spotted muslin, and leaves you in 
rags ; — suppose you wait till your father comes home again ? " 
" That may not be for years." 

" Why, Jack. I don't go to church — I am too old — too poor 
to dress myself to go to church, even if I could go so far, — why 
should you go ? " 

( - Well, mother," said I, rising up, '-if you will not do it, I'm 
very sorry ; I would have paid you honestly, and have given you 
good bargains, so good bye." 

• 4 Not so fast, Jack, — sit down, sit down, boy, — look about the 
shop and see if you can find something that will suit you." Here 
Nanny communed with herself aloud : — "Thirty-three shillings! 
that's a great deal of money, — pay me honestly, — and good bar- 
gains ! His mother called me an old cat the other day ; — I think 
they could begot cheaper, they always cheat boys; — she'd be 
vexed to see him dressed clean at church ; — honest boy, I do 
believe ; — r a boy that wants to go to church must be a good boy. 
— Oh, dear me, it is so much money !" 

" I'll work day and night to pay you, Nanny." 
" And mind, Jack, I'm to have good bargains, — and this piece 
of rope for nothing ; — something paid every week." 
" If I can earn it, mother, as sure as I sit here." 
" Well, the old cat will do more for you, Jack, than your 
mother would. You shall have the money ; but, Jack, I must 
bargain for the things." 

' f Thank you, Nanny, thank you ! " replied I, jumping off my 
seat with delight. 



78 POOR JACK. 

" Well, we can do nothing to-night, Jack. Come to me on 
Monday, and if I don't change my mind " 

" Change your mind ! " said I, sorrowfully. " I thought you 
had promised ! " 

"Well, so I did — and — and I'll keep my promise, Jack. 
Come on Monday, and as you can't go to church to-morrow, see 
if you can't piek up a little money." 

I did not neglect her injunctions, and was fortunate enough to 
be able to bring her sixpence on the Monday morning. Nanny 
went with me to the clothing shop, haggled and fought until she 
reduced the articles to twenty-eight shillings, and then they were 
ordered to be made and sent to her house. I earned but little 
money that week, and more than once Nanny ajDpeared to be very 
unhappy, and repent of her kind offices ; but when Sunday came 
she was very cheerful ; she washed me herself very carefully, and 
then put on my clothes. I cannot express the delight I felt at 
that moment ; when Nanny said to me, as she placed the hat on 
my head, — 

" Well, Jack, I wouldn't have thought that you were such a 
handsome boy as you are. Why, you may walk with your sister 
Virginia, and she will have nothing to be ashamed of, pretty as she 
is. There, now, go and show yourself; and, Jack, don't forget your 
promise to pay me back soon, and give me good bargains ! " 

I repeated my promise, and hastened to the Hospital to find 
Peter Anderson. He did not know me when I came up to him. 
I told him how and why I had got the clothes ; he patted my 
head, said I was a good lad, and that he would take me to the 
chapel at the Hospital, where I could sit with the school-children ; 
he could manage that. Then I met Ben and others, and they 
were all so surprised. I went to the chapel, and although I could 
not hear well what was said, for I was a long way off from the 
parson, and the old pensioners coughed so much, I was very much 
pleased, although a little tired before it was over. When the 
service was finished, I was proceeding to my mother's, when I met 
her and little Virginia coming home from the town church. 



POOR JACK. 



79 



"There's a nice little boy, Virginia," said my mother; 
" would'nt you like to walk with him?"' 

My mother did not know me, but Virginia did immediately ; 
she burst away from her mother and ran into my arms, laughing 
and crying as she clung to me, and then she cried out, — 

" Mother, yes, mother, I will walk with him ! " and she hastened 
me away with her, much to my mother's annoyance, who would 
have run after us to stop her, but she didn't think it genteel to 
go so fast ; so Virginia and I went off together, leaving my mother 
very angry indeed. We walked along towards the Hospital, 
Virginia crying out to every one she knew, her large hazel eyes 
beaming with delight, " Look, this is brother Jack ! " and I went 
with her to Peter Anderson and old Ben. I was so proud to 
have my sister with me ; and Peter Anderson said, — 

" This is as it should have been a long while ago." And then 
he continued, "Jack, you may happen not to earn any money in 
the week, and if so, come to me, for old Xanny must not be dis- 
appointed ; but, recollect, you must pay for your own clothes out 
of your own earnings." 

When it was dinner-time Virginia and I went home together. 
As we came to Fisher's Alley I said to her, i; Mother will be angry 
with you." 

" I can't help it, Jack,"' replied she ; " you are my own brother, 
and we are not doing wrong." 

When we went in, my mother looked hard at me, but, to my 
surprise, said nothing : she was sulky, but whether it was with 
Virginia or with me, or with my new clothes, or whether her con- 
science smote her for her neglect of me, I do not know. She jDut 
the dinner on the table in silence ; and after it was over, she went 
up stairs. Virginia and I did not neglect this opportunity ; she 
put on her bonnet, we slipped out, and walked about together till 
tea-time. When we came back, my mother seized my sister by 
the arm and carried her up to bed. Little Virginia made no re- 
sistance, but turned her head and smiled at me as she was led 
awav. I never felt so happy in my life as I did when I went to 
bed, and thought over the events of the day. 



80 POOR JACK. 



CHAP. XIII. 

I AM SO UNFASHIONABLE AS TO PAY MY DEBTS. BEN's OPINION AS TO 
MY FATHER'S RETURN. THE CHANCES EXEMPLIFIED IN THE LU>T OF 
KILLED AND WOUNDED. THE l'oRIENT BLOWING UP, AND THE ROYAL 
GEORGE GOING DOWN. 

Time passed ; and three years of it certainly were not unprofitably 
spent. Anderson had instructed me well. I could read, write, 
and cypher, and, what the reader will consider of more conse- 
quence, I was well acquainted with the Bible, and duly admonished 
by my preceptor of my duty towards God and man. Xor was my 
sister Virginia neglected : my mother, as soon as she was seven 
years old, sent her as day scholar to a young lady's seminary, 
where she was well taught, although the style of the school was 
much above my sister's situation in life; but my mother would not 
allow her to go any where else, although there were several schools 
more appropriate : she declared that Virginia should not mix with 
the vulgar ungenteel girls of the place; and that, if she had de- 
meaned herself by marrying below her rank, at all events her 
daughter should be brought up as she ought to be. The neigh- 
bours laughed at her, but my mother did not care ; she worked 
hard, and always was ready to pay the quarter's bill for schooling 
whenever it was due. 

To me, Sunday was a day of rejoicing; I was so glad to throw 
off my ragged apparel of Ci Poor Jack," and put on my best 
clothes, that I might walk with my sister ; for my mother gradually 
softened down her asperity (perhaps out of prudence), as she 
could raise no objection to Virginia walking with her brother when 
he was clean and well dressed, and Virginia was very firm in sup- 
porting me when I requested permission. Indeed, latterly, my re- 
quests were more like demanding a right than a favour, and my 
mother appeared to wish to avoid a contest with me. She knew 
that I was a good scholar, very independent of her, and very much 
liked : the favourable opinion of others induced her to treat me. 



POOR JACK. 81 

with more consideration ; but we had no regard for each other, — 
only preserving a sort of armed neutrality. 

There are grades in all classes of life ; and the young ladies' 
seminarv. to which Virginia went as a day scholar, had its distinc- 
tions of rank. The first in consequence among the young ladies 
were the two daughters of Mr. Tippet, the haberdasher; then 
came the hatter's daughter, Miss Beaver. The grades appeared to 
be as follows : manufactures held the first rank ; then dry goods, 
as the tea-dealers, grocers. &c ; the third class consisted of the 
daughters of the substantial butchers and pastrycooks. The 
squabbles between the young ladies about rank and precedence 
were continual ; what then must have been the position of poor 
little Virginia, whose mother was a clear-starcher and getter-up 
of fine linen ? At first they called her the washerwoman's daugh- 
ter, and would not associate with her. — which made her very un- 
comfortable ; and she used to tell me on the Sundays, when we 
walked out, how she had been treated during the week. But it 
was all for her advantage, and tended to correct the false pride 
and upstart ideas which in time must have been engendered by my 
mother's folly. Neither, after a few weeks, was my sister unhappy'; 
she was too meek in disposition to reply, so that she disarmed those 
who would assail her ; and being, as she was, of the lowest rank 
in the school, there could be no contest with the others as to pre- 
cedence. Her mildness, humility, and sweetness of temper soon 
won upon both the schoolmistress and the scholars ; eventually the 
Miss Tippets took Virginia under their protection ; and this mag- 
nanimity on their part silenced all opposition. My mother had 
desired my sister to take lessons in dancing. At first, the girls 
would not stand up with her ; but, when the elder Miss Tippet 
took her as a partner, my sister became quite the fashion, and, 
what was better, a great favourite and pet with every body ; and 
they all patronized her as * little Virginia." 

I very soon paid off my debt to old Nanny, without having to 
applv to Peter Anderson. I had assistance (but without asking 
for it) as follows: — The second Sunday after I had obtained my 
clothes, I called, with Virginia, upon the widow St. Felix. She 

o 



82 POOR JACK. 

was in the back parlour; and the Doctor, as usual, sitting with her. 
She received us very kindly, spoke a good deal to Virginia, and 
told me that I looked very handsome for " Poor Jack." 

" You'll be quite the fashion," continued she ; " and I pre- 
sume, like most fashionable gentlemen, your clothes are not paid 
for." 

I replied, laughing, that they were not ; but that they should be, 
if I lived, and could work. 

" I've heard the whole story from old Ben," replied she. 
" Come in to morrow, Jack ; I want to speak with you." 

I did so in the forenoon, when she put a five- shilling piece in 
my hand, and said, — " That's from me, to help you to pay your 
debt to old Nanny. But that's not all, Jack ; I've coaxed the 
Doctor (not that he required much coaxing, to do him justice), 
and here's two half-crowns from him, which, I believe, will go 
about as far as my five shillings. Now, Jack, you look very 
happy ; so, just out of gratitude, run as fast as you can, and make 
poor old Nanny happy, for she moans over her generous fit, and 
wonders all day long whether you will ever pay her again." 

I had listened all this while to Mrs. St. Felix ; but I was so 
moved by her kindness and generosity that I could not speak. I 
had received money for services performed, and I had obtained 
it from Nanny as a loan, to be repaid with interest; but so much 
money, as a gift, had never entered into my imagination. I could 
not restrain my feelings; I dropped my face on the counter, to 
conceal the tears which escaped. 

" I can't say ' thank you/ as I wish, indeed I can't," said I, as 
I looked up at her. 

" Why, you foolish boy, you have said thank you," replied 
the widow ; " and now run away, for I must leave the shop a 
minute." 

This assistance made me redouble my exertions, and in three 
months I had repaid the whole : the last portion which was due I 
received from Virginia. She knew how much I paid off every 
week ; and, when on Sunday I told her that I had only one and 
sixpence owing, she ran up-stairs, and, when she came down again, 



POOR JACK. S3 

put the sum into my hand. She had been saving up all she could 
coax out of my mother ever since I had first obtained the 
clothes ; and great, indeed, was her delight when she gave me 
the money, — she kissed me, and began to dance, although it 
was Sunday, and then she proposed that we should walk together 
to old Nanny's, and close the account. We found the old woman 
sitting on her steps ; the door was open, but the shop shutters 
were up. On the Saturday night I had paid her two shillings, so 
that she did not expect to see me. Virginia put the one and six- 
pence in her hand, saying, " Now brother has paid you all." 

" Yes, darling, he has," replied old Xanny ; i; but then he pro- 
mised " 

" I know I did," interrupted I ; if and I will keep my promise. 
I promised you good bargains." 

" You're an honest boy. Jack ; and, what's more strange, your 
sister isn't a spoiled girl ; but that's not her mother's fault. My 
dear, if it was not Sunday, you would be able to see all the pretty 
things in my shop, and perhaps you might like something. You 
must come another day." 

I thanked old Xanny once more for having trusted me, and then 
we left her. I did keep my word with her, and gave her good 
bargains for a long while afterwards. 

I often thought of my father, who had been absent now for 
nearly four years ; and, as the time advanced, I became more 
anxious to hear of him. I seldom met old Ben the whaler without 
talking about my father, and asking Ben what chance he thought 
there was of his return. 

" Why, you see, Jack," said Ben, ;i in these times, it's hard to 
say whether a man be alive or not. Every day we hear of some 
naval action or another, and therefore every day some must lose 
the number of their mess ; and then, you see, Jack, a man may be 
supposed to be dead for years, and after all turn up in some French 
prison or another ; and then ships change their station, and ships' 
companies their ships ; and then ships are sometimes wrecked, 
with all hands, or take fire, and are blown up. Many a good 
seaman lo?es his life by falling overboard in a gale, — and who 

g 2 



84 POOR JACK. 

knows or cares ? Whether your father be alive or be dead, 
Jack, it is impossible for me to say ; — but, howsomever, I hope 
he be." 

This was not a satisfactory, although a cautious reply, and I 
never could get Ben to give any other. I began to think that 
one of the mischances enumerated in Ben's catalogue might have 
occurred, and that I never should see my father again ; when one 
morning, as I was standing at the landing place, Ben came up to 
me and said, "Now, Jack, perhaps we may hear something of 
your father. Here's been a famous action fought, and a matter of a 
thousand men killed and wounded. I've only just heard about it — 
Nelson has licked the French on the coast of Egypt (Ben here 
referred to the battle of the Nile) ; and the Oudacious, the ship on 
board of which your father was boatswain's mate, was in the action. 
Now you see the names of the killed will be sent into the office 
here, that their relations may receive the pay and prize-money due 
to them ; — so now, Jack, perhaps, you'll hear something about 
your father." 

" But I shall only hear of his being killed, by your account ; I 
don't want to hear that." 

" No, bov, of course you don't ; but if you do, you'll hear the 
worst of it, and that's some comfort ; and if he ar'n't killed, why, 
perhaps he's wounded, and perhaps he ar'n't ; all perhapses in this 
world. Howsomever, come with me. I saw Anderson, with a 
paper in his hand, walking up to his retreat, as he calls it ; so let's 
make all sail after him, and we shall overhaul him before he 
begins to read it. 

There is a small hill just inside of the Greenwich Park Gates, 
commanding a beautiful view of the river and the Hospital. Here 
Anderson was accustomed to repair when the weather was fine, 
that, as he told me, he might commune with himself. In this in- 
stance he had retired there to avoid the excitement and confusion 
which prevailed; he had, however, been accompanied by three 
other pensioners, whom we found on the hill when we arrived ; 
and, before we had been there a minute, the pensioners had fol- 
lowed up so fast that there was quite a crowd. We were just 



POOR JACK. 



85 



in time to hear him commence reading the newspaper account. 
The wind was very high ; old Anderson had taken off his hat, 
(out of respect, I presume, for the service,) and his long grey 
locks were swept by the wind, which, indeed, carried away his 
voice, so that it was with difficulty that I could hear what he 
said. " Second Edition. Glorious news ! We have the felicity 
to inform our readers, that, by despatches received at the Ad- 
miralty this day, a splendid naval victory has been gained over 
the French fleet lying in Aboukir Bay, by Rear-Admiral Sir 
Horatio Nelson and the gallant seamen under his command. 
We refer our readers to the despatch of Sir Horatio Nelson 
for the details: we have only to say, in few words, that the 
French fleet of thirteen sail of the line and four frigates were, 
on the 1st of August last, when lying at anchor in Aboukir 
Bay, attacked by the English fleet of twelve sail of the line and 
one fifty-gun ship, and after a severe action, eleven sail of the 
line and two frigates belonging to the French were taken or burnt. 
The loss on our side amounts to two hundred and eighteen killed, 
and six hundred and seventy-seven wounded." 

" Hurrah ! three cheers, my lads ;" cried Anderson, dropping 
the hand which held the newspaper, and raising the other with his 
hat in it above his head. The three hearty cheers were given by 
the crowd which had now assembled ; and then Ben said to me, — 

" You see, Jack, there's a lot of killed and wounded ; so now, 
perhaps, you will hear something about your father." 

By this time I had been pushed back, first by one, and then 
by another, until I was a long way off from where Anderson stood. 

" I can't hear a word that Peter says," replied I to Ben. 

" No, because the wind's so high ; and I myself am a little hard 
of hearing out of doors ; suppose we go now, and by and by you 
shall get the paper from Anderson, and read it all over to me." 

« Come away, Ben," replied I, impatiently, " I've got a shilling, 
and I'll buy one." 

We left the hill, and went down into the town, directing our 
course to where we heard the horns blowing. I had not, however, 
to go to such an extraordinary expense, as " a full and particular 

g 3 



86 POOR JACK. 

account" had been struck off for twopence : one of these I purchased, 
and then Ben and I sat down on the bench outside of a public 
house, and I commenced reading. 

" How good that porter looks ! " observed Ben, after a pause, as 
he eyed a man near to him who was^blowing off the froth from the 
top of the pot he held in his hand. 

" Well, Ben, as I have bought the account of the battle for two- 
pence, suppose I spend the rest of the money I intended to pay 
for it in a pot of porter, to drink the health of Nelson ? " 

"Ay, my boy, and of those who fought with him," replied 
Ben, " your own father, Jack, whether he be dead or alive." 

I sighed at the idea of my father being dead ; for I had a 
great regard for him, although I had not seen much of him. The 
porter was brought ; and, after we had both drunk, I recommenced 
reading. Having concluded Admiral Nelson's despatch, and the 
list of the ships taken, we then came to the loss in killed and 
wounded on board of the respective English ships. 

"Vanguard — thirty killed, seventy-five wounded; total, a hun- 
dred and five." 

" Yes, Jack, that was Nelson's own ship ; and he is always to be 
found where the shot fly thickest." 

" Bellerophon — forty-nine killed, a hundred and forty-eight 
wounded ; total, a hundred and ninety-seven." 

" Well ! she was in the thick of it, any how," observed Ben. 

" Majestic — fifty killed, a hundred and forty-three wounded ; 
total, a hundred and ninety-three." 

" Why, she and the Bellyruffron seem to have pretty well shared 
and shared alike. You see, Jack, they led into the action, and 
had all the cream of the fire." 

I went on reading and Ben remarking, until I came to the 
Audacious. 

" Audacious — one killed, and thirty-five wounded ; total, 
thirty-six." 

" Well now, Jack, that's all in favour of your father being alive ; 
'cause why should he be the one killed, more than any one else ? 
I'd bet two pots of beer that he's among the wounded — but its 



FOOR JACK. 



87 



impossible to say ; for you see, Jack, although they give us the 
names of the officers killed and wounded, they always lump the 
petty officers and common seamen. Well ! here's to your father's 
health, Jack, anyhow — we shall soon hear something about him." 
" I hope so ;" replied I, folding up the paper. 
" And now, Jack," continued Ben, handing me the pot, " don't 
you feel how proud a thing it is to know how to read. Here I 
am, you see, old enough almost to be your grandfather, and don't 
I look like a helpless tabby beside you; — you can inform me 
of what is going on, but I cannot help myself. Don't I feel, as I 
sit here, as if you were the man, and I were the boy ; indeed I do, 
Jack, and no mistake ; — but, arter all, there was no one to blame 
in my case ; that's some comfort" 

I certainly did acknowledge to myself how much I had gained 
by the tuition of Peter Anderson, and what advantage it was to 
me that I had been instructed ; and I could not help, for a moment, 
feeling that I had the advantage over my good friend Ben. 

According to the usual custom on the occasion of a great vic- 
tory, the pensioners had, on the following day, what was called a 
holyday ; that is, a day of rejoicing, on which they were supplied 
with an extra quantity of beer, to make merry with. On these 
occasions, the rules of the Hospital, with respect to sobriety, are, of 
course, not strictly observed. Most of those who prefer smoking 
collect in what is called the smoking room, where they sit and 
enjoy themselves; but very often, as there is so much noise on 
these occasions, those who belong to the same ward collect toge- 
ther, club for some spirits to add to their extra allowance, and sit 
by the fire, which is in the corridor of the ward. The fireplace 
is generally a very large one, and surrounded by benches with high 
backs, to serve as screens against the cold and wind ; and, as there 
are tables inside, you are very snug and comfortable. On this oc- 
casion, many of the Warriors Ward, of which Anderson was 
boatswain, and Ben one of the boatswain's mates, had repaired to 
their own fire, for it was now October, and very chilly after the 
sun went down. 

Ben, I suppose, in return for the pot of porter which I had 

G 4 



88 POOR JACK. 

given him, invited me to be of the party ; they drank the health of 
Nelson, and talked about the different ships which were in the 
action. Some drank very fast, and then reeled off to their beds, 
which were close at hand ; others were taken to bed by Peter 
Anderson and Ben ; and, at last, there were but four or five left. 
One of these was the other boatswain's mate of the ward ; I knew 
very little of him at that time, except that his name was James 
Turner. He was a very quiet well-behaved man, and seemed to 
be more fond of sitting or walking alone than of being in com- 
pany ; never was known to drink too much ; and, indeed, as boat- 
swain's mate, was more relied upon by Anderson than even Ben was 
— although, perhaps, Ben was his more constant companion. The 
conversation relative to the particulars of the battle of the Nile 
was resumed ; and Anderson observed, — 

" What an awful sight it must have been to behold the blowing 
up of the L'Orient French three-decker, with upwards of a 
thousand men on board ! Merciful Heaven I so many poor fellows 
launched into eternity in one moment ! They say there were but 
seventy-three saved." 

" There were nearly as many souls lost when the Royal George 
went down at Spithead, with all the fleet at anchor round about 
her," replied Ben ; " were there not, Turner, for you were on 
board of her ? " 

" Yes, I should think there were," replied Turner ; " but it is 
impossible to say how many people were on board at the time." 

" Messmate," said Anderson ; " as all the noisy ones are gone, 
and we shall be able to hear you, suppose that you let us know all 
about it ? I have heard a good deal, but, I suspect, not the rights 
of it." 

" With all my heart," replied Turner. " It was a sad affair ; 
and was all owing to the pride of an officer, who was not much of 
a sailor, at all events." 

I drew nearer, that I might not lose a word of what Turner 
said ; and then he narrated, in the following words, 






, 




POOR JACK. 89 



THE LOSS OF THE ROYAL GEORGE. 

" Well, messmates, the Royal George was a hundred-gun ship ; 
and, what we don't often see now, when I first belonged to her, her 
guns were all brass. We had "brass twenty-four pounders on our 
quarter-deck, forecastle, poop, and main deck, brass thirty-twos 
on our middle deck, and brass forty-two pounders on our lower 
deck. In the spring of '82, when we were at Plymouth (about six 
months before she sunk), it was considered that the brass forty- 
twos on the lower deck were too heavy for her, and so they were 
put on shore, and we had iron thirty-twos instead. I don t think, 
myself, it made much difference in the weight of metal, and we 
were sorry to part with them. We were a flag-ship, you know, — 
old Kempenfelt carrying his blue at the mizen, — and our poop 
lanthorns were so large that the men used to get inside of them to 
clean them. She was rather a top-heavy sort of ship, in my opinion, 
her upper works were so high, — why, we measured sixty-six feet 
from the keelson up to the taffrail ; but still, with proper attention, 
there was nothing to fear on that score. ( 

" Well, it was on the 29th of August, '82, — that's just fourteen 
years and about six weeks ago, — that we were lying at Spithead, 
in company with Lord Howe's fleet of between twenty and thirty 
sail of the line : there was the Victory, Barfleur, Ocean, and 
Union, all three-deckers, I recollect, close to us. We were in good 
repair, not at all leaky, and were to have sailed in two days to join 
the fleet in the Mediterranean. We had been paid, in consequence 
of our being about to sail foreign ; and we had been paid in golden 
guineas. I think that, could all the money be collected together, 
from the pockets of the seamen, the women, and the Jews, who 
went down in the ship, it would be a very pretty fortune even for 
a duke's daughter." 

Here Ben shoved the ale to Turner, who drank a little and 
proceeded ; while Ben took a swig and passed it round. 

•'« Well, you see, messmates, the first lieutenant had been washing 
the decks on the morning before, and the carpenter had been 



90 POOK JACK. 

ordered to let the water in, when it was found that the water-cock 
which was about three feet below the water line, was out of order, 
and it was necessary that it should be repaired. The foreman came 
off from the dock-yard, and stated that it was necessary that the 
ship should be careened over to port, sufficiently to raise the mouth 
of the pipe — which went through the ship's timbers below — clean 
out of the water, that they might work at it ; so, between seven and 
eight o'clock on that morning, the whole of the larboard guns were 
run out as far as they could be, and of course the larboard lower 
deck ports were open; the starboard guns were also run in amidships, 
and secured by the tackles : the shifting over of this great weight 
of metal brought the larboard lower deck port cilia just level 
with the water ; the men were then able to get at the mouth 
of the pipe to the water-cock on the starboard side, as it was 
clean out of water, and for about an hour they were working away 
hard at it. 

« It was about nine o'clock, we had just finished our break- 
fasts, and the hands had been turned up, when the last lighter, 
with the rum on board, came alongside. She was a sloop of fifty 
tons, called the Lark, and belonged to three brothers, whose names 
I forget. She was secured to the larboard side of the ship ; and 
the hands were piped < clear lighter.' Some of our men were in 
the lighter slinging the casks ; others at the yard tackle and stay- 
falls hoisting in ; some in the spirit room stowing away. I was in 
the waist, bearing the casks over, down the hatchway ; — none of 
us thinking that we should never mix our grog out of that 
liquor." 

« No, I suppose not," observed Anderson ; u but we little know 
what the day may bring forth." 

" That 's true as gospel," said Ben. 

" It's a very old saying, that every little helps : I did not think 
of it at the time ; but, you see, as we were clearing the lighter, 
almost all the men were on the larboard side, and that must have 
brought the ship down still more to port. Then, again, the water 
was not so smooth as it was when we first careened her, and it began 
to wash into the lower deck ports, and of course had no escape, so 



POOR JACK. 



91 



that there was very soon a good weight of water in the lower deck. 
There were mice in the ship ; and they were disturbed by the water 
entering into their quarters, and the men were catching tnem, 
and laughing as they swam about, little thinking that it was to be 
a general swim so shortly afterwards. But the carpenter was the 
first that perceived that there was danger; for again, you see, the 
casks of rum, hoisted in, and lying on the decks on the larboard 
side, before it could be lowered into the hold, made also a dif- 
ference ; and so the carpenter went on the deck to the lieutenant, 
who was officer of the watch, requesting that he would be pleased 
to order the ship to be righted somewhat, as she could not bear it ; 
but the lieutenant gave a very short answer to the carpenter, 
who then went down below." 

" Who was the lieutenant on deck?" inquired Anderson. 
" I don't recollect his right name ; he was, I think, the third 
lieutenant : he went by the name of ' Jib and Foresail Jack ;' for, 
whenever he had the watch, he did nothing but up jib, and down 
jib, up foresail, down foresail, every five minutes, always worry- 
ing the men for nothing. He was not considered as a good 
officer, but a very troublesome one : he had a knack of twisting 
and moving his fingers about as he walked the deck; and the 
men were wont to say that ' he must have been a forty piany 
teacher.' " 

" And where were the captain and first lieutenant ? " said 
Anderson. 

« The first lieutenant was, at the time, busy in the wing?, I 
believe ; and as for the captain, I don't know where he was ; but 
you know a captain seldom interferes in harbour." 
c< Where was the admiral?" inquired Ben. 

" The admiral was in his cabin. I saw the barber, who had been 
in to shave him, come out just before she went clown." 
" What sort of man was the admiral ? " said Anderson. 
'« He was a thin tall man, upwards of seventy years of age, and 
he stooped a good deal in his walk." 

'•' Whet your whistle, Jem," said Ben, " for this is a long yarn." 
" Well." continued Turner, as soon as he had put down the pot, 



92 POOR JACK. 

" the carpenter came up a second time on the quarter-deck to the 
lieutenant, and said to him, — 

" ' If you please, sir, to right the ship : it's my duty to tell you 
she will not bear it any longer.' He spoke in a very positive way, 
as was his duty ; but the lieutenant answered, with an oath, — 

" 'If you, think, sir, that you can manage the ship better than 
I can, you had better take the command.' I was in the waist at 
the time, with a good many more men, and we heard what the 
carpenter said, and what answer the lieutenant gave. Indeed, we 
were all aware of the danger, and felt very uncomfortable : there 
were plenty of good seamen on board, who knew what they were 
about, almost as well as the officers, and certainly better than the 
one who had the watch. 

" A few minutes afterwards (whether it was that he had re- 
mained that time doing nothing, merely because he would not be 
dictated to by the carpenter, I know not), the lieutenant ordered the 
drummer to be called to beat to quarters, that the guns might be 
run into their places, and the ship righted. The drummer's name 
was passed along quick enough, for we were all alarmed at our 
situation ; for the ship just then heeled over still more. I jumped 
down off the gangway as soon as the drummer was called, and 
hastened down to my quarters. The drum was not beat, for the 
man had not time to get his drum. All hands were now tumbling 
down the hatchways as fast as they could to their quarters, that 
they might run their guns into their places, and so right the 
ship. The gun I was stationed at was the third gun from forward 
on the starboard side of the lower gun-deck. I said to Carroll, 
the second captain of the gun, 'I say, let us try to get our gun 
out without waiting for the drum, as the sooner we right the 
better.' We boused out our gun, which had been run in amid- 
ships ; but the ship heeled over so much that, do all we could, it 
ran in again upon us, and at the same time the water made a heavy 
rush into the larboard lower deck ports. « The ship is sinking, 
Carroll!' cried I; ' lay hold of the ring-bolt and jump out; 
we shall all be drowned ! ' He made for the ring-bolt, caught 
it, climbed out of the port, and jumped into the sea. I presume 



POOR JACK. 



93 



be was drowned, for I never saw him afterwards. I followed him 
as fast as I could out of the same port, which was the one belong- 
ing to our gun (the third from forward on the starboard side); and 
when I was outside, I perceived that all the other port-holes were 
crowded as full as they could be with the heads of the men, all 
trying to escape, and jamming one another so that they could 
scarcely move either one way or the other. I caught hold of the 
sheet anchor, which was just above me, to prevent falling back in 
board ; and,, perceiving a woman struggling at the port, I caught 
hold of her, dragged her out, and threw her from me. The ship 
was now lying down so completely on her larboard broadside, that 
the heads of the men in the ports disappeared all at once ; they all 
dropped back into the ship, for the port-holes were now upright ; 
and it was just as if men were trying to get out of the tops of so 
many chimneys, with nothing for their feet to purchase upon. 
Just after the men fell in board, there came a rush of air through 
the ports, so violent as to blow my hat off. It was the air from 
the hold and lower deck, which having no other vent, escaped, as 
the water which poured in took up its space. The ship then sunk 
in a moment, righting as she went down. I was a good swimmer 
and diver, and when she was sinking I attempted to keep above 
water ; but it was impossible : I was drawn down with the ship 
until she reached the bottom. As soon as she grounded, the water 
boiled and bubbled a great deal, and then I found that I could 
swim, and began to rise to the surface. A man tried to grapple 
me as I went up ; his fore-fingers caught in my shoe, between the 
shoe and my foot. I succeeded in kicking off my shoe, and thus 
got rid of him ; and then I rose to the surface of the water." 

" Take breath after that, Jem," said Ben, handing him the 
ale. 

" I can tell vou that I could hardly take breath when I came to 
the surface, for my head came up through a quantity of tar, which 
floated like fat on a boiler, and it nearly smothered me ; for you 
see, there had been one or two casks of tar on the decks, which 
had stove when the ship was going down, and the tar got up to 
the top of the water before I did. It prevented me from seeing 



04- POOR JACK. 

at first, but I heard the guns firing as signals of distress." Here 
Turner drank some ale. 

" Well," said he, after a short pause, " I may as well finish 
my story. As soon as I could clear the tar from my eyes, I saw 
the main topsail halyard block about level with the water's edge, 
about eight or ten yards from me ; so I swam to it and rode on it, 
holding on by the halyards, and then I looked about me. The 
fore, main, and mizen tops were all above water, as was a part of 
the bowsprit, and also part of the ensign-staff, with the flag 
hoisted, — for you see, messmates, we went down in only thirteen 
and a half fathom water, that is, about eighty feet; and, as I 
said before, she measured sixty-six feet from the keelson up to the 
taffrail ; and she grounded as nearly upright as a vessel could ; for 
the lighter, which was fast to leeward when she went down, caught 
the main yard, which helped to right her as she sank, — but the 
lighter went clown with her. Well, as I looked round, I saw the 
admiral's baker in the mizen shrouds, and there was the body of 
the woman I had dragged out of the port rolling about close to 
him. The baker was an Irishman, of the name of Claridge ; and I 
called out to him, ' Bob, reach out your hand and catch hold of 
that woman, I dare say she is not dead.' 

" He said, ' She's dead enough ; it's of no use to lay hold of her.' 
" I answered, < She is not dead/ He caught hold of the woman 
and hung her head over one of the rattlings of the mizen shrouds, 
and there she swung by her chin till a wash came and lifted her 
off, and then she rolled about again. Just then, one of the cap- 
tains of the frigates came up in his boat. I waved my hand 
towards the woman, — he stopped pulling, the men dragged her 
into the boat, and laid her in the stern sheets. 

" ' My man/ said the captain, i I must pick up those who are in 
more danger than you/ 

" ' All right, sir,' said I ; f I'm safe moored here.' 
" There was one of our men hanging on the main-stay, and roar- 
ing like a bull, as he tried to climb by it out of the water. Had 
he only remained quiet, he would have done well enough. The 
boat took him off first, and then others of the people who were 



POOR JACK. 95 

clinging about the masts and rigging, including the baker and 
myself. It then pulled on board the Victory with us ; and I once 
more found a good dry plank between me and the salt water." 

" Was the captain and admiral saved ? " 

" Captain Waghorn was: he could not swim; but one of the 
seamen held him up. The admiral was drowned in his cabin. 
Captain Waghorn tried to acquaint him that the ship was sinking ; 
but the heeling over of the ship had so jammed the doors of the 
cabin, that they could not be opened." 

iC What became of the lieutenant of the watch and the car- 
penter ?" 

" The lieutenant of the watch was drowned — and so indeed was 
the carpenter : his body was taken up, I believe, by the same boat 
which picked up Lieutenant Durham.* When I went on board 
of the Victory, I saw the carpenter's body before the galley fire 
— some women were attempting to recover hiin, but he was quite 
dead. There was a strong westerly breeze, although the day was 
fine ; and the wind made the water so rough, that there was great 
danger of the boats getting entangled in the rigging and spars, when 
they came to take the men off, or more would have been saved.'* 

fi How many do you think were lost altogether ? " inquired 
Anderson. 

" W T e had our whole complement on board, eight hundred and 
sixty-five men ; and there were more than three hundred women 
on board, besides a great many Jews with slops and watches ; as 
there always are, you know, when a ship is paid, and the men have 
any money to be swindled out of. I don't exactly know how 
many men were saved, but there was only one woman, which was 
the one I dragged out of the port. There was a great fat old bum- 
boat woman, whom the sailors used to call the "Royal George," — 
she was picked up floating, for she was too fat to sink; but she had 
been floating the wrong way uppermost, and she was dead. There 
was a poor little child saved rather strangely. He was picked up 
by a gentleman who was in a wherry, holding on to the wool of a 

* New Admiral Sir Philip Durham, 



96 POOR JACK. 

sheep which had escaped and was swimming. His father and 
mother were drowned, and the boy did not know their names ; all 
that he knew was, that his own name was Jack ; so they christened 
him John Lamb, and the gentleman took care of him." 

" Have you no idea how many men were saved, Turner ? " 

" I only know this,— that the Admiralty ordered five pounds a 
man to be given to the seamen who were saved, as a recompense 
for the loss of their clothes, and I heard that only seventy-five 
claimed it; but how many marines were saved, or other people 
Mho were on board, I do not know ; but perhaps, altogether, there 
might be two hundred or more, — for you see the seamen had the 
worst chance of being saved, as they were almost all down in the 
hold, or on the lower and main decks at their guns. A few days 
after the ship went down the bodies would come up, eight or ten 
almost the same time — rising to the top of the water so suddenly 
as to frighten people who were passing near. The watermen made 
a good thing of it ; for, as the bodies rose, they took from them 
their shoe-buckles, money, and watches, and then towed them on 
shore to be buried." 

" That lieutenant had much to answer for," observed Ben : 
" his false pride was the cause of it all." 

" It would seem so, — but God only knows," replied Anderson. 
" Come, my lads, the beer is out, and it's two bells in the middle 
watch. I think we had better turn in. Jack, what's to become of 
you ? 

« Oh ! I'll find a plank," said I. 

" So you shall, boy, and a bed upon it," replied Ben ; " come 
and turn in with me, and don't you dream that the larboard lower 
deck ports are open." 



. 




JACK'S FATHER LANDING AFTER THE BATTLE OF THE NILE. 



poor jack. 97 



CHAP. XIV. 

&IY FATHER MAKES HIS APPEARANCE, HAVING LEFT HIS LEG, BUT NOT 
HIS TAIL, BEHIND HIM. — MY FATHER IS PENSIONED OFF BY MY 
MOTHER AS WELL AS BY HIS COUNTRY. 

About six weeks after the intelligence of the battle of the Nile, as 
I was sweeping away from the steps the mud which had been left 
by the tide, a King's Tender that I had been watching as she came 
up the river, dropped her anchor in the stream, abreast of the 
Hospital. 

Shortly afterwards, the lieutenant who commanded her pulled on 
shore in his boat ; and landing at the steps, proceeded to the 
governor's house. The men having orders not to leave the boat, 
requested me to procure them some porter, which I did ; and on my 
return with it, they informed me that they had come round from 
Portsmouth with sixty-three men, who had lost their limbs, or had 
been otherwise so severely wounded in the late action, as to have 
been recommended for Greenwich. 

I felt very anxious for the men to land, as it was possible that my 
father might be one of them. The lieutenant soon returned, 
jumped into the boat, and shoved off. I perceived that the disabled 
men were getting ready to land, hauling their chests and kits on 
deck. In about half an hour, a boat full of them came to the 
steps. I ran down to assist ; and as I held on to the gunnel of 
the boat, while they threw out their gang-board, the first person 
who stumped out was my father, minus his left leg. 

" Father !" cried I, half sorry and half pleased. 

" Who calls me father ? " replied he, looking at me. ' : Why, 
you don't mean to say that you're my boy Tom ? " 

" Yes, indeed ! " said I. 

"Ah! yes — I recollect your smile now. Why, what a big 
fellow you've grown !" 

" It's four years since you left, father." 

u Well ! I suppose it is. since you say so," replied he y taking 

H 



98 TOO 11 JACK. 

me by the arm, and stumping a little of one side, when he said 
in a low tone, " I say, Jack, what became of the old woman ? 
Did I settle her?" 

(C Oh ! no," replied I, laughing, " she was only shamming." 

" Shamming, was she ? Well ! it's all the better, — for she has 
been a little on my conscience, that's truth. Shamming ? Heh ! 
She won't sham next time, if I fall foul of her. How does she 
get on ?" 

" Oh ! very well indeed/' 

" And how's your little sister? What's her name — Jenny 
lengthened at both ends ? I never could recollect it, though I've 
often thought of her sweet little face." 

" She's quite well, and as pretty and as good as ever." 

" Well ! Tom my boy, you stood by your father when he was in 
trouble, and now he'll stand by you. How does your mother 
treat you?" 

" We get on pretty well — not over fond of each other." 

"Well, Tom, I've only one pin left; but I say," continued my 
father, with a wink of his eye, " I hav'n't left my tail behind me, 
'cause it may be useful you know. Now we must all go up to the 
governor of the Hospital for inspection, and I suppose we shall be 
kept for some time — so you may run home and tell your mother 
that I've come back in a perfect good humour, and that it will be 
her fault if she puts me out — that's all." 

" I will, father ; and then I'll come to you at the Hospital." 

I ran home to communicate the important intelligence to my 
mother and to Virginia, who had as usual come from school for her 
dinner. 

" Mother," says I out of breath, " who do you think has come 
back?" 

" Come back?" said she. Back? Not your father ? " 

" Yes," savs I, ei my father. I just left him." 

My mother turned deadly pale, and dropped the hot iron from 
her hand, so as to spoil a frilled night-cap belonging to one of her 
lady customers. She staggered to a chair, and trembled all over. 
I really believe that had she been aware of his being about to 



POOR JACK. 99 

return, she would have quitted Greenwich before his arrival ; but 
now it was too late. Virginia had run for the salts, as soon as she 
perceived that her mother was unwell, and as she smelt them she 
gradually recovered. At last she inquired how my father looked, 
and what he said. 

I told her that he had lost his leg, and had been sent as a pen- 
sioner to the Hospital ; that he had looked very well, and that 
he had told me to say that, " he was in a perfect good humour, 
and it would be her fault if she put him out of it ; and that if 
she did " 

" Well, what then?" inquired my mother. 

" Oh ! the tail, — that's all." 

At the mention of the tail, my mother very nearly went off in a 
swoon — her head fell back, and I heard her mutter, u So vulgar ! 
so ungenteel ! " However, she recovered herself, and appeared to 
be for some time in deep thought. At last she rose up, ordered 
me to fetch something extra for supper, and recommenced her 
ironing. 

As soon as I had executed her commission, I went to the 
Hospital where I found my father, who with the other men had 
just been dismissed. He accompanied me to my mother, shook 
hands with her very good-humouredly, kissed Virginia, whom he 
took on his knee, praised the supper, drank only one pot of porter, 
and then returned to the Hospital, to sleep in the cabin which had 
been allotted to him in the Warrior's ward, of which Anderson 
was the boatswain. My mother, although not very gracious, was 
much subdued, and for a few days everything went on very com- 
fortably ; but my mother's temper could not be long restrained. 
Displeased at something which she considered as very vulgar, she 
ventured to assail my father as before, concluding her tirade as 
usual, with " There — now you're vexed ! " 

My father looked at her very sternly — at last he said, et You're 
just right — I am vexed; and whenever you tell me so in future, 
I'll prove that it's no lie." He then rose, stumped up stairs to 
my room, in which he had deposited his sea-chest, and soon made 
his appearance with the formidable and never to be forgotten tail 

h 2 



100 POOR JACK. 

in his hand. " Mistress," said he, as my mother retreated, " you 
said, ' Now you're vexed/ to me just now. I ask you again, am I 
vexed, or am I not?" and my father nourished the tail over his 
head. 

My mother looked at the strange weapon, the remembrance oi 
the past was too painful ; she was conquered by her fear. 

" Oh, no ! " cried she, falling on her knees. " You're not 
vexed — indeed you are not." 

" You're quite sure of that ? " responded my father authorita- 
tively, as he advanced towards her. 

" Oh ! yes, yes," cried my mother, trembling; "indeed, you're 
not." 

iC A'n't I in a very good-humour?" continued my father. 
" Yes, vou are in the best of humouis, and always are so, unless 
— I aggravate you," replied my mother whimpering. 

" Well!" replied my father, lowering his tail ; " I expect we've 
come to a right understanding at last. So now get up and wipe 
your eyes : but recollect, that whenever you dare to tell me that 
I'm vexed, I won't be so ungenteel as to contradict you." 

Thus was the mastery gained by my father, and never lost. It 
is true, that sometimes my mother would forget herself, and would 

get on as far as " There now, you're ," but she would stop 

there, and correct herself, saying " No ! you're not," and allow 
her temper to evaporate, by singing one of her usual ditties, as 
i( Hush-a-by, baby, on the tree top;" but my father never took' 
notice of her singing ; and being really a very good-tempered man, 
my mother's temper gradually became improved. 

The return of my father made some alteration in our mode of 
life. He might, if he had pleased, have lived as an out-pensioner 
with my mother ; but this he would not do. He used to come in 
almost every evening to see her, and she used to provide for him 
a pot of porter, which he seldom exceeded ; if he had friends with 
him, they paid for what they drank. This pot of porter per diem 
was the only demand made upon my mother for permission to 
remain separate, and she did not grumble at it. His tobacco he 
found himself out of the tobacco money allowed at the Hospital, 



POOR JACK. 101 

He had received some pay ; which, contrary to his former custom, 
he had laid by in the charge of one of the lieutenants of the 
Hospital ; for at that time there were no savings banks. 

As a married man, my father had the liberty to introduce his 
wife and children into the Hospital at meal times, to share his 
allowance with them : this my mother would not listen to, as re- 
garded herself and my sister ; but my father messed in what is 
called the married men's room, on my account ; and instead of 
buying my own dinner, or applying to my mother for it, I now 
always took it with my father in the Hospital. In consequence of 
my father's admittance as a pensioner, both I and my sister might 
have been instructed at the Hospital school ; but my mother would 
not permit Virginia to go there, and I found it much more con- 
venient to go to Peter Anderson in the evening, when I had 
nothing to do. On the whole, we all went on much more com- 
fortably than we did before my father's return. 

One evening I was, as usual, with Anderson in his cabin, my 
father having been drafted into his ward, I could not help asking 
Anderson how he liked him. His reply was, " I like your father, 
Jack, for he is a straight-forward, honest, good-tempered man ; 
and, moreover, has a good natural judgment. I think it a great 
pity that such a man as he is, should be so early in life lost as it 
were, to the country. He is a first-rate seaman ; and although 
there are manv like him, still there are none to spare. However, 
if his country loses, he may himself gain, by being so soon called 
away from a service of great temptation. The sailor who has 
fought for his country, Jack, has much to be thankful for when 
he takes in moorings at Greenwich Hospital. He is well fed, 
well clothed, tended in sickness, and buried with respect ; but all 
these are nothing, compared with the greatest boon. When I 
reflect what lives sailors live, how reckless they are, how often 
they have been on the brink of eternity, and wonderfully pre- 
served, without even a feeling of gratitude to Him who has 
watched over them, or taking their escapes as warnings — when I 
consider how they pass their whole lives in excess, intemperance, 
and, too often, blasphemy, it is indeed a mercy that they are 

h 3 



102 POOR JACK. 

allowed to repose here after such a venturous and careless career — 
that they have time to reflect upon what has passed — to listen to 
the words of the Gospel, to hate their former life, and, trusting in 
God's mercy, to secure their salvation. This is the greatest charity 
of this institution, and long may it flourish, a blessing to the 
country which has endowed it, and to the seamen, who are not 
only provided for in this world, but are prepared in it for the 
next." 

Such were continually the style of admonitions given me by 
this good old man ; and I need not point out to the reader how 
fortunate it was for me that I had secured such a preceptor. 



CHAP. XV. 

IN WHICH IS PROVED THE TRUTH OF THE PROVERB " WHEN YOUR OWN 
HOUSE IS MADE OF GLASS, YOU NEVER SHOULD BE THE FIRST TO 
THROW STONES." 

One evening, when I went to the shop of the widow St. Felix to 
purchase some tobacco for my father, she said, " Why don't your 
father come himself, Jack? I want to make his acquaintance, 
and see how he looks without his pig-tail." 

" Why, you never saw him when he had it on," replied I. 

" No, that's the truth ; but still I wish to have a sight of him, — 
the fact is, I want to laugh at him." 

" Very well, I'll bring him here ; but, recollect, it's a very sore 
subject with him," replied I, " and that you may have a sharp 
answer." 

" That I'll take my chance of, Jack," replied the widow, laughing. 

In consequence of this intimation, one evening when my father 
was walking in the Hospital, I persuaded him to call at the shop. 

" This is my father, Mrs. St. Felix," said I. 



POOR JACK. 103 

" Most happy to see him. What shall I have the pleasure of 
assisting you to, Mr. Saunders ? " said the widow. 

" My sarvice to you, Marm, — if you please, to two penn'orth 
of pigtail and a paper of shorts." 

" Much obliged to you, Mr. Saunders," replied she ; " sure 
we're much indebted to Admiral Lord Nelson for sending us such 
fine-looking pensioners. I shouldn't wonder if I were to choose a 
husband out of the Hospital yet." 

" I'm afeard we're all too mauled, Marm, to suit a pretty young 
woman like you," replied my father, very gallantly. 

" Thank you for that, Mr. Saunders ; but you're mistaken 
entirely. I don't consider the loss of a leg, for instance, as any 
thing ; I never look at men's legs, and, therefore, care little whetiier 
they are made of wood or not, provided they don't tread on my 
corns." 

" Well, Marm, I'm glad that you don't consider a timber toe 
as any obstacle to matrimony ; but, I fear, having a wife already 
may be considered by you a sort of objection." 

" Why, sure, I must have the whole of my husband ; I couldn't 
afford to share him, especially when one limb is gone already. 
That puts me in mind of my want of manners ; I hope Mrs. 
Saunders is quite well. I hear from Jack that you have a separate 
maintenance, — that's very genteel." 

" Why, yes, Marm," replied my father ; " the king maintains me, 
and my wife maintains herself; so, as you say, we have a separate 
maintenance." 

" Well, that's the best way when married people don't agree. 
What are you laughing at, Mr. Jack ? did I hint that your father 
and mother ever had any little matrimonial differences ? I certainly 
did hear that there was a trifling dispute when they last parted ; 
but when they bring me such tales I always cut them short. Here's 
your pigtail, Mr. Saunders," continued the widow, laughing, as 
she put the tobacco on the counter. 

I looked at my father, who did not seem to relish the hint, but 
he answered very frankly, ' f If you cut them as short as my wife 
cut mine, why then you won't be troubled with them any more. 

H 4- 



104 POOR JACK. 

I see, Marm, you know all about it, and you may have your laugh 
if it pleases you ; but, I can tell you that my tail has done me 
better sarvice since it was off, than when it hung down my back." 

« Become useful, instead of ornamental, I presume, Mr. Saun- 
ders." 

" Just made this difference — when it was on it made my wife's 
tongue to go ; now it is off, it has stopped it." 

" An extraordinary powerful instrument, to stop a woman's 
tongue !" 

" Well, you've only to ax Mistress Saunders, she'll tell you all 
its virtues." 

iC Well ! Mr. Saunders. I don't know whether you have any 
idea of taking another wife some future day. If so, say nothing 
about it, or you'll never get one." 

" Well, Marm — I don't know whether you ever think of taking 
another husband ; but if so, I think it would be kind on my part 
to lend it to him. Can you tell me why widows' tongues run so 
much faster than other womens' ? " 

" Mercv ! what put that idea in your head, Mr. Saunders?" 

" You, and half a dozen more that I happen to know. May I 
make so bold as to ask you, Marm, how long you may have been a 
widow ? " continued my father. 

" Bless me ! so long, that I quite forget all about it," replied 
Mrs. St. Felix," turning away from the counter to the jars behind. 

I gave my father a wink to let him know that it was his turn 
now: he understood me, hitched up his waistband, and nodded. 

il How did vou lose your first husband.. Marm ? What did he 
die of?" 

The widow coloured, and my father perceiving it followed up 
his question. 

" Did he die of a fever, Marm ? " 

" I'm not exactly sure," replied she, hurriedly. 

" May I ask how long it is since he died ? " continued my father. 

" Oh ! Mr. Saunders," replied the widow confusedly, " I really 
don't recollect just now It's very painful to answer such ques- 
tions." 



POOR JACK. 105 

" Not if you've been a widow so long, that you forget all about 
it ; that's all sham and nonsense. So you a'n't sure what he died 
of, nor when it was that he died ? Are you quite sure, Marm, 
that your husband is dead ? 

Mrs. St. Felix started, turned very red, and then very pale. 

" My sarvice to you for the present, Marm," said my father, 
after a pause, taking off his hat. " I suspect that I've found a way 
to stop your tongue as well as my wife's. Broadside for broadside, 
that's fair play." 

So saying, my father stumped away out of the shop-door. 
Mrs. St. Felix put her apron up to her eyes, with her elbows rest- 
ing on the counter. I waited a little, and then I said — 

" What is the matter, .Mrs. St. Felix ? " 

She started at my voice. 

"You here, Jack? I thought you had gone out with your 
father. Well !" continued she, wiping her eyes, " it serves me 
right. I forgot that in amusing myself I annoyed him. Jack, 
don't you mention anything about this ? Do you think your 
father will ? " 

" I don't think he will, for he cannot do so without talking 
about having his pigtail cut off, and I know he cannot bear to 
think of it." 

" Well, then, pray don't you — that's a good boy." 

" I never will, I promise you." 

" Then, good night, Jack — you must leave me now, I don't feel 
quite well." 

I wished the widow good night, and went back to my mother's 
house. My father was there, but he never hinted at the convers- 
ation which had taken place, neither at that time, nor afterwards. 



106 POOR JACK, 



CHAP. XVI. 

SHOWING HOW OLD NANNY FELL SICK AND GOT WELL AGAIN. 

Before I fell asleep that night, I thought a great deal of what had 
passed between the widow St. Felix and my father Why should 
she have shown such emotion, and why should she request of me 
not to mention what had passed ? I had heard reports about 
her, as I have before mentioned ; I had heard them from old 
Nanny, but I did not put any confidence in what she said. Think- 
ing of old Nanny reminded me that I had not called upon her for 
some time, and I resolved that I would visit her the next day. 

It was not until late in the evening that I could spare time to 
call upon her, and, what was not usual, I went empty handed. I 
found to my surprise that the door was shut to, and the shutters 
of the shop not taken down. I tried the latch ; the door opened, 
and I went in. 

; Who's there?" screamed old Nanny from the inner room. 
<; What do you want?" 

" It's only poor Jack, mother," replied I ; " come to see how 
you are." " Come in ?" replied she ; " I'm very bad. Oh ! Oh ! 
I thought it Mas some thief or another, come to steal all the things 
in my shop." 

I entered the room, and found old Nanny in bed; she looked 
very ill and miserable, and everything was very dirty. 

" Are you not well, mother ? " said I. 

'• Well, boy ? No, very ill, very ill indeed, haven't left my 
bed these three days. Reach me a little water. Jack, there's a 
good boy ? I've been dying for water." 

I handed her a broken jug, which had some water in it. She 
drank greedily, so as to spill nearly half of it on the coverlid. 

i( Oh ! how good it is," exclaimed the old woman, as soon as 
she recovered her breath ! u I'm better now. I could not reach it 



POOR JACK. 



107 



myself. I've the rheumatiz so bad ! I've been in such a fright, 
because I could not lock the door — it kept me awake all night 
long, Oh ! my poor back." 

" But, why did you not send for the doctor, mother ?" 
" Doctor ? Heli ! who's to pay him ! I've got no money, 
Jack." 

* Well, but Doctor Tadpole's very kind." 

" Yes, yes ! kind to the widow ; but not to old women like me, 
without any money." 

" But why not have some one to sit up with you, and help 
you ? 

" Sit up with me ! who'd sit up with me ? Yes, if I paid 
them ; but I've no money, Jack ; and then I don't know them — 
they might rob me — there's a great many pretty things in my 
shop." 

" But you might die, mother, lying here without any one to help 
you." 

" Die ? well, and who would care, if a poor old woman like me 
died, Jack?" 

" I should care, for one, mother ; and so would my sister Vir- 
ginia, and many others besides." 

" You might care, Jack, for you're a good boy ; and so might 
your little sister, for she has a kind heart ; but, nobody else, Jack, 
— no — not one I " 

I could not reply to this remark, as I really did not know any- 
body who would have cared ; so I said, " You must see the doctor, 
mother. I will go for him." 

"No, Jack, I can't afford it, it's no use; besides I'm better now." 
« Well, if you can't afford it, you shall not pay him ; and, if he 
will not come for nothing, I'll pay him myself." 

" Will you pay him, Jack ? that's a good boy — you promised 
me bargains you know — that shall be one of them." 

" Well mother, I'll make the bargain that I'll pay him, if you'll 
see him ; so good bye, now — do you want anything before I 



go' 



No, Jack, no, I don't want anything ; only just lock the door, 



108 POOR JACK. 

and take the key with you, when you go out ; and then no one can 
rob me, Jack, whilst you're gone." 

I complied with her request, and ran for Doctor Tadpole, whom 
I found smoking his cigar in the widow's shop. 

" Doctor," said I, " old Nanny has been ill in bed these three 
days, and I want you to go and see her." 

" Does she send you to me, or do you ask it yourself?" said the 
doctor, " for I think she would die rather than pay the doctor." 

il As for that, Mr. Tadpole," said the widow ; " there are many 
of your patients who send for the doctor without ever intending 
to pay him. Perhaps old Nanny may go on the same plan." 

i( Certainly, that alters the case. Well, Jack, what's the matter 
with her?" 

" Rheumatism, and, I believe, fever ; for her hand is hot, and 
her tongue very white. She was lying in bed with no one to help 
her ; and had not strength to reach a drop of water, until I gave it 
to her." 

" Poor old soul!" said the widow; u and yet they say that she 
has money." 

" I don't think that she has much," replied I ; " for when she 
lent me the twenty-eight shillings, she had not ten shillings more 
in the bag ; but, doctor, I'll pay you, I will indeed ! How much 
will it be ? " 

" Now, doctor, just put on your hat, and set off as soon as you 
please ; for if poor Jack says he'll pay you, you know that your 
money is as safe as mine was in the bank, — before it failed." 

"Well, I'll just finish my cigar." 

ft Of course you will, as you walk along, Mr. Tadpole," replied 
the widow ; " it's very pleasant to smoke in the air, and just as 
unpleasant to others your smoking in the house. So, doctor, just 
be off and see the poor old wretch directly ; or, — I'll be affronted." 

Hereupon the doctor took up his hat, and without reply walked 
off with me. When we arrived, I unlocked the door, and we 
went in. 

" Well ! old Nanny, what's the matter now?" said Doctor Tad- 
pole. 



POOR JACK. 



109 



" Nothing, doctor, nothing ; you've come on a useless message ; 
I didn't send for you, recollect that ; it was Jack who would go ; 
I did not send, recollect that, doctor ; I can't afford it ; I've no 

money." 

" Very well ; I shan't look to you for money ; put out your 
tongue," replied the doctor, as he felt her pulse. 

« Recollect, doctor, I did not send for you. Jack, you are 
witness — I've no money;" repeated old Nanny. 
" Put out your tongue," repeated the doctor. 
" No, I won't, till it's all clearly settled." 

" It is, you old fool," said the doctor impatiently ; " put out 
your tongue." 

" Jack, you're witness it's all by force," said Nanny, who at 
last put out her tongue ; (i and now, doctor, I'll tell you." Where- 
upon Nanny commenced with a narrative of her ills ; and by her 
own account there was not a portion of her body from top to toe 
which had not some ailment. 

" You've a very bad complaint," said the doctor: — " what d'ye 
think it is ? It's old age. I hardly know whether I can cure it." 
Ci Can you draw the pain out of my old bones?" said Nanny, 
groaning. 

« Why, I'll try, at all events. I must send you something to 
take inwardly." 

" Who's to pay for it?" said old Nanny. 
u I will, mother ;" said I. 

" You're witness, doctor, —Jack says he'll pay for it. You're a 
good boy, Jack." 

: ' Well, that's settled — but now, we must have some one to sit 
up with you." 

« Sit up with me ? nobody will sit up with an old thing like me. 
" Yes, I will, mother," said I, " and I'll look in upon you in the 
day-time, and see if you want to drink." 

"No, no, Jack! then you'll make no money." 
" Yes I will — never mind that." 

" Well ! at all events," replied the doctor, " Jack will sit up with 
vou this night ; and we'll see how you are to-morrow. Now, 



110 POOR JACK. 

Jack, come back with me, and I'll give you something for her. 
Good night, Nanny/' said the doctor, leaving the room. 

"Good night;" grumbled old Nanny; and as we were going 
through the shop, I heard her continue — "It's very easy saying 
' good night,' but how can a poor wretch like me, with every bone 
aching as if it would split, expect to have a 'good night?' ' 

As the doctor walked home, he appeared not to be in his usual 
talkative mood. He went to the shop, made up the medicines, 
and gave me the directions. 

" Here, Jack, take these ; and it will be a kindness to sit up 
with her to-night. I will see her to-morrow ; and as I can't allow 
you to be the only good Samaritan in the place, understand Jack 
that I attend the poor old woman, and find medicine for nothing." 

I thanked him, and hastened back. Old Nanny took her draught, 
and then turned round on her side. I suppose there Mas opium in 
it, for she soon fell fast asleep ; not, however, until she had said, — 

"Jack, have you locked the door ? " 

" Yes, mother, I have." 

" Well, now, don't you think you could watch without burning 
a candle ? — You a'n't afraid?" 

" No, mother, I'm not afraid ; but if I do, I shall fall asleep ; 
and, besides, if you wake and want any thing, I shall not be able 
to find it. I should break the jug and other things, and they 
would cost more than a candle." 

"Very true, Jack. I feel sleepy already" — and old Nanny 
was soon in a loud snore. 

I had stopped at my mother's to say that I intended to stay with 
old Nanny, so that they might not sit up for me ; and now, all 
that I had to do was to keep myself awake. I had forgotten to 
bring a book with me, so I looked about the room for something 
to read ; but I could find nothing. At last I ventured to open a 
drawer — it creaked, and old Nanny was roused. " Who's that? " 
cried she, but she did not wake up, the opiate was too powerful. 
I went to her ; she was in a perspiration, which I knew was what 
the doctor wished. I put the clothes close up to her head, and left 
her. I then took the candle and looked into the drawer ; and found 



v^iiK 




- 




JACK " 



POOR JACK. Ill 

a book lying in a corner with one side of the cover off. It was very- 
dirty and stained. I took it out, and went again to my chair, and 
opened it. It was " Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress," and full of 
plates. I had never heard of the book, and did not know what the 
title meant. I first looked at all the plates, and then I turned to 
the opening of the book. On the blank leaf at the commencement, 
in very neat and lawyer-like hand-writing, was " Anna James, on 
her marriage, from her dear friend Mary Farquhar, Tynemouth, 
June the 19th, 1738." By this I discovered, as I thought, the mar- 
ried but not the maiden name of old Nanny ; and very probably, 
also, that Tynemouth was her native place. She was married, too, 
in 1738, that was more than sixty years back — and her age was, 
therefore, in all likelihood, nearly eighty years. I pondered over 
this for some time, and then I commenced reading ; and so inter- 
ested was I with the contents, that I did not raise my head, until 
the candle had burnt to the socket ; as I was about to light another, 
I perceived daylight through the chinks of the window shutter. So 
I laid down the book, and walking softly out of the room, un- 
locked the shop-door, to get a little fresh air ; for the room that 
old Nanny was sleeping in was, from dirt and neglect, very close. 
I could not, however, unlock the door without waking up Nanny ; 
who screamed out " Thieves ! — murder ! thieves! — " until she was 
wide awake. 

"Oh! — it is you, Jack?" said she at last. " I dreamt there 
were thieves breaking in." 

" Nothing but day breaking in, mother," said I ; " how do you 
feel this morning ? " 

" Better, Jack, better ; I've not so much pain — but I'm very 
thirsty, give me some water ? " 

" No, mother ; the doctor said you must not drink cold water. 
If you'll wait a little, I'll run and fetch you something warm. I 
won't be gone long, so try to go to sleep again." 

Old Nanny made no reply, but turned her face away from the 
light, as if in obedience to my orders. I locked the outer door, 
and hastened home. 

I found my mother and Virginia sitting in the nice clean room, 



112 POOR JACK. 

the fire blazing cheerfully, and the breakfast on the table, and I 
could not help making the contrast in my own mind between it 
and the dirty abode I had just left. I ran into the back kitchen 
to wash my face and hands, and then returned, kissed Virginia, 
and wished my mother "good morning." Why, I do not know, 
but she was in one of her worst of humours. 

"Don't come near me, or near your sister Virginia?" said she 
sharply ; " who knows what vermin you may have brought from 
where you have been staying all night ? " 
I did feel that what she said might be true. 
" Well, mother ! " said I, " I won't come near you if you don't 
like, but I want some tea for poor old Nanny." 
" I can't find tea for old Nannies ;" replied she. 
" I'll give her mine, Jack;" cried Virginia. 
"Indeed, miss, you'll do no such thing," said my mother; 
" and sit up properly to table, instead of hanging your head down 
in that way ; and don't pour your tea in your saucer ? that's 
vulgar !" 

" The tea's so hot, mamma!" said Virginia. 
" Then wait till it's cool, miss ? Leave the tea-pot alone, sir ? " 
"I'll thank you for some tea, mother?" replied I. "I shall 
give my breakfast to old Nanny." 

" You'll take no breakfast out of this house," was the reply. 
" Why, mother ? for a poor sick old woman." 
* "Let her go to the parish." 

I now became angry myself; I took up the tea-pot, and 
walked away into the back kitchen : my mother rose, and fol- 
lowed me ; insisting upon my putting the tea-pot down : but I 
would not, and I poured out the tea into a little milk-can. I did 
not answer her, but I felt that I was right, and would not give in ; 
and she was afraid to attempt force. My mother then ran back 
to the table — caught up the sugar basin, and carried it up stairs 
— singing as she went, at the highest pitch of her voice, 

" What are little girls made of, made of? 
Sugar and spice, and ail that's nice ; 
And that's what girls are made of!" 



POOR JACK. 113 

While my mother was away, little Virginia poured her cup 
of tea, which was already sweetened, into the can. I seized 
some bread and butter, and before my mother came down I was 
clear of the house. Old Nanny made a good breakfast ; the 
doctor came, and said that she was much better, and would soon 
be well. The doctor had not left long before Peter Anderson 
came, and told me to go and mind my business, and that he 
would sit by old Nanny. Old Ben, who had heard of it, also 
called in ; and he sat up with her the next night. 

" Did I not tell you that there were others who cared for you, 
Nanny ? " said I, a few days afterwards. 

" Yes, you did, Jack ; but I did not believe you ; the world is 
better than I thought it was. But how will you pay the doctor, 
Jack?" 

" The doctor 'tended you for nothing ; he told me so the first 
night." 

"Well, and that widow, too ! — it's kind of her to send me tea 
and sugar, and such nice things to eat."' 

" Yes, mother, it is." 

" And your father, to bring your little dear sister, so nice and 
clean, to come and see an old wretch like me, in such a dirty 
hole. Ah, Jack ! now I'm getting well again, I like the world 
better than I did." 

In a few days old Nanny had again opened her shop, sitting 
at the door as usual ; and, as the spring was now well advanced; 
she gradually recovered her strength. When I gave up my office 
of nurse, she did not, however, forget to tell me to bring her good 
bargains, as I had promised that I would. 



114- POOR JACK. 



CHAP. XVII. 

A MORNING CONCERT IN WHICH THE OPPOSITION IS AS GREAT AS 

BLACK TO WHITE. 

Among my father's associates there was a man, of about forty 
years of age — Dick Harness by name. He had received a wound 
in the hip, from a grape-shot ; and his leg having in consequence 
contracted, it occasioned him to limp very much ; but he was as 
strong and hearty in all other respects as a man could be. He was 
a very merry fellow, full of jokes ; and if any one told a story, which 
was at all verging on the marvellous, he was sure to tell another 
which would be still more incredible. He played the fiddle, 
and sang to his own accompaniments, which were very droll, as he 
extracted very strange noises from his instrument : sometimes 
his bow would be on the wrong side of the bridge, sometimes down 
at the keys ; besides which, he produced sounds by thumping the 
fiddle as well as by touching its strings, as a guitar; indeed, he 
could imitate, in a certain way, almost every instrument, and most 
of the noises made by animals. He had one fault, for which he 
used to be occasionally punished ; which was, he was too fond of 
the bottle : but he was a great favourite, and therefore screened by 
the men, and as much as possible overlooked by the officers. The. 
punishment for a pensioner getting drunk, was at that time being 
made to wear a yellow instead of a blue coat, which made a man 
look very conspicuous. 

I recollect one day he had the yellow coat on, when a party of 
ladies and gentlemen came to see the Hospital. Perceiving that 
he was dressed so differently from the other pensioners, one of the 
ladies' curiosity was excited ; and at last she called him to her and 
said, " Pray, my good man, why do you wear a yellow coat, when 
the other pensioners have blue ones ? " 

u Bless your handsome face, Ma'am ! " replied Dick, " don't 
you really know ? " — " Xo, indeed ! " replied she. 

Ci Well then, Ma'am, perhaps you may have heard of the 



POOR JACK. 115 

glorious battle of the Nile, in which Nelson gave the French such 
a drubbing ? *' 

f; Oh, yes ! " cried all the ladies and gentlemen, who had now 
crowded about him. " Well, ladies and gentlemen, I had the good 
fortune to be in that great victory ; and all we Xilers, as we are 
called, are permitted to wear a yellow coat as a mark of distinction, 
while the common pensioners wear nothing but blue." 

"" Dear me ! " said the lady, " and do I really speak to one of 
those brave fellows who fought at the battle of the Nile ?" and she 
put her hand into her pocket, and pulled out five shillings. "There," 
said she, "I hope you'll not be affronted, but accept this from me." 

" Not at all, Ma'am," replied Dick, pocketing the money. 

Then the whole party made a subscription for him, and Dick 
went off with a handful of silver. 

There was, however, another man who contributed much to the 
fun created by Dick Harness. He was an American black, who 
had served as cook in the Majestic, and had been wounded in the 
battle of the Nile ; he had received a bullet in the knee, which had 
occasioned a stiff joint ; and, as his leg was bent, he wore a short 
wooden stump. He also could play his fiddle and sing his songs ; 
but in neither case so well as Dick Harness, although he thought 
otherwise himself. We used to call him Opposition Bill ; but his 
name was Bill White, at least that was the purser's name that he 
went by when on board of a man-of-war. His pleasure was to 
follow Dick Harness every where ; and if Dick sung, he would 
sing — if Dick played, he would play also ; not at the same time, 
but if Dick stopped Bill would strike up. Dick used to call him 
his black shadow ; and sometimes he would execute a flourish 
on his fiddle, which would be quite a puzzler to Opposition Bill, 
who would attempt something of the kind, which invariably set 
every one laughing. At last, Dick Harness's performances were 
not considered to be complete, if Opposition Bill was not in his 
company; and, as they were both very good-tempered funny fellows, 
they were a great amusement, especially in the fine weather, 
when thev would sit on the benches upon the terrace about six or 
eight yards apart, for they seldom came nearer, and play and sing 

i 2 



1J6 POOR JACK. 

alternately. The songs sung by Dick Harness were chiefly old 
sea-songs ; those of Opposition Bill were picked up from every part 
of the world ; principally, however, those sung by the negroes who 
worked on the plantations in Virginia and Carolina. 

Peter Anderson, my father, Ben, and many others, were sitting 
on the benches, basking in the morning's sun, when Dick Harness 
made his appearance, limping along with his fiddle under his arm. 

" Come along, Dick?" said Ben the whaler, " we'll stow close, 
and make room for you here." 

" You must make elbow-room too, my hearty, or I sha'n't be able 
to fiddle. Come, what will you have this fine morning?" said Har- 
ness, tuning his instrument. As soon as it was in tune, he flourished 
a prelude from the top of the scale to the bottom, ending with an 
" Eh-haw ! eh-haw ! " in imitation of the braying of a donkey. 

" Give us the Spanish Ladies, Dick?" said my father. As this 
sono- was very popular at that time among the seamen, and is now 
almost forgotten, I shall, by inserting it here, for a short time 
rescue it from oblivion. 

«' Farewell and adieu to you, Spanish ladies, 
Farewell and adieu to you, ladies of Spain ; 
For we have received orders 
For to sail to old England, 
But we hope in a short time to see you again." 

" Stop a moment, lads ? I must screw him up a little more." 
Dick regulated his first string, and then continued. 

" We'll rant and we'll roar, like true British sailors, 
We'll rant and we'll roar across the salt seas ; 
Until we strike soundings 
In the Channel of old England, 
(From Ushant to Scilly 'tis thirty-five leagues). 

" Then we hove our ship to, with the wind at sou'west, my boys, 
Then we hove our ship to, for to strike soundings clear ; 
Then we filled the main topsail 
' And bore right away, my boys, 
And straight up the Channel of old England did steer. 

" So the first land we made, it is called the Deadman, 

Next Ram Head, ofF Plymouth, Start, Portland, and the Wight ; 
We sail-ed by Beachy, 
By Fairly and Dungeness, 
And then bore away for the South Foreland light. 



POOR JACK. 117 

" Now the signal it was made for the grand fleet to anchor, 
All in the Downs that night for to meet ; 

Then stand by your stoppers, 

See clear your shank painters, 
Hawl all your clew garnets, stick out tacks and sheets." 

Here Dick was interrupted by another fiddle, which went, 
" turn, turn — scrape — turn, turn." 

" There's Opposition Bill, Dick," said my father ; " I thought 
you would bring him out." 

" All's right," replied Dick ; hope he arn't affronted — but he 
looks very black this morning." 

" Now let every man take off his full bumper, 
Let every man take off his full bowl ; 
For we will be jolly 
And drown melancholy, 
With a health to each jovial and true- hearted soul." 

" Now then, Billy, fire away." 

"You tink I 'bey your order, you Dick? — No sar, suppose I 
fire away, I go off — I not go off, I stay here." 

" Well, but if you play, you'll get in trouble, Billy." 

" How I get in trouble ? " 

" Why you'll get in a scrape., won't you ? " 

" He ! you just got out of one, any how." 

Dick Harness then said to those who sat by him, " I'll make 
him sing the Negro General." 

« Well ! if you will howl, Mr. Billy," cried out Harness, " at all 
events, don't give us that abominable Nigger General — it always 
gives me the tooth-ache." 

" Now, I tink dat very fine song — -so you may have whole jaw- 
ache, for all I care. I sing dat, Mr. Dick — you jealous of dat 
song, I know." 

Opposition Billy flourished a little, and then commenced,— 

" Listen, my boys, and I will tell you — 
Tell you a leetle 'bout Gin'ral Gabriel. 

Oh-e-oh ! Oh-e-oh ! 
" Dey advertise de Nigger Gin'ral, 
A dousand pounds dey advertise him. 

Oh, my boys, I'm most done ! 

i 3 



213 POOR JACK. 

" And who betrayed de Nigger Gin'ral ? 
A leetle boy betrayed de Gin'ral. 

Oh-e-oh ! Oh-e-oh ! 
" A leetle boy by de name of Daniel, 
Betrayed him down at Norfolk Landing. 

Oh, my boys, I'm most done ! 

" He says, how do my uncle Gabriel? 
But dis is not your uncle Gabriel. 

Oh-e-oh ! Oh-e-oh ! 
** Yes it is my uncle Gabriel ; 

For I do know you, uncle Gabriel. 

Oh, my boys, I'm most done ! 

" De man belonged to Major Prosser, 
So cum and hang de Nigger Gin'ral. 

Oh-e-oh ! Oh-e-oh ! 
" For he's ruined old Virginny ! 
Hard times in old Virginny. 

Oh, my boys, I'm most done I 

" Dey wrote a letter to de tailor 
To cut out de Gin'ral's ruffles. 

Oh-e-oh ! Oh-e-oh ! 
" Dey cut de ruffles out o' iron ! 
So they handcuff and chained him. 

Oh, my boys, I'm most done ! 

" Dey went and called a troop of light horse, 
To come and guard de Nigger Gin'ral ! 

Oh-e-oh ! Oh-e-oh 
" To guard him all to de city of Richmond, 
To guard him up unto de justice. 

Oh, my boys, I'm most done ! 

" De justice tuk him to de gobnor — 
(Monroe he set up for gobnor.) 

Oh-e-oh ! Oh-e-oh ! 
" Command him to de Penetenshy, — 
On Thursday-week come on his trial. 

Oh, my boys, I'm most done ! 

" Dey went and called all de country 
For to come and see de Nigger Gin'ral. 

Oh-e-oh ! Oh-e-oh ! 
" Some dey call him Archy Mullen — 
« My right name is John Decullen.' 

Oh, my boys, I'm most done ! 



POOR JACK. 119 

li ' I'm here to-day, and gone to-morrow ; 
I did not come for to stay for eber.' 

Oh-e-oh ! Oh-e-oh ! 
" So den dey tuk him to de gallows, 
Drive him down dere in a waggon. 

Oh, my boys, I'm most done ! 

" Dey drive him down unto de gallows, 
Dev drive him down with four grey horses. 

Oh-e-oh ! Oh-e-oh ! 
:: | Price's Ben, he drive de waggon) 
Very sad loss to Major Prosser. 

Oh, my boys, I'm most done ! 

" Dey drove him right beneath de gallows, 
And den dev hang him and dey swing him. 

Oh-e-ob ! O-e-oh ! 
•• And dat de fate of de Nigger Gin'ral, 
Who almost ruined old Virginny ! 

Now, my boys, I'm quite done !" 

« You've quite done, have you, Billy ? " said Harness : (i take 
my advice, and never begin again." 

« Eh, Mister Dick ; you no ab song like dat in your budget ; 
and I neber give you de tune." 

" I hope you wont — but now I'll play you a tune which will beat 
vou hollow." Hereupon, Dick Harness imitated the squeaking of 
pigs and caterwauling of cats upon his fiddle, so as to set every body 
laughing, except Opposition Bill, who pretended to be very sulky. 

" Come, Dick, it's your turn now. Give us a regular forecastle 
song ?" said Ben the whaler. 

" Well, then — here's one that's been sung ever since the days 
of old Queen Anne. 

' ; It was one November — the second day — 
The admiral he bore away ; 
Intending for his native shore, 
The wind at sou'sou'west did roar ; 
There was likewise a terrible sky, 
Which made the sea to run mountains high. 

' ; The tide of ebb, it was not done, 
But fiercely to the west did run ; 
Which put us all in terrible fear, 
Because there was not room for to veer. 
The wind and weather increased sore, 
And drove ten sail of us on shore. 
I 4 



120 POOR JACK, 

" Ashore went the Northumberland, 
The Harwich, and the Cumberland, 
The Lion and the Warwick, too ; 
But the Elizabeth had the most to rue, — 
She came stem on — her fore-foot broke, 
And she sunk the Gloucester at oue stroke. 

" But now remains what is worse to tell, 
The greatest ships had the greatest knell ; 
The brave C'ronation and all her men 
Was lost and drownded every one, • 

Except the mate and eighteen more, 
What in the long boat com'd ashore. 

" And thus they lost their precious lives ; 
But the greatest loss was to their wives; 
Who, with their children left on shore, 
Their husbands' watery death deplore ; 
And wept their loss with many tears ; 
(But grief endureth not for years). 

" Now you who've a mind to go to sea, 
Pray take a useful hint from me, 
And live at home, and be content 
With what kind Providence has sent ; 
For they were punish'd for their misdeeds, 
In grumbling when they had no needs. 

" Now God preserve our noble queen, 
Likewise her ministers serene; 
And may they ever steer a course, 
To make things better 'stead of worse, 
And England's flag triumphant fly, 
The dread of hevery he-ne-my." 

" You call dat singing ! Stop now ! I sing a song you nebber 
hear in all you life," cried Opposition Bill, tuning his fiddle. 

" And never wish to hear again, most likely," replied Dick. 
" Out with it, Bill ! your face shines beautifully this morning." 

" I take de shine out of you, Massa Dick ; now you listen." 

" Now your fader is asleep, maid, listen unto me ; 
Will you follow in my trail to Ken-tuck-y ? 
For cross de Alleghany to-morrow I must go, 
To chace de bounding deer on de O-hi-o. 

" And will you lub me truly, and kind to me will be, 
If I quit my fader's roof for Ken-tuck-y. 
And will you nebber leave me, if I consent to go 
To your Shanty, by de stream of de O-hi-o? 



POOR JACK. 121 

" Her fader's not asleep, and he will not agree, 
Dat you take away his dater to Ken-tuck-y. 
So alone by yourself, good hunter, you must go, 
"Where the Ingin's rifle cracks on de O-hi-o. 

" Your moder, too, is near, aldough you did not see ; 
And wid her leave you nebber go to Ken-tuck-y. 
He hab a wife already, as I do surely know, 
Who weeps for his return to de O-hi-o. 

" Man, I have dis purse of gold, half of it for ye, 
Woman, I hab ne'er a wife in Ken-tuck-y : 
Your dater is my only lub, so pridee let us go 
To where my corn is ripening on de O-hi-o. 

" De fader weighed de purse, he took his half wid glee, 
De moder said her child might go to Ken-tuck-y. 
So de hunter and de maid, arm in arm dey go 
Across de Alleghany to de O-hi-o." 



" Bravo, Billy, that's not so bad !" said some of the pensioners. 

" I tell you. Dick, I take de shine out of you. You nebber 
believe, till I make you fall in my wake — and den you soon be 
where de little boat was — long way astarn." 

" I'll tell you what, Billy," said Dick Harness ; " you do im- 
prove, and we'll allow you to sing that song once more before you 
die, just by way of encouragement." 

Dick then played several flourishes on his fiddle. Opposition 
Bill tried to imitate him, but made sad work of it. It was near 
dinner-time, and the pensioners rose, and proceeded to the painted 
hall ; for at that time they dined there, and not below in the crypts, 
as thev do now. 



122 



POOR JACK. 




JACK IN OLD GRUMBLE'S BOAT. 



CHAP. XVIII. 

I GET INTO VERY DOUBTFUL COMPANY. I AM TEMPTED, AND, LIKE A 

TRUE SON OF ADAM, I FALL. 



The reader must have observed, that, under the tuition of An- 
derson, I promised to follow the right path, and, provided his good 
offices were not interfered with, there appeared little doubt but 
that such would be the case ; but I was little aware, nor was he, 
that the humble profession which I had chosen for myself was 
beset with danger, and that the majority of those with whom I 
was associating, were the most likely of all others to lead me into 
evil. Why I had not hitherto been tempted can only be ascribed 
to my tender years. In fact, I had not been considered strong 
enough, or of an age, to be useful to them ; but dow that I was 
more than thirteen years old, being moreover very tall and 
strong for my age, the hour of temptation arrived ; and fortunate 



POOR JACK. 123 

was it for me that, previous to this epoch, I had been taken 
under the protection of Peter Anderson. 

I have said, in a former chapter, that I was a regular mudlarker; 
so I was, as far as the ostensible occupation of those who are so de- 
nominated went, to wit ; " picking up pieces of old rope, wood, &c;" 
but the mudlarkers, properly speaking, at that time composed a 
very extensive body on the river, and were a more humble por- 
tion of the numerous river depredators, of which I may hereafter 
speak. A mudlarker was a man who had an old boat, generally 
sold by some merchant vessel, furnished with an iron bar full of 
hooks, which was lowered down by a rope to catch pieces of cord- 
age, oakum, canvass, or other articles, which might fall overboard 
from the numerous vessels in the river. These were sold to the 
marine stores, such as were kept by old Nanny ; but, as I observed, 
this was the ostensible mode of livelihood ; they had other resources 
to which I shall presently refer. An old man of the name of 
Jones, who resided at Greenwich, was one of these mudlarkers by 
profession. He was a surly old fellow, his sharp nose and chin 
nearly meeting, and he usually went by the name of Old Grumble. 
I had occasionally assisted him with his boat, but without re- 
ceiving money, or indeed thanks, for my pains ; but for this I cared 
little. He was a very old man ; and when he came on shore, and . 
went up to old Nanny, with the few things he had collected 
during the day, I almost wondered how he could manage to sub- 
sist, and thought myself infinitely better off than he was. 

One evening he said to me, " Jack, I'm going up the river; I wish 
you'd come in the boat and help me ; and if I make any thing, I 
will give you something for your trouble ; but if I don't, you can't 
expect it." As he was very infirm, I went with him, more out of 
charity than with any hopes of profit. We pulled with the tide till 
we arrived a little above Deptford, where several ships were lying, 
and he went close to one and lowered down his grapnels. He 
dragged for a short time. 

" Just you make a little farther off, old fellow," cried the mate 
of the vessel. 

" Wo'n't allow a poor old man to earn a few pence, I suppose," 
replied Old Grumble, hauling up his grapnel, and directing me to 



124 POOR JACK. 

pull under the bows, where he dropped it down again. I now 
perceived, as I thought, some signs passing between him and one 
of the men in the head; but if so, they were soon over, and Old 
Grumble continued his avocation till the sun set. 

" How long do you intend to remain here?" inquired I. 

" Oh ! not much longer; but I must wait a bit." At last it was 
quite dark, and then Grumble pulled up his grapnel and dropped 
down nearer to the cutwater of the vessel. I soon distinguished a 
tinkling, as it were, of metal ; and Old Grumble, holding up his 
hands, received some sheets of copper, which were lowered down 
by a rope-yarn. As soon as they were quietly landed in the stern 
of the boat, down came a bag, which he cast off and laid beside 
the copper. I was all astonishment ; but still more so, when a 
large bag of something weighing very heavy was lowered down 
by a rope after the small bag. A low whistle was then given, and 
the words "Monday night" pronounced in a whisper. Grumble 
whistled in return ; and then, hauling up the grapnel, he told me to 
put out the oars and pull, while he took his grapnel on board. We 
then pulled down the river again, for the tide had turned ; and as 
soon as we were clear of the shipping, I began to interrogate him. 

" Who gave you all these things ? " — " Who ! why, that man." 

" But what did he give them you for ? " 

" Why, out of charity, to be sure ; but I can't talk now, I've no 
breath to spare. Let's pull ashcre, and then I'll talk to you." 

As we pulled down, I observed that a lighter had broken adrift 
from her moorings, and was sweeping down the river with the ebb 
tide. " There's a lighter adrift," said I. 

Ci Yes," replied Grumble ; " I'm too old for that work now ; — 
time was ; — there'll be pretty pickings as soon as she gets down a 
little lower. The Light Horsemen have cut her adrift." 

" Light Horsemen ! Who are they ? " 

" Bah ! you know nothing; — I tell ye again, I hav'n't no breath 
to spare — I can't pull and talk too." 

I was convinced in my own mind that Old Grumble had not 
obtained the articles in the boat by fair means, and annoyed that I 
should have been made a participator in any dishonest dealings ; I 
was resolved to question him closely as soon as we landed. There 



POOR JACK. 125 

was no one at the steps ; and when we beached the boat, I asked 
him whether he was going to take the things up to old Nanny's. 

"" Old Nanny ! no. She's no fence now : she used to be a good 
one ; but she was overhauled once or twice, and nearly sent on the 
other side of the water, and, since that, she's satisfied with little 
articles, sure profit and no risk." 

" What do you mean by a fence ? " enquired I. 

et Why don't you know that yet, boy ? Well, & fence is one who re- 
ceives things that are brought for sale, and never asks no questions.'' 

" Well, but if these things were given you out of charity, as you 
say, why should you want to take them up to a fence, as you call it? " 

"I tell you what, Jack; I can't be answering all these questions 
here, where there may be twenty pair of ears a listening." 

ft Well, and if they do listen, what is the harm, if we are doing 
what is right ? " 

" It wo'n't do to argufy here, I tell you. In my opinion, a poor 
man who works hard to get some victuals to keep body and soul 
together is doing what is right." 

" Yes, if he works at an honest livelihood." 

" Don't talk so loud about honesty ; the very word is enough to 
make people suspect something not right. I'll tell you all, when 
you come up to my house ; for you see, Jack, you must help me 
to carry these things up. D'ye think you can manage this bag 
of pease ? Let's try ! " Between us, we contrived to get the bag, 
which weighed about half a hundred weight, on my back, and I 
walked off with it ; Grumble following me with the copper and the 
other small bag, which I afterwards found contained copper nails. 
When we arrived at his dwelling, which was as dilapidated and 
miserable as old Nanny's, he took out his key and fumbled a long 
while at the lock ; at last he opened it. You had better stay till 
I get a light, said he. In a minute he came with one to the door, 
and told me to follow him. I went in, put down the bag, and, 
some grains falling out, I took them up. 

" Why, this is coffee, Grumble !" — " Well, pease is our name 
for coffee, sand for sugar, and vinegar for rum, when we get any." 

n Well, but, Grumble, I wish to know how you came by these 
things." 



126 POOR JACK. 

" I'll tell you, Jack, if you ask every body how they come by 
things, you will have enough to do ; but the fact is, the man wants 
me to sell them for him." 

u Why, you said he gave them to you out of charity ! " 

ei Oh, that was only because I couldn't spare breath to tell you 
all about it." 

" But why should he lower them down in the dark, if they are 
his own property?" 

" Jack, I don't ask whose property it is ; all I know is, that I 
come by it honestly. I don't steal it, and I can't prove that the 
man does. Why, Jack, if one is to be so nice as that, you can't 
go into a grocer's shop to buy sugar, or coffee, or pepper, or indeed 
into almost any shop, if you first want to know whether the 
people have come by the goods honestly before you buy of 
them." 

" Still, it is so plain, that the man must have stolen them." 

" Suppose it is ; how are so many poor people to find their 
livelihood and support their families, if they refuse to get a 
shilling or two when it is offered ? If we were only to live upon 
what we get honestly, why, we should starve : the rich take 
good care of that by grinding us down so close. Why, Jack, 
how many thousands get their living on this river ! and do you 
think they could all get their living honestly, as you call it ? No ; 
we all plunder one another in this world.* You asked me, who 
were Light Horsemen ? — that's a name for one set of people who 
live by plunder ; — that lighter will have a good slice of her cargo 
out to-night ; for those who cut her adrift, know what's on board 
of her. Then we have the Heavy Horsemen, — they do their work 
in day time, when they go on board as Lumpers to clear the ships. 
And then we've the Coopers and Bumboat men, and the Rat- 
catchers and the Scuffle Hunters, and the River Pirates; and, last 

* These remarks of Grumble were, at the time, perfectly correct ; it was 
before the Wet Docks or the River Police was established. Previously to 
the West India, London, St. Katherine's, and other docks having been made, all 
ships unloaded in the river, and the depredations were so enormous, that 3Ir. 
Colquhoun, in his work, has estimated them at half a million sterling annually. 
At present, the river may be said to be comparatively honest ; the police is 
strict, and the temptations are removed. 



POOR JACK. 127 

of all, we have the Mudlarkers : all different professions, Jack ; 
never interfering with each other, and all living by their wits. I'm 
too old now; I was a flash pirate once; but I'm now nearly eighty, 
and am only fit for a Mudlarker." 

" But," exclaimed I with astonishment, " are they not discovered 
and punished ?" 

M That's very seldom, Jack ; for you see we have receivers all 
down the river; some of them great men, and dining with the 
Mayor and Common Council; others in a small way; — all sorts, 
Jack: and then we have what we call Jew Carts, always ready to 
take goods inland, where they will not be looked after. Old 
Xannv was a receiver and fence in a large way once. ' 

" Then the only honest people on the river are the watermen." 

Here old Grumble chuckled. <• Why, Jack, they be the worst 
of all ; for they be both receivers and thieves. Do you think the 
watermen live by their fares ? If you do, just wait on the steps 
one night, and you'll find that their night work is worth more than 
the day work is. We all must live. Jack ; and now I've shown you 
a way by which you can earn more money in a night, than you 
can in a fortnight by asking for half-pence. Here's five shillings 
for you, my boy ; and when I want you again, I'll let you know." 

Alas ! the five shillings, so easily and so unexpectedly earned, 
did, for the time, satisfy all my scruples : so easily are we bribed 
into what is wrong. I wished Old Grumble a good night, and left 
him. As I returned home, I thought of what he had said about 
night work ; and, instead of making my way to Fisher's Alley, I 
returned to the landing steps, resolving to watch for a time, and 
see what occurred. 

I thought of what had passed. I was not satisfied with myself. 
I thought of what Anderson would say ; and I felt that I had done 
wrong. And then I attempted to exculpate myself: I could not 
prove that the things were stolen ? I did not go with any intent to 
help in such a business. Old Grumble had only paid me for my 
work: but then, why did he pay me so much money? My conscience 
told me that it was because the dealings were unfair. I could not 
persuade myself that I was right. I looked up at the heavens,— for 
it was a clear night, and there was a very bright star just above 



128 POOR JACK. 

me ; and as I looked at it, it appeared as if it were an eye beaming 
down upon me, and piercing into my breast. I turned away 
from it, and then looked at it again ;— still it had the same appear- 
ance : I thought it was the eye of God ; — I trembled, and I resolved 
to reveal the whole to Anderson the next day, when I heard the 
the sound of oars. I looked in the direction, and perceived a 
wherry with two men pulling in : I was down on the steps, under 
the shadow of the wall, and they did not see me. They landed, 
and handed out of the wherry three large and full canvass bags. 
" It's more than we can carry," said the voice of a waterman I 
well knew ; " we must leave one in the boat; and be quick, for they 
are on our scent. Hollo ! who's that ? what are you doing here ? 
Poor Jack, I declare." 

" Well, mayn't I have a little night work, as well as you ? " 

" Oh ! you've come to that, have you ? " replied he. " Well, as 
you're waiting for something else, I suppose you could not help us 
with one of these bags ? " 

" Yes, I can," replied I, forgetting all my resolutions ; " put it 
on my back, if it's not too heavy." 

" No, no ; you're stout enough to carry it. I say, Jack, can you 
tell us, does old Xanny fence again, or has she given it up?" 

" I believe she does not," replied I. 

"Well," said he, "just put the question to her to-morrow 
morning, for she used to be a good-un ; now, follow us." 

I walked after them with my load until we came to a by- 
street ; at the shutters of a shop they rapped three times on the 
iron bar outside which fixed them up ; the door was opened, and 
we put the bags down in the passage, walked out again without a 
word, and the door was immediately closed. 

" Well, Jack," said the waterman, " I suppose we must tip 
handsome for the first time ; here's ten shillings for you, and we'll 
let you know when we want you to be on the look-out for us." 

Ten shillings ! and five before — fifteen shillings ! I felt as I 
were a rich man ; all scruples of conscience were, for the time, 
driven away. I hurried home rattling the silver in my pocket, 
and opening the door softly, I crept to bed. Did I say my prayers 
that night ? No ! ! 



POOR JACK. 129 



CHAP. XIX. 

I AM TEMPTED AGAIN. MY PRIDE IS ROUSED, AND MY COURSE OF LIFE 
IS CHANGED IN CONSEQUENCE. 

I passed a dreaming restless night, and woke early. I recalled all 
that had passed, and I felt very much dissatisfied with myself ; 
the fifteen shillings, with the added prospect of receiving more, 
did not yield me the satisfaction I had anticipated. From what 
the men had said about old Nanny, I thought that I would go and 
see her ; and why ? because I wished support against my own 
convictions : if I had not been actuated by such a feeling, I 
should, as usual, have gone to old Anderson. When I went down 
to breakfast I felt confused, and I hardly dared to meet the clear 
bright eye of my little sister, and I wished the fifteen shillings out 
of my pocket. That I might appear to her and my mother as if I 
were not guilty, I swaggered ; my sister was surprised, and my 
mother justifiably angry. As soon as breakfast was over, I 
hastened to old Nanny's. 

"Well, Jack," said she, "what brings you here so early?" 

« Why, mother, I was desired to ask you a question last night, 
— between ourselves." 

"Well, why don't you ask it, since it's between ourselves?" 
replied she with surprise. 

" Some of the people want to know if you fence now." 

" Jack," said old Nanny, harshly, " who asked you that ques- 
tion ? and how did you fall into their company ? Tell me directly ; 
I will know." 

« Why, mother, is there any harm in it ? " replied I, confused 
and holding down my head. 

" Harm in it ! Ask your own conscience, Jack, whether there's 
harm in it. Why do you not look me in the face like an honest 
boy ? would they have dared to put that question to you, if you 
had not been a party to their evil deeds, Jack?" continued she, 

K 



130 POOR JACK. 

shaking her head : " I thought better of you ; now you have filled 
me full of sorrow." 

I was smitten to the heart at this rebuke from a quarter whence 
I did not expect it ; but my heart was still rebellious, and I would 
not acknowledge what I felt. I thought to turn the tables, and 
replied — 

" Why, mother, at all events, they say that once you were a real 
good one." 

" Is it indeed gone so far?" replied she. " Poor boy ! poor boy I 
Yes, Jack, to my shame be it spoken, I once did receive things 
and buy them, when they were not honestly come by; and now I'm 
rebuked by a child : but, Jack, I was almost mad then — I had that 
which would have turned any one's brain — I was reckless, wretched ; 
but I don't do so any more. Even now I am a poor sinful wretch 
— I know it ; but I'm not so crazy as I was then. I have done 
so, Jack, more's the shame for me, and I wish I could recal it ; 
but, Jack, we can't recal the past. Oh that we could !" 

Here old Nanny pressed her hands to her temples, and for 
some time was silent ; at last she continued, — 

" Why did I love you, Jack ? because you were honest. Why 
did I lend you money — I, an old miserly wretch, who have been 
made to dote on money — I, who have never spent a shilling for my 
own comfort for these ten years, — but because you were honest? 
Why have I longed the whole day to see you, and have cared only 
for you ? because I thought you honest, Jack. I don't care how 
soon I die now. I thought the world too bad to live in ; you 
made me think better of it. Oh ! Jack, Jack, how has this come 
to pass ? How long have you known these bad people ? " 

"Why, mother," replied I, much affected, "only last night." 

" Only last night ! Tell me all about it ; tell the truth, dear 
boy, do." 

I could hold out no longer, and I told her every thing that had 
passed. 

" Jack," said she, " I'm not fit to talk to you ; I'm a bad old 
woman, and you may say I don't practise what I preach ; but, 
Jack, if you love me, go to Peter Anderson and tell him every 



POOR JACK. 131 

thing : don't be afraid ; only be afraid of doing what is wrong. 
Now, Jack, you must go." 

u I will, I will," replied I, bursting into tears. 

" Do, do, dear Jack ! God bless your heart — I wish I could 
cry that way." 

I walked away quite humiliated ; at last I ran, I was so eager 
to go to Anderson and confess every thing. I found him in his 
cabin — I attempted to speak, but I could not — I pulled out the 
money, put it on the table, and then 1 knelt down and sobbed on 
his knee. 

" What is all this, Jack ? " said Anderson, calmly ; but I did not 
reply. " I think I know, Jack," said he, after a pause. " You 
have been doing wrong." 

" Yes, yes," replied I, sobbing. 

" Well, my dear boy, wait till you can speak, and then tell me 
all about it." 

As soon as I could, I did. Anderson heard me without inter- 
ruption. 

" Jack," said he, when I had done speaking, " the temptation 
(pointing to the money) has been very great ; you did not resist 
at the moment ; but you have, fortunately, seen your error in good 
time, for the money is still here. I have little to say to you, for 
your own feelings convince me that it is needless. Do you think 
that you can read a little ? then read this." Anderson turned to 
the parable of the prodigal son, which I read to him : " And now," 
said he, turning over the leaves, "here is one verse more." I 
read it: — "There is more joy over one sinner tnat repenteth, than 
over ninety and nine that need no repentance." " Be careful, there- 
fore, my dear boy ; let this be a warning to you ; think well of 
it, for you have escaped a great danger ; the money shall be re- 
turned. Go now, my child, to your employment ; and if you do 
receive only halfpence, you will have the satisfaction of feeling 
that they are honestly obtained." 

I can assure the reader that this was a lesson which I never 
forgot ; it ^vas, however, succeeded by another variety of tempt- 
ation, which might have proved more dangerous to a young and 

K 9 



132 POOR JACK. 

ardent spirit, had it not ended as it did, in changing the course of 
my destiny and throwing me into a new path of action : to this I 
shall now refer. 

Hardly a month passed but we received additional pensioners 
into the Hospital. Among others, a man was sent to the Hospital 
who went by the name of Sam Spicer. I say went by the 
name, as it was not the custom for the seamen to give their 
real names when they were entered or pressed into the service ; 
and of course they were discharged into the Hospital by the 
same name which they bore on the ship's books. Spicer was 
upwards of six feet in height, very large boned, and must, when 
he was in his prime, have been a man of prodigious strength. 
When he was admitted to the Hospital he was nearly sixty 
years of age ; his hair was black and grey mixed, his com- 
plexion very dark, and his countenance fierce and unprepossess- 
ing. He went by the name of Black Sam, on account of his 
appearance. He had lost his right hand in a frigate action ; and 
to the stump he had fixed a sort of socket, into which he screwed 
his knife and the various articles which he wished to make use of; 
sometimes a file, sometimes a saw — having had every article made 
to fit into the socket, for he had been an armourer on board ship, 
and was very handy at such work. He was, generally speaking, very 
morose and savage to every body; seldom entered into conversation ; 
but sat apart, as if thinking, with a frown upon his countenance, 
and his eves, surmounted with bushy eyebrows, fixed upon the 
ground. The pensioners who belonged to the same ward said 
that he talked in his sleep, and from what they could collect at 
those times he must have been a pirate : but no one dared to speak 
to him on the subject, for more than once he had been punished for 
striking those who had offended him : indeed, he nearly killed one 
old man who was jesting with him when he was at work, having 
made a stab at him with his knife screwed in his socket ; but his 
foot slipped, and the blow missed. Spicer was brought up before 
the Council for this offence, and would have been discharged, 
had he not declared that he had done it only by way of a joke, 
to frighten the man ; and, as no one else was present, it could not 



FOOR JACK. 133 

be proved to the contrary. For some reason or another, which 
I could not comprehend, Spicer appeared to have taken a liking 
to me ; he would call me to him, and tell me stories about the 
West Indies and the Spanish Main, which I listened to very 
eagerly, for they were to me very interesting. But he seldom, if 
ever, spoke to me inside of the Hospital ; it was always when I was 
at the steps minding my vocation ; where he would come down 
and lean over the rail at the top of the wharf. He made and gave 
me a boat-hook, which I found very convenient. He had a great 
deal of information, and, as the ships came up the river, he would 
point out the flags of the different nations, tell me where they 
traded from, and what their cargoes probably consisted of. If 
they had no ensign, he would tell by their build, and the cut of 
their sails, what nation they belonged to ; pointing out to me the 
differences, which I soon began to perceive. He had been in every 
part of the world ; and scarcely a day passed in which I did not 
gain from him some amusing or useful information. Indeed, I be- 
came so fond of his company, that Peter Anderson spoke to me 
on the subject, and asked me what Spicer talked about. I told 
him, and he replied, — 

" Well, Jack, I dare say that he is a very pleasant companion to 
one who, like you, is so anxious for information, and I have 
nothing to say against him, for we have no right to listen to foolish 
reports which may probably have been raised from his savage 
appearance. Still, I confess, I do not like the man, as he is de- 
cidedly of a violent temper. As long as he talks to you about 
what you say he does, there is no harm done ; but when once he 
says anything which you think is wrong, promise me to let me 
know : and even now, if you will take my advice, you will not be 
so intimate with him." 

A little while afterwards, my father and Ben the whaler both 
spoke to me on the same subject, but with much less reservation. 

My father said, — 

" Jack, I don't like to see you always in company with that old 
pirate ; no good can come of it ; so haul ,off a little further for 
the future." And Ben told me, — 

k 3 



134 POOR JACK. 

"That a man who couldn't sleep o' nights without talking of 
killing people must have a bad conscience, and something lying 
heavy on his soul. There's an old saying, Jack, — ■ Tell me whose 
company you keeps, and I'll tell you what sort of a chap you be.' 
You've the character of a good honest boy; — steer clear of Sam 
Spicer, or you'll lose it." 

Admonitions from all those whom I loved were not without 
their effect ; and I made a resolution to be less intimate with 
Spicer. But it was difficult to do so, as I was obliged to be at the 
landing steps, and could not prevent his coming there. 

I acknowledge that it was a severe privation to me to follow 
the injunctions given to me ; for I would listen for hours to the 
thrilling narratives, the strange and almost incredible accounts of 
battles, incidents, and wild adventures, which this man Spicer 
would relate to me ; and when I thought over them, I felt that 
the desire to rove was becoming more strong within me every day. 
One morning I said to him that " I had a great mind to go on 
board of a man-of-war." 

"On board of a man-of-war?" replied Spicer ; "you'd soon be 
sick enough of that. Why, who would be at the beck and nod of 
others, ordered here, called there, by boy midshipmen ; bullied 
by lieutenants ; flogged by captains ; have all the work and little 
of the pay, all the fighting and less of the prize-money ; and, after 
having worn out your life in hard service, be sent here as a great 
favour, to wear a cocked hat, and get a shilling a week for your 
'baccy? Pshaw ! boy — that's not life." 

" Then, what is life ?" inquired I. 

" What is life ? Why, to sail in a clipper, with a jolly crew and 
a roving commission ; take your prizes, share and share alike, of 
gold dust and doubloons." 

" But what sort of vessel must that be, Spicer ?" 

" What sort ? why — a letter of marque — a privateer — a cruise 
on the Spanish Main — that's life. Many's the jolly day I've seen 
in those latitudes, where men-of-war do not bring vessels to and 
press the best men out of them. There the sun's warm, and the 
sky and the sea are deep blue — and the corals grow like forests 



POOR JACK. 135 

underneath, and there are sandy coves and cool caves for retreat 
— and where you may hide your gold till you want it — ay, and 
your sweethearts too, if you have any." 

" I thought privateers always sent their prizes into port, to be 
condemned ?" 

" Yes, in the Channel and these seas they do ; but not down 
there ; it's too far off. We condemn the vessels ourselves, and 
share the money on the capstan head." 

" But is that lawful ? " 

"Lawful! to be sure it is. Could we spare men to send prizes 
home to England, and put them into the hands of a rascally agent, 
who would rob us of three fourths at least ? No, no — that would 
never do. If I could have escaped from the man-of-war which 
picked up me and four others, who were adrift in an open boat, I 
would now have been on the Coast. But when I lost my fin, I 
knew that all was over with me ; so I came to the Hospital : but 
I often think of old times, and the life of a rover. Now, if you 
have any thoughts of going to sea, look out for some vessel bound 
to the Gold Coast, and then you'll soon get in the right way." 

"The Gold Coast? — Is not that to where the slavers go ?" 

" Yes, slavers, and other vessels besides : some traffic for ivory 
and gold dust ; however, that's as may happen. You'd soon find 
yourself in good company ; and wouldn't that be better than 
begging here for halfpence ? I would be above that, at all 
events." 

This remark, the first of the kind ever made to me, stung me to 
the quick. Strange, I had never before considered myself in the 
light of a beggar ; and yet, was I not so, just as much as a 
sweeper of a crossing ? 

" A beggar ?" replied I. 

" Yes, a beggar ; don't you beg for halfpence, and say, ' Thank 
your honour; a copper for poor Jack, your honour?'" rejoined 
Spicer, mimicking me. " When I see that pretty sister of yours, 
that looks so like a real lady, I often thinks to myself, ' Fine and 
smart as you are, miss, your brother's only a beggar.' Now, would 
you net like to return from a cruise with a bag of doubloons to 

k 4 



136 POOR JACK. 

throw into her lap, proving that you were a gentleman, and above 
coppers thrown to you out of charity ? Well, old as I am, and 

maimed, I'd sooner starve where I now stand but I must be 

off; so good-bye, Jack — look sharp after the halfpence." 

As Spicer walked away, my young blood boiled. A beggar ! — 
it was but too true — and yet I had never thought it a disgrace 
before. I sat down on the steps, and was soon in deep thought. 
Boat after boat came to the stairs, and yet I stirred not. Not one 
halfpenny did I take during the remainder of that day ; for I could 
not— would not ask for one. My pride, hitherto latent, was roused ; 
and before I rose from where I had been seated, I made a reso- 
lution that I would earn my livelihood in some other way. W hat 
hurt me most was his observations about Virginia and her beggar 
brother. I was so proud of Virginia, I felt that her brother 
ought not to be a beggar. Such was the effect produced in so 
ehort a time by the insidious discourse of this man. Had he still 
remained at the steps, I do believe that I should have asked, 
probably have followed, his advice. Fortunately he had left ; 
and, after a little reflection, I had the wisdom to go and seek 
Peter Anderson, and consult him as to what I could do ; for to 
change my mode of obtaining my livelihood I was determined 
upon. 

I found Anderson, as usual, seated under the colonnade, reading ; 
and I went up to him. 

"Well, Jack, my boy, you are home early," said he. 

" Yes," replied I, gravely ; and then I was silent. 

After a pause of about a minute, Peter Anderson said, — 

"Jack, I see there's something the matter. Now, tell me what 
it is. Can I help you ? " 

" I did wish to speak to you," rejDlied I. " I've been thinking — 
about going to sea." 

" And how long have you thought of that, Jack ? " 

" I've thought more of it lately," replied I. 

" Yes, since Spicer has been talking to you. Xow, is that not 
the case ? " 

" Yes, it is.'* 



POOR JACK. 137 

" I knew that, Jack. I'm at your service for as long as you 
please ; now sit down and tell me all he has said to you that you 
can remember. I sha'n't interrupt you." 

I did so ; and before I had half finished, Anderson replied, — 
u That is quite enough, Jack. One thing is evident to me — that 
Spicer has led a bad and lawless life, and would even now continue 
it, old as he is, only that he is prevented by being crippled. Jack, 
he has talked to you about privateers ! God forgive me if I wrong 
him ; but I think, had he said pirates, he would have told the truth. 
But say nothing about that observation of mine ; I wish from my 
heart that you had never known him. But here comes your father. 
He has a right to know what we are talking about ; for you owe duty 
to him as his son, and nothing can be done without his permission." 

When my father came up to us, Anderson begged him to sit 
down, and he told him what we had been discoursing about. I had 
already stated my objections to enter on board of a man-of-war. 

'•'Well!" said my father, "I may come athwart hawse of that 
old piccaroon yet, if he don't look oat. Not that I mind your 
going to sea, Jack, as your father did before you ; but what he 
says about the sarvice is a confounded lie. Let a man do his duty, 
and the sarvice is a good one ; and a man who is provided for as 
he is, ought to be ashamed of himself to speak as he has done — 
the old rascal. Still, I do not care for your entering the sarvice so 
young. It would be better that you were first apprentice and 
larnt your duty ; and as soon as your time is out, you will be 
pressed of course, and then you would sarve the King. I see no 
objection to all that." 

" But why do you want so particularly to go to sea, Jack ? " 
observed Anderson. 

"I don't like being a beggar — begging for halfpence!" re- 
plied I. 

" And Spicer told you that you were a beggar?" said Peter. 

"He did." 

" Jack, if that is the case, we all are beggars ; for we all work, 
and receive what money we can get for our work. There is no 
shame in that." 



13S toor jack. 

"I can't bear to think of it/" replied I, as the tears came into 
ray eyes. 

"Well, well! I see how it is," replied Anderson; "it's a pity 
you ever fell in with that man." 

" That's true as gospel," observed my father ; " but still, if he 
had said nothing worse than that, I should not have minded. I 
do think that Jack is now old enough to do something better ; and 
I must say, I do not dislike his wishing so to do — for it is begging 
for halfpence, arter all." 

" Well, boy," said Peter Anderson, u suppose you leave your 
lather and me to talk over the matter ; and to-morrow, by this 
time, we will tell you what we think will be best." 

" Anything — anything," replied I, " but being a beggar." 

" Go along, you are a foolish boy," said Anderson. 

"I like his spirit, though," said my father, as I walked away. 

On the next day, the important question was to be decided. I 
did not go to the stairs, to follow up my vocation. I had talked 
the matter over with Virginia ; who, although she did not like that 
I should go away, had agreed with me that she objected to my 
begging for money. I waited very impatiently for the time that 
Anderson had appointed ; and, at last, he and my father came 
together, when the former said, — 

" Well, Jack ; it appears that you do not like to be a waterman ; 
and that you have no great fancy for a man-of-war, although you 
have a hankering for the sea- Now, as you cannot cruise with 
your friend Spicer on the Spanish Main, nor yet be safe from im- 
pressment in a privateer or merchantman, we have been thinking 
that, perhaps, you would have no objection to be a channel and 
river pilot ; and if so, I have an old friend in that service, who, 
I think, may help you. What do you say ?" 

11 I should like it very much." 

" Yes, it is a good service, and a man is usefully employed. You 
may be the means, as soon as you are out of your time, and have 
passed your examination, of saving many a vessel and more lives. 
You have had a pretty fair education, indeed quite sufficient ; 
and, as you will often be coming up the river, you will have 



POOR JACK. 1S9 

opportunities of seeing your father and your friends. If you 
decide, I will write at once." 

" It is the very thing that I should like/' replied I ; " and many 
thanks to you, Anderson." 

" And it's exactly what I should wish, also," replied my father. 
" So that job's jobbed, as the saying is." 

After this arrangement, I walked away as proud as if I had 
been an emancipated slave : that very evening I announced my in- 
tention of resigning my office of " Poor Jack ;" and named as my 
successor the boy with whom I had fought so desperately to obtain 
it, when the prospect was held out to me, by old Ben, of my 
becoming Poor Jack — for ever ! 



chap. xx. 

MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING ; OR A SPECIMEN OF MODERN PATRONAGE. 

I communicated to my mother and Virginia my father's inten- 
tions relative to my future employ, and was not surprised to find 
my mother very much pleased with the intelligence ; for she had 
always considered my situation of "Poor Jack" as disgracing her 
faaiily — declaring it the "most ungenteelest" of all occupations. 
Perhaps she was not only glad of my giving up the situation, but 
also of my quitting her house. My father desired me to wear 
my Sunday clothes during the week, and ordered me a new suit 
for my best, which he paid for out of the money which he had 
placed in the hands of the Lieutenant of the Hospital ; and I was 
very much surprised to perceive my mother cutting out half a 
dozen new shirts for me, which she and Virginia were employed 
making up during the evenings. Not that my mother told me who 
the shirts were for — she said nothing ; but Virginia whispered it to 



140 POOR JACK. 



me ; my mother could not be even gracious to me : nevertheless, 
the shirts and several other necessaries, such as stockings and 
pocket-handkerchiefs, were placed for my use on my father's sea- 
chest, in my room, without any comment on her part, although 
she had paid for them out of her own purse. During the time 
that elapsed from my giving up the situation of " Poor Jack," to 
my quitting Greenwich, I remained very quietly in my mother's 
house, doing every thing that I could for her, and employing myself 
chiefly in reading books which I borrowed anywhere that I could. 
I was very anxious to get rid of my soubriquet of " Poor Jack," 
and when so called would tell every body that my name was now 
" Thomas Saunders." 

One Sunday, about three weeks after I had given up my berth, 
I was walking with my father and Virginia on the terrace of the 
Hospital, when we perceived a large party of ladies and gentlemen 
coming towards us. My father was very proud of us : I had 
this very day put on the new suit of clothes which he had ordered 
for me, and which had been cut out in the true man-of-war fashion; 
and Virginia was, as usual, very nicely dressed. We were walk- 
ing towards the party who were advancing, when all of a sudden 
my father started, and exclaimed, — 

" Well, shiver my timbers ! if it ain't she—and fie — by all that's 
blue!" 

Who she or he might be, neither Virginia nor I could imagine ; 
but I looked at the party, who were now close to us, and per- 
ceived, in advance of the rest, an enormous lady, dressed in a 
puce-coloured pelisse and a white satin bonnet. Her features 
were good, and had they been on a smaller scale would have 
been considered handsome. She towered above the rest of the 
company, and there was but one man who could at all compete 
with her in height and size, and he was by her side. 

My father stopped, took off his cocked hat, and scraped the 
gravel with his timber toe, as he bowed a little forward. 

" Sarvant, your Honour's Ladyship. Sarvant, your Honour Sir 
Hercules." 

" Ah ! who have we here ? " replied Sir Hercules, putting his 



POOR JACK. 141 

hand up as a screen above his eyes. " Who are you, my man?" 
continued he. 

" Tom Saunders ; your Honour's coxswain, as was, in the Druid," 
replied my father, with another scrape at the gravel ; " taken in 
moorings at last, your Honour. Hope to see your Honour and 
your honourable Ladyship quite well." 

" I recollect you now, my man," replied Sir Hercules, very 
stiffly ; — " and where did you lose your leg ?" 

" Battle o' the Nile, your Honour ; Majesty's ship Oudacious." 

"How interesting !" observed one of the ladies; "one of Sir 
Hercules' old men." 

" Yes, madam, and one of my best men. Lady Hercules, you 
must recollect him," said Sir Hercules. 

"I should think so, Sir Hercules," replied the lady; "did I not 
give him my own lady's maid in marriage ? 

" Dear me, how excessively interesting ! " said another of the 
party. 

Now this was a little event in which Sir Hercules and Lady 
Hercules stood prominent ; it added to their importance for the 
moment, and therefore they were both pleased. Lady Hercules 
then said, — 

"And pray, my good man, how is your wife?" 

" Quite well and hearty, at your Ladyship's sarvice," replied 
my father ; " and, please your Ladyship, these two be our children." 

" Bless me, how interesting ! " exclaimed another lady. 

" And remarkably well bred uns," remarked a short gentleman 
in a fox-hunting coat, examining Virginia through his eye-glass ; 
" coxswain, filly — dam, lady's maid." 

"What is your name, child?" said Lady Hercules to Virginia. 

" Virginia, ma'am," replied my sister with a courtesy. 

" You must say ' Lady Hercules/ my dear," said my father, 
stooping down. 

" My name is Virginia, Lady Hercules," replied my sister, 
courtesying again. 

" Indeed I then I suppose you are named after me ? " 

"Yes, your Ladyship ; hope no offence — but we did take the 
liberty," replied my father. 



142 POO It JACK, 

" And what is yours, boy ? " 

" Thomas, Lady Hercules," replied I, with a bow and scrape, 
after my father's receipt for politeness. 

" And where is your mother ? " said Sir Hercules. 

" Mother's at home, Lady Hercules," replied I, with another 
scrape. 

"How very interesting!" exclaimed one of the party. "Quite 
an event ! " said another. " A delightful rencontre !" cried a third. 
" How kind of you, Lady Hercules, to give up your own maid ! and 
such handsome children," &c. &e. " It's really quite charming." 

Lady Hercules was evidently much pleased ; and she assumed 
the patroness. 

" Well, little girl, since you have been named after me, out of 
gratitude, I must see what can be done for you. Tell your mother 
to come up to me to-morrow at three o'clock, and bring you with 
her." 

" Yes, Lady Hercules," replied Virginia, with a courtesy. 

" And Saunders, you may as well come up at the same time, and 
bring your lad with you," added Sir Hercules. 

" Yes, your Honour," replied my father, both he and I simul- 
taneously scraping the gravel. 

" Wish your Honour Sir Hercules, and your honourable lady, 
and all the honourable company, a very good morning !" continued 
my father, taking Virginia and me by the hand to lead us away. 

Sir Hercules touched his hat in return, and walked away as stiff 
as usual : the pensioners who had witnessed the interview between 
him and my father, concluding that Sir Hercules was a naval 
officer, now rose and touched their hats to him as he walked 
with her Ladyship in advance of the party. We joined Anderson, 
who was sitting down at the other end of the walk, when my 
father communicated to him what had passed. 

As my father conducted Virginia home, she said to him, — 

" Why do you call him Sir, and her Lady f " 

" Because they are quality people, child. He is a barrownight, 
and she is Lady Hercules." 

" Are all barrow nights and ladies so much bigger than other 
people are in general ? " 



POOR JACK. H3 

'•'No, child, they don't go by size. I've seen many a Lord who 
was a very little man." 

My mother was very much pleased when we narrated what 
had happened, as she considered that Lady Hercules might prove 
a valuable patron to Virginia, whom she did not fail to have 
ready at the time appointed ; and, dressed in our very best, we all 
walked together to The Sun, at which Sir Hercules and his lady 
had taken up their quarters. Let it not be supposed that my 
mother had forgotten the unceremonious manner in which she had 
been dismissed from the service of Lady Hercules, — it was still 
fresh in the memory of a person so revengeful in her disposition ; 
but she considered that as Lady Hercules had forgotten it, it was 
her interest to do the same ; so, when we were ushered into the 
room where sat Sir Hercules and her Ladyship, my mother was 
all smiles, and courtesies, and gratitude for past favours. 

There was an old gentleman, with a bald powdered head, 
dressed in black, standing with his back to the fire, when we 
entered; he was the only other person in the room beside Sir 
Hercules and his lady. Lady Hercules first obtained from my 
mother a short history of what had happened since they had 
parted ; and really, to hear my mother's explanation, it would 
have been supposed that she and my father had always been the 
most loving couple in the world. 

" Well," said Sir Hercules, u and what do you intend to do 
with your boy, Saunders ? " 

* May it please your Honour, I've been thinking of bringing him 
up as a channel pilot," replied my father. 

" Very good," replied Sir Hercules ; ei I can see to that ; and 
with my interest at the Trinity Board, the thing is done, sir;" and 
Sir Hercules walked pompously about the room. " Saunders," 
said Sir Hercules, stopping, after he had taken three or four turns 
up and down, and joining his fingers behind his back, "I thought 
I perceived some difference in you, when you first addressed me. 
What has become of your tail, sir ? " 

" My tail, your Honour?" replied my father, looking as much a 
delinquent as if he was still on board a man-of-war, and had been 



144 POOR JACK. 

guilty of some misdemeanor, — " why, please your Honour Sir 
Hercules " 

" I cut it off for him with my scissors," interrupted my mother, 
with a courtesy. " Saunders was very savage when he came for 
to know it ; but he had a stupefaction of the brain, and was quite 
insensible at the time ; and so, Sir Hercules and my Lady (here a 
courtesy), I thought it was better " 

u Ah ! I see, — a brain fever," observed Sir Hercules. * Well, 
under these circumstances, you may have saved his life ; but 'twas 
a pity — was it not, my Lady ? — quite altered the man, — you re- 
collect his tail, my Lady ? " 

" What a question, Sir Hercules ! " replied her Ladyship with 
great, dignity, turning round towards my mother. 

My father appeared to be quite relieved from his dilemma 
by his wife's presence of mind, and really thankful to her for 
coming to his assistance ; she had saved him from the mortification 
of telling the truth. How true it is, that married people, however 
much they may quarrel, like to conceal their squabbles from the 
world. 

" And what are you thinking of doing with your little girl ? " 
said Lady Hercules — " bringing her up to service, I presume: leave 
that to me ; as soon as she is old enough, the thing is done, you 
need say no more about it." Here her Ladyship fell back in the 
large easy chair on which she was seated, with a self-satisfied air 
of patronage, and looking even more dignified than her husband. 

But my mother had no such intentions, and having first thanked 
her Ladyship for her great kindness, stated very humbly, that she 
did not much like the idea of her daughter going out to service ; 
that she was far from strong, and that her health would not allow 
her to undertake hard work. 

iC Well, but I presume she may do the work of a lady's maid?" 
replied her Ladyship haughtily; K and it was that service which I 
intended for her." 

" Indeed, Lady Hercules, you are very kind ; but there is an 
objection," replied my mother, to gain time. 

" Please your Ladyship," said my father, who, to my great sur- 



POOR JACK. 115 

prise, came to my mother's support, " I do not wish that my little 
girl should be a lady's maid." 

" And why not, pray?" said her ladyship, rather angrily. 
" Why, you see, your ladyship, my daughter is, after all, only 
the daughter of a poor Greenwich pensioner; and, although she 
has been so far pretty well educated, yet I wishes her not to forget 
her low situation in life, and ladies' maids do get so confounded 
proud ('specially those who have the fortune to be ladies' ladies' 
maids), that I don't wish that she should take a situation which 
would make her forget herself, and her poor old pensioner of a 
father ; and, begging your honour's pardon, that is the real state 
of the case, my lady." 

What my mother felt at this slap at her, I do not know, but 
certain it is that she was satisfied with my father taking the re- 
sponsibility of refusal on his own shoulders, and she therefore 
continued — "I often have told Mr. Saunders how happy I was when 
under your ladyship's protection, and what a fortunate person I 
considered myself; but my husband has always had such an 
objection to my girl being brought up to it, that I have (of course, 
my lady, as it is my duty to him to do so) given up my own wishes 
from the first ; indeed, my lady, had I not known that my little 
girl was not to go to service, I never should have ventured to have 
called her Virginia, my lady." 

" What, then, do you intend her for?" said Sir Hercules to my 
father. " You don't mean to bring her up as a lady, do you ? " 

" No, your honour, she's but a pensioner's daughter, and I wishes 
her to be humble, as she ought to be ; so I've been thinking that 
something in the millinery line, or perhaps " 

" As a governess, my lady," interrupted my mother, with a 
curtsey. 

" That will make her humble enough, at all events," observed 
the bald gentleman in black, with a smile. 

" I admit," replied Lady Hercules, " that your having given 
my name to your little girl is a strong reason for her not going into 
service ; but there are many expenses attending the education 
necessary for a young person as governess." 

L 



14-6 POOR JACK. 

Here my mother entered into an explanation of how Virginia 
had been educated; an education which she should not have 
dreamt of giving, only that her child bore her ladyship's name, &c. 
My mother employed her usual flattery and humility, so as to 
reconcile her ladyship to the idea ; who was the more inclined 
when she discovered that she was not likely to be put to any ex- 
pense in her patronage of my sister. It was finally agreed that 
Virginia should be educated for the office of governess, and that 
when she was old enough Lady Hercules would take her under 
her august protection ; but her ladyship did do her some service. 
Finding that Virginia was at a respectable school, she- called there 
with a party of ladies, and informed the schoolmistress that the 
little girl was under her protection, and that she trusted that jus- 
tice would be done to her education. In a school where the Miss 
Tippets were considered the aristocracy, the appearance of so 
great a woman as Lady Hercules was an event, and I do not know 
whether my little sister did not after that take precedence in the 
school ; at all events, she was much more carefully instructed and 
looked after than she had been before. Sir Hercules was also 
pleased to find, upon inquiry, that there was every prospect of my 
entering the pilot service, without any trouble on his part. Both 
Sir Hercules and his lady informed their friends of what their in- 
tentions were to their young proteges, and were inundated with 
praises and commendations for their kindness, the full extent of 
which the reader will appreciate. But, as my mother pointed out 
as we walked home, if we did not require their assistance at 
present, there was no saying but that we eventually might ; and if 
so, that Sir Hercules and Lady Hawkingtrefylyan could not well 
refuse to perform their promises. I must say that this was the 
first instance in my recollection in which my parents appeared to 
draw amicably together ; and I believe that nothing except regard 
for their children could have produced the effect. 



POOH JACK. 



CHAP. XXL 



117 



A 310ST IMPORTANT PRESENT IS MADE TO ME J AND, AS IT WILL EVEN- 
TUALLY APPEAR, THE GENEROSITY OF THE GIVER IS REWARDED. 

Sir Hercules and Lady Hawkingtrefylyan quitted Greenwich 
the day after the interview narrated in the preceding chapter, and 
by that day's post Anderson received a letter in reply to the one 
he had written, from his friend Philip Bramble, channel and river 
pilot, who had, as he said in his letter, put on shore at Deal, where 
he resided, but the day before, after knocking about in the Channel 
for three weeks. Bramble stated his willingness to receive and 
take charge of me, desiring that I would hold myself in readi- 
ness to be picked up at a minute's warning, and he would call for 
me the first time that he took a vessel up the river. A letter 
communicating this intelligence was forthwith despatched by my 
mother to Sir Hercules, who sent a short reply, stating that if 
I conducted myself properly he would not lose sight of me. This 
letter, however, very much increased the family consequence in 
Fisher's Alley, for my mother did not fail to show it to every body, 
and every body was anxious to see the handwriting of a real 
baronet. About a week afterwards I went to the shop of the 
widow St. Felix, to purchase some tobacco for my father, when 
she said to me, 

" So, Jack,— or Tom, as I hear you request to be called now. — 
you are going to leave us ? " 

" Yes," replied I ; " and I shall be sorry to leave you, — you have 
been so kind to me." 

" A little kindness goes a great way with some people, Tom, 
and that's the case with you, for you've a grateful heart. You're to 
be a pilot, I hear ; well, Tom, I've a present to make you, which you 
will find very useful in your profession, and which will make you 
think of me sometimes. Stop a moment till I come down again." 

The widow went up stairs, and when she came down, held in 
her hand a telescope, or spy-glass, as sailors generally call them. It 

L 2 



148 POOR JACK. 

was about two feet long, covered with white leather, and appa- 
rently had been well preserved. 

" Now, Tom, this is what a pilot ought not to be without; and if 
what was said by the person to whom it belonged is true, it is an 
excellent spy-glass ; so now accept it from your loving friend, and 
long may you live to peep through it." 

" Thank you, thank you ! " replied I, delighted, as Mrs. St. Felix 
put it into my hands. I surveyed it all over, pulled out the tube, 
and then said to her, " Who did it belong to?" 

" Tom," replied the widow, " that's a sad trick you have of 
asking questions ; it's quite sufficient that it is mine, and that I 
give it to you, — is it not ? " 

" Yes," replied I ; " but you're the only person who says that 1 
ask too many questions. Why, here's a name ! F. I." 

The widow stretched herself over the counter with a sudden 
spring, and snatched the telescope out of my hand. When I looked 
at her, she stood pale and trembling. 

f( Why, what is the matter ? " inquired I. 

She put her hand to her side, as if in great pain, and for some 
seconds could not speak. 

" Tom, I never knew that there was a name on the telescope ; the 
name must not be known, that's the truth ; you shall have it this 
evening, but you must go away now — do, that's a dear good boy." 

The widow turned to walk into the back parlour, with the 
telescope in her hand, and I obeyed her injunctions in silence and 
wondering. That there was a mystery about her was certain ; and 
I felt very sorrowful, not that I did not know the secret, but that I 
could not be of service to her. That evening the telescope was 
brought to my mother's house by fat Jane. I perceived that the 
portion of the brass rim upon which the name had been cut with a 
knife, for it had not been engraved, as I thought, had been care- 
fully filed down, so that not a vestige of the letters appeared. 

The next morning I was down at the steps long before break- 
fast, that I might try my new present. Bill Freeman was there, 
and he showed me how to adjust the focus. I amused myself 
looking at the vessels which were working up and down the Reach ; 



POOR JACK. 14:9 

and so much was I delighted, that I quite forgot how time passed, 
and lost my breakfast. Every one asked to have a peep through 
the telescope, and every one declared that it was an excellent 
glass ; at last Spicer came up to where I stood. 

" Well, Jack/' said he, " what have you there, — a spy-glass ? 
Let's have a look ; I'm a good judge of one, I can tell you." 

I handed the telescope over to him ■ he looked through it for 
some time. 

« A first-rate glass, Jack" (I was oftener called Jack than Tom 
at that time); " I never knew but one equal to it. Where did you 
get it?" 

I don't exactly know why, but perhaps the mystery evident in 
the widow, and the cautions I had received against Spicer, com- 
bined together, induced me not to answer the question. 

" It's odd," observed Spicer, who was now examining the out- 
side of the telescope ; " I could almost swear to it." He then 
looked at the small brass rim where the name had been, and per- 
ceived that it had been erased. « Now I'm positive ! Jack, where 
did you get this glass ? " 

" It was made a present to me," replied I. 

" Come here," said Spicer, leading me apart from the others 
standing by. "Now tell me directly"— and Spicer spoke in an 
authoritative tone — " who gave you this glass?" 

I really was somewhat afraid of Spicer, who had gained much 
power over me. I dared not say that I would not tell him, and I 
did not like to tell a lie. I thought that if I told the truth I might 
somehow or another injure Mrs. St. Felix, and I therefore answered 
evasively. 

" It was sent to me as a present by a lady." 

« Oh ! " replied Spicer, who had heard of Sir Hercules and his 
lady, " so the lady sent it to you ! It's very odd," continued he; 
« I could take my oath that I've had that glass in my hand a 
hundred times." 

"Indeed !" replied I. " Where?" 

But Spicer did not answer me ; he had fallen into one of his 
dark moods, and appeared as if recalling former events to his 

l 3 



150 rooR jack. 

mind. He still kept possession of the glass, and I was afraid that 
he would not return it, for I tried to take it softly out of his hand, 
and he would not let go. He remained in this way about a minute, 
when I perceived my father and Ben the Whaler coming up, at 
which I was delighted. 

" Father," said I, as they came near, " come and try my new 
spy-glass." 

Spicer started, and released the telescope, when I laid hold of it 
and put it into my father's hands. As neither my father nor Ben 
would ever speak to him, Spicer, with a lowering brow, walked 
away. After my father had examined the glass and praised it, he 
very naturally asked me where I obtained it. After what had 
passed with Spicer, I was so fearful of his discovering, by other 
people, by whom the glass had been given to me, that I replied 
again, in the hearing of every body, " a lady ; father, — you may 
easily guess who." 

"Well," replied my father, "I never thought that her ladyship 
could have been so generous ; I take it very kindly of her." 

I was delighted at my father falling so easily into the mistake. 
As for my mother and Virginia, they were neither of them present 
when Jane brought the telescope to me, or I certainly should have 
stated, without reservation, to whom I had been indebted. I 
hardly could decide whether I would go to the widow and tell her 
what had occurred ; but, upon some reflection, as she had accused 
me of asking too many questions, and might suppose that I wished 
to obtain her secrets, I determined upon saying nothing about it. 

For a week I occupied myself wholly with my telescope, and I 
became perfectly master of it, or rather quite used to it, which is 
of some importance. I avoided Spicer, always leaving the steps 
when I perceived him approaching, although once or twice he 
beckoned to me. At the expiration of the week, a message was 
brought by a waterman from Philip Bramble, stating that he 
should pass Greenwich in a day or two, being about to take down 
a West Indiaman then lying below London Bridge : my clothes 
were therefore then packed up in readiness, and I went to bid 
farewell to my limited acquaintance. 



POOR JACK. 151 

I called upon old Nanny, who was now quite strong again. I 
had before acquainted her with my future prospects. 

" Well, Jack/' says she, " and so you're going away ? I don't 
think you were quite right to give up a situation where you gained 
so many halfpence every day, and only for touching your cap : 
however, you know best. I shall have no more bargains after 
you are gone, — that's certain. But, Jack, you'll be on board of 
vessels coining from the East and West Indies, and all other parts 
of the world, and they have plenty of pretty things on board, such 
as shells, and empty bottles, and hard biscuit, and bags of oakum ; 
and, Jack, they will give them to you for nothing, for sailors don't 
care what they give away when they come from a long voyage ; 
and so mind you beg for me as much as you can, that's a good 
boy ; but don't take live monkeys or those things, they eat so 
much. You may bring me a parrot, I think I could sell one, and 
that don't cos.t much to feed. Do you understand, Jack ? Will 
you do this for me ? " 

" I don't know whether I can do all you wish, but depend upon 
it, mother, I won't forget you." 

" That's enough, Jack, you'll keep your word ; and now, is there 
any nice thing that I can give you out of my shop, as a keep- 
sake, Jack ? " 

"Why, no, mother, I thank you, — nothing." 

" Think of something, Jack," replied old Nanny ; " you must 
have something." 

" Well, then, mother, you know I like reading ; will you give 
me the old book that I was reading when I sat up with you one 
night ?" 

" Yes, Jack, and welcome ; what book is it ? I don't know — I 
can't see to read large print without spectacles, and I broke mine 
many years ago." 

"Why do you not buy another pair?" 

" Another pair, Jack ? Spectacles cost money. I've no money ; 
and as I never read, I don't want spectacles. Go in and fetch the 
book ; it's yours, and welcome." 

l 4 



152 



POOR JACK. 



I went in and brought out the u Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress" 
which I before mentioned. " This is it, mother." 

" Yes, yes, I recollect now, it's a very pretty book. What's it 
about, Jack ? I can't see myself : never mind, take it, Jack, and 
don't forget your promise." 

I wished old Nanny good-bye, and took the book home, which I 
gave into Virginia's care, as I wished her to read it. The next 
morning, at daybreak, I was summoned ; the ship was dropping 
down the river. I bade farewell to my little sister, who wept on 
my shoulder ; to my mother, who hardly condescended to answer 
me. My father helped me down with my luggage, which was not 
very heavy ; and Anderson and old Ben accompanied us to the 
landing-steps ; and having bid them all farewell, besides many- 
others of my friends who were there, I stepped into the boat sent 
forme, and quitted Greenwich for my new avocation, on the 6th of 
October, 1799, being then, as Anderson had calculated, precisely 
thirteen years and seven months old. 




m : ; 



POOR JACK. 



153 



CHAP. XXII. 

IN WHICH A STORY IS BEGUN AND NOT FINISHED, WHICH I THINK THE 
READER WILL REGRET AS MUCH AS, AT THE TIME, I DID. 

The boat was soon alongside of the West Indiaman, which had 
been tiding it down Limehouse Reach under her topsails, there 
being but little wind, and that contrary ; but now that she had 
arrived to Greenwich Reach, she had braced up, with her head 
the right way. My box was handed up the side, and I made my 
appearance on the deck soon afterwards, with my telescope in my 
hand. 

" Are you the lad for whom the pilot sent the boat?" inquired 
a man whom I afterwards found to be the second mate. 

" Yes," replied I. 

" Well, there he is abaft, in a P-jacket," said he, walking to 
the gangway, and directing the men to drop the boat astern. 

I looked aft, and perceived my future master talking with the 
captain of the vessel. Philip Bramble was a spare man, about 
five feet seven inches high : he had on his head a low-crowned 
tarpaulin hat ; a short P-jacket (so called from the abbreviation 
of pilot's jacket) reached down to just above his knees. His 
features were regular ; and, indeed, although weather-beaten, they 
might be termed handsome. His nose was perfectly straight, his 
lips thin, his eyes grey and very keen ; he had little or no whiskers, 
and, from his appearance, and the intermixture of grey with his 
brown hair, I supposed him to be about fifty years of age. In 
one hand he held a short clay-pipe, into which he was inserting 
the forefinger of the other, as he talked with the captain. At the 
time that he was pointed out to me by the second mate he was 
looking up aloft ; I had, therefore, time to make the above observ- 
ations before he cast his eyes down and perceived me, when I 
immediately went aft to him. 



lot POOR JACK, 

te l suppose you are Tom Saunders/' said he, surveying ine from 
head to foot. 

I replied in the affirmative. 

""Well, Anderson has given you a good character; mind you 
don't lose it. D'ye think you'll like to be a pilot ? " 

" Yes," replied I. 

et Have you sharp eyes, a good memory, and plenty of nerve ? " 

" I believe I've got the two first ; I don't know about the 
other." 

" I suppose not ; it hasn't been tried yet. How far can you 
see through a fog ?" 

" According how thick it is." 

" I see you've a glass there ; tell me what you make of that 
vessel just opening from Blackwali Reach ?" 

" What, that ship ? " 

" Oh, you can make it out to be a ship, can you, with the naked 
eye ? Well, then, you have good eyes." 

I fixed my glass upon the vessel ; and, after a time, not having 
forgotten the lessons so repeatedly given me by Spicer, I said, 
" She has no colours up ; but she's an Embden vessel, by her 
build." 

" Oh !" said he, " hand me the glass. The boy's right, — and 
a good glass, too. Come, I see you do know something ; and good 
knowledge, too, for a pilot. It often saves us a deal of trouble 
when we know a vessel by her build ; them foreigners sail too 
close to take pilots. Can you stand cold ? Have you got a P- 
jacket?" 

" Yes ; father bought me one." 

" Well, you'll want it this winter ; for the wild geese tell us that 
it will be a sharp one. Steady, starboard ! " 

" Starboard it is ! " 

" D'ye know the compass ? " 

« No." 

< < Well, stop till we get down to Deal. Now, stand by me, and 
keep your eyes wide open ; for, d'ye see, you've plenty to lam, and 
you can't begin too soon. We must square the mainyard, captain, 



POOR JACK. 155 

if you please," continued he, as we entered Blackwall Reach. 
;; What could make the river so perverse as to take these two 
bends in Limehouse and Blackwall reaches, unless to give pilots 
trouble, I can't say."' 

The wind being now contrary, from the sharp turn in the river, 
we were again tiding it down ; that is, hove to and allowing the 
tide to drift us through the Reach ; but, as soon as we were clear 
of Blackwall Reach, we could lay our course down the river. As 
we passed Gravesend, Bramble asked me whether I was ever so low 
down. 

" Yes," replied I, " I have been down as far as Sea Reach ;" 
which I had been when I was upset in the wherry, and I told him 
the story. 

" Well, Tom, that's called the river now ; but do you know that, 
many years ago, where we now are used to be considered as the 
mouth of the river, and that fort there" (pointing to Tilbury Fort) 
" was built to defend it ; for they say the French fleet used to come 
and anchor down below." 

" Yes," replied I ; " and they say, in the History of England, 
that the Danes used to come up much higher, even up to Green- 
wich; but that's a very long while ago." 

" Well, you beat me, Tom ; I never heard that ; and I think, if 
ever they did do so, they won't do it again in a hurry. What 
water have you got, my man ? Port there !" 

" Port it is." 

" Steady, — so." 

" Shall we get down to the Xore to-night, pilot ? " said the cap- 
tain. 

" Why, sir, I'm in hopes we shall ; we have still nearly three 
hours daylight ; and now that we are clear of the Hope, we shall lay 
fairlv down Sea Reach ; and if the wind will only freshen a little 
(and it looks very like it), we shall be able to stem thefrst of the 
flood, at all events." 

I ought to observe, that Bramble, as soon as he had passed any- 
shoal or danger, pointed it out to me : he said, — 

" I tell it to you, because you can't be told too often. You 



J 56 



POOR JACK. 



won't recollect much that I tell you, I dare say ; I don't expect it; 
but you may recollect a little, and every little helps." 

The tide had flowed more than an hour when we passed the 
Nore light and came to an anchor. 
" What lights are those ? " inquired I. 

" That's Sheerness," replied Bramble. " We were talking of 
the French and Danes coming up the river. Why, Tom, it is not 
much more than one hundred and fifty years ago when the Dutch 
fleet came up to Sheerness, destroyed the batteries and landed 
troops there ; howsomever, as I said of the French and the other 
chaps, they won't do so again in a hurry." 

As soon as they had veered out sufficient cable, Bramble ac- 
cepted the invitation of the captain to go down in the cabin, when 
I went and joined the men, Mho were getting their supper for- 
wards. I was soon on good terms with them; and after supper, as it 
was cold, they went down to the fore peak, got out some beer and 
grog, and we sat round in a circle, with the bottles and mugs and a 
farthing candle in the centre. Being right in the eyes of her, as it 
is termed, we could plainly hear the water slapping against the 
bends outside of her, as it was divided by the keelson, and borne 
away by the strong flood tide. It was a melancholy sound ; I had 
never heard it before; and during a pause, as I listened to it, 
one of the men observed, " Queer sound, boy, ain't it? You'd 
think that the water was lapping in right among us. But noises 
aboard ship don't sound as they do on shore ; I don't know why." 
Nor more did I at that time ; the fact is, that nothing conveys 
sound better than wood, and every slight noise is magnified, in con- 
sequence, on board of a vessel. 

" I recollect when I was on a Mediterranean voyage how we 
were frightened with noises, sure enough," observed one of the 
men. 

" Come, that's right, Dick, give us a yarn," said the others. 
" Yes," replied Dick, "and it's a true yarn too, and all about a 
ghost." 

" Well, stop a moment," said one of the men, " and let us top 
this glim a bit before you begin ; for it seemed to get dimmer the 



POOR JACK. 157 

moment you talked about a ghost." Dick waited till a little more 
light was obtained, and then commenced. 

" I had shipped on board of a vessel bound to Smyrna, now 
about seven years ago. We had gone down to Portsmouth, where 
we waited for one of the partners of the house by which we had 
been freighted, and who was going out as passenger. We were 
a man short, and the captain went on shore to get one from the 
crimps, whom he knew very well, and the fellows promised to 
send one on board the next morning. Well, sure enough a wherry 
came off with him just before break of day, and he and his traps 
were taken on board ; but it was not perceived, at the time, what 
he had in his arms under his grego ; and what do you think it 
proved to be at daylight ? Why — a large black torn cat." 

et What, a black one ? " 

" Yes, as black as the enemy himself. The fellow came down 
forward with it, and so says I, ' Why, messmate, you're not going 
to take that animal to sea with us?'"' 

n ' Yes, I am," said he very surlily ; ' it's an old friend of mine, 
and I never parts with him.' 

" ' Well,' says I, ' you'll find the difference when the captain 
hears on it, I can tell you; and, for the matter of that, I won't pro- 
mise you that it will be very safe if it comes near me, when I've a 
handspike in my hand.' 

" < I tell you what,' says he, ■ it ain't the taking of a cat on 
board what brings mischief; but it's turning one out of a ship, 
what occasions ill luck. No cat ever sunk a ship till the animal 
was hove overboard, and sunk first itself, and then it does drag 
the ship down after it.' 

" Well, one of the boys who did not care about such things, for 
he was young and ignorant, put his hand to the cat's head to stroke 
it, and the cat bit him right through the fingers, at which the boy 
gave a loud cry. 

w ' Now, that will teach you to leave my cat alone,' said the 
man ; ' he won't come near nobody but me, and he bites every body 
else, so I give you fair warning.' 

" And sure enough the brute, which was about as big as two 



158 POOR JACK. 

common cats, was just as savage as a tiger. When the first mate 
called the man on deck, the fellow left his cat behind him in the 
fore peak, just as if it were now here; and it got into a dark corner, 
growling and humping its back, with its eyes flashing fire at every 
one of us as we came anigh it. ' Oh ! ' says we, f this here won't 
never do ; wait till the captain comes on board, that's all.' Well, 
the hatches were off, and we were busy re-stowing the upper tier 
of the cargo, which we had thrown in very carelessly in our hurry 
to get down the river ; just putting- the bales in order (it wasn't 
breaking bulk, you see) ; and we were at it all day. At last, 
towards evening, the captain comes on board with the gentleman 
passenger ; a mighty timorsome sort of young chap he appeared for 
to be, and had never before set his foot upon the plank of a vessel. 
So, as soon as the captain was on deck, we all broke off our work 
and went to him to tell him about this cat ; and the captain he gets 
into a great rage as soon as he hears on it, and orders the man to 
send the cat on shore, or else he'd throw it overboard. Well, the 
man, who was a sulky, saucy sort of chap, and no seaman, I've a 
notion, gives cheek, and says he won't send his cat on shore for no 
man ; whereupon the captain orders the cat to be caught, that he 
might send it in the boat ; but nobody dared to catch it, for it was 
so fierce to every body but its master : the second mate tried, 
and he got a devil of a bite, and came up from the fore peak with- 
out the cat, looking very blue indeed ; and then the first mate 
went down, and he tried ; but the cat flew at him, and he came 
up as white as a sheet ; and then the cat became so savage that 
it stood at the foot of the ladder, all ready to attack whoever 
should come down ; and the man laughed heartily, and told us to 
fetch the cat. < Well,' says the first mate, e I can't touch the cat, 
but I can you, you beggar; and I will, too, if it costs me twenty 
pounds;' so he ups with a handspike and knocks the fellow 
down senseless on the deck, and there he laid ; and it sarved him 
right. 

" Well, then the captain thought to shoot the cat, for it was for 
all the world like a wild beast, and one proposed one thing and 
one another ; at last Jim, the cabin bov, comes forward with some 



POOR JACK. 159 

brimstone matches in a pan, and he lights them and lowers them 
down into the fore peak by a rope yarn, to smother it out; and 
so it did sure enough, for all of a sudden the cat made a spring 
up to the deck, and then we all chased it here and there until at 
last it got out to the end of the flying jib-boom ; and then Jim, the 
cabin boy, followed it out with a handspike, and poked at it as 
hard as he could, until at last it lost its hold, and down it went into 
the water, and Jim and the handspike went along with it ; for Jim, 
in his last poke at the cat, lost his balance — so away they went 
together. Well, there was a great hurry in manning the boat, and 
picking up poor Jim and the handspike ; but the cat we saw no 
more, for it was just dark at the time. Well, when it Mas all 
over, we began to think what we had done ; and as soon as we had 
put on the hatches and secured the hold, we went down below into 
the fore peak, where the smell of brimstone did not make us feel 
more comfortable, I can tell you, and we began to talk over 
the matter ; for you see the cat should not have been thrown over- 
board, but put on shore ; but we were called away to man the boat 
again, for the fellow had come to his senses, and swore that he 
would not stay in the ship, but go on shore and take the law of the 
first mate ; and the first mate and captain thought the sooner he 
was out of the ship the better, for we were to sail before daylight, 
and there might not be a wherry for him to get into ; so the fellow 
took his kit, and we pulled him on shore and landed him on Southsea 
beach, he swearing vengeance the whole way, and as he stepped 
out on the beach he turned round to us, and said, as he shook his 
fist, 'You've thrown overboard a black torn cat, recollect that! 
and now you'll see the consequence ; a pleasant voyage to you, — I 
wouldn't sail in that vessel if you were to offer her to me as a 
present as soon as she got to Smyrna ; because why — you've 
thrown overboard a black torn cat, and you'll never get there — 
never,' cried he again, and off he ran with his bundle. 

" Well we didn't much like it, and if the second mate hadn't 
been in the boat, I'm not sure that we shouldn't all have gone on 
shore rather than sail in the vessel ; but there was no help for it. 
The next morning before daylight we started, for the captain 



160 POOR JACK. 

wouldn't wait to get another hand, and we were soon out of 
soundings, and well into the Bay of Biscay. 

"We had just passed Cape Finisterre, when Jim, the cabin-boy, 
says, one morning, ' I'm blessed if I didn't hear that cat last night, 
or the ghost on it ! ' So we laughed at him ; for, you see, he slept 
abaft, just outside the cabin-door, close to the pantry, and not 
forward with the rest of us. 

" ' Well/ says he, ' I heard her miaul, and when I awoke I 
think I seed two eyes looking at me.' 

" ' Well, Jim,' said I, for we had got over our fears, ' it was you 
who knocked her overboard ; so it's all right that she should haunt 
you and nobody else.' Jim, however, could not laugh, but looked 
very grave and unhappy. A few days afterwards, the captain 
and passenger complained that they could not sleep for the noise 
and racket that was kept up all night between the timbers and in 
the run aft. They said it was as if a whole legion of devils 
were broken loose and scampering about : and the captain was 
very grave ; and as for the passenger, he was frightened out of his 
wits. Still we laughed, because we had heard nothing ourselves, 
and thought that it must only be fancy on their parts, particularly 
as the captain used to bowse his jib up pretty taut every night. 
Well, all went on very well; we arrived at the Rock, got our 
fresh provisions and vegetables, and then made sail again. The 
captain complained of no more noises, and Jim of no more eyes, 
and the whole matter was almost forgotten." 

Here the narrator was interrupted by the thumping of a hand- 
spike on the deck above. 

" Halloo ! what's the matter now ! " 

" Come, tumble up, my lads, and pump the ship out," said the 
mate from above ; u we had almost forgotten that. Be smart now, 
it's but a ten minutes' job." 

Thus broke off the story, much to my annoyance ; but it could 
not be helped, — ships must be pumped out, — so the men went on 
deck, and I followed them. 



POOR JACK. 161 



CHAP. XXIII. 

"RECOLLECT," SAYS THE FELLOW, "YOU HAVE THROWN OVERBOARD A 
BLACK TOM CAT !" 

In a quarter of an hour the pump sucked, and we all hastened 
down below to our grog and the completion of our yarn. As 
soon as we were all comfortably seated as before, Dick recom- 
menced. 

•• Well, we were abreast of Malta, when the weather, which 
had hitherto on the voyage been very fine, changed. The 
clouds hung down very heavy, and there was every symptom of a 
fierce gale ; and sure enough a worse gale I never was in thai 
came on that night, — and such a sea ! — the ship rolled gu 
under, for the gale was fair, but the sea ran so high and so I 
that we expected to be pooped every minute. It was abo 
midnight, when the rain came on in torrents, and the wind blev.- 
fiercer than ever. I was on deck, and so was the first mat- 
and another man at the helm, for we were flying right before 
it, and she was hard to steer. 

" ' We shall have it worse yet,' said the captain. 

" i MiawT was the reply; so clear, so loud, we could not tell 
where it came from. I thought it came from the maintop. 

" i Mercy on us ! what was that ? ' said the first mate, the light 
from the binnacle showing his face as pale as a sheet. 

" ' Miaw /' was the reply from somewhere. 

" ' The black cat. by all that's blue !' cried the captain. 

" 'The Lord have mercy upon us, we're all gone!' said the 
mate, clasping his hands in terror. To clasp his hands, of course 
he let go the wheel ; and the other man, who was equally 
frightened, had not strength to hold it. Away he went, right over 
the wheel, knocking down the mate on the other side ; and the 
ship taking a heavy lurch, they both went into the scuppers toge- 
ther. The ship broached to ; and our mainmast and mizenmast 
went over the side." 

M 



162 POOR JACK. 

•• Do top that glim, Bill," said one of the men, in a tremulous 
voice. 

Dick paused while the snuff was taken off the candle ; and the 
water went tap. tap, tap against the bends, with a most melancholy 
sound. 

I really did feel rather queer myself. 

Dick continued, — " Well, all hands were on deck immediately ; 
and it was good two hours before we could clear the wreck, for the 
men were disheartened. They had heard the loud miato v hen in 
the fore peak, and declared that it was close to them ; and the 
passenger and Jim came out, frightened out of their wits. They 
had heard the miuic, and said that it was from under the cabin 
table. At last we were clear of the wreck, and the wind roared 
louder than ever. 

u The captain was a stout-hearted fellow, and as the men were 
collected together under the bulwark, he said, 'Well, this breeze 
will shorten our distance at any rate, and. if it holds, we shall 
soon be at Smyrna.' 

M • We shall never see Smyrna ! replied the second mate, his 
teeth chattering. 

" • No. never ! ' cried the seamen. 

" The captain sent Jim down for his rum bottle, and gave every 
man a stiff glass of liquor, and that made them feel more com- 
fortable for a time ; when there was a sort of lull, and again the 
loud miaw was repeated. 

u c There it is!' cried the men,: but they hardly had time to sav 
so, when the ship was pooped with a tremendous sea. washing 
away the stern and quarter boats, and sending all the men 
swimming forward. So loaded was the ship with water, that she 
stopped, and appeared as if she was settling down. At last she 
rolled heavy to port and discharged it. and away we went before 
the wind, faster than ever. Well, there was some talk among the 
seamen of throwing poor Jim overboard to appease the ghost of 
the cat. for it was he who had thrown the cat overboard. But the 
captain heard what the men were saying, and he swore that he 
would knock the brains out of the first man who laid hold of the 



POOR JACK. 163 

low- 



boy ; and he sent Jim below out of harm's way. Poor Jim ! 1 
bitterly he cried, poor boy, when he heard what was going on. 

" Well, it's a long lane that has no turning, and no gale lasts for 
ever : the next day it moderated, and the day after the weather was 
quite fine, and the sea had gone down. We recovered our spirits, 
the more so, as we heard no more of the cat; and having jury- 
rigged her aft, we steered our course with a light breeze. We 
were now but a short distance from Smyrna, and hoped to be 
there by the next day ; but the second mate shook his head ; he 
said, * The cat has not done with us, for it was a black torn cat.' 

" The fourth day the captain came on deck, and said, ' I 
heard a great washing of water in the run last night, as I thought ; 
have you sounded the well lately ? ' 

" < No,' replied the first mate, ( I left that to the carpenter.' 
« < Well, then, ask him.' Well, the carpenter had not sounded 
the well, as it appeared ; and so he sounded it immediately, and 
found that we had six feet water in the hold. 

" ' I knowed we were doomed,' said the second mate ; ' we'll 
never get at port:' and so thought the men ; but the captain said,— 
" < Why, the fact is, my lads, we must have sprung a leak in the 
gale, and no wonder, beating against the wreck so, as we did when 
the masts went over the side. Come, rig the pumps, and we shall 
soon clear her. The torn cat has nothing to do with this, at all 

events.' 

« Now you see our bottom cargo consisted of two or three 
tier of crates of crockery, which would not spoil by being wet ; but 
the upper part of the cargo was bales of dry goods and linen, so 
the captain was very anxious that they should work the pumps 
before the water got higher ; the weather was very fine, the sea 
smooth, and the wind, although fair, was light. Well, the seamen 
were terrified, and thought they were lost ; they asked for liquor, 
and refused to work at the pumps; they said it was no use, the ship 
was doomed. Well, the captain he got very angry, he went down 
into the cabin, loaded his double-barrelled gun, and swore that he 
would shoot the first man through the head who refused to work 
at the pumps. The men knew that he was in earnest, for he was a 

m 2 



16i POOR JACK. 

violent sort of fellow, and so they set to. We didn't gain much 
upon her ; I thought we did a little, but the men said no. The 
captain declared that we did gain considerably, but it was supposed 
that he only said so to encourage the people. Well, the captain 
ordered the mate to take up the hatches, that they might see the 
state of the cargo. This was done ; the dry goods, as far as we 
could make out, were not injured, and the men pumped spell 
and spell until the evening, when the captain gave them a good 
allowance of grog, and an hour to rest themselves. It was a beau- 
tiful moonlight night, the sails were just asleep and no more ; but 
the vessel was heavy, from the water in her, and we dragged slowly 
along. The captain, who had gone down below with the first 
mate, came up from the cabin, and said to the men, c Now, my 
lads, we'll set to again ; ' when suddenly there was a loud, melan- 
choly miaiv ! which terrified us all. We looked from whence the 
sound appeared to come, and there, on the launch turned over 
amidship, we beheld the ghost of the black torn cat, so large, so 
black, with the broad moonlight shining on it ; and so thin, it 
was the skeleton of the cat, only it looked as black as ever ; its 
back was humped up and its tail curved ; and as it stood out in the 
broad moonlight, it did look twice as big as the original cat, which 
was the biggest I ever saw. Well, the men actually screamed ; 
they ran aft, upsetting the captain and mate, and rolling over them 
and hiding their faces, with ' Lord have mercy on us ! ' and ' God 
forgive our sins!' and c Oh ! we're lost, we're lost !' and every sort 
of crying and groaning that could be thought of. At last, the cap- 
tain gets up from under them in a great rage and looks forward to 
see what was the matter, and there he sees the ghost of the torn cat 
standing just in the same place ; and it gave another miserable 
miaiv ! ' Why,' cried the captain (who had his grog on board, 
and was as brave as brass), ' it is the cussed cat himself. Stop a 
moment.' Down he goes to the cabin, reels up the hatchway 
again with his double-barrelled gun, and lets fly at it" — (here 
Dick lowered his voice to almost a whisper) — " the cat gave a 

shriek — and then " 

Here, during the pause, Bill put out his finger and thumb to 



POOR JACK. 



165 



srmff the candle, but his hand shook ; he snuffed it out, and we 
were all left in darkness. I can hardly describe the feeling which 
appeared to pervade the whole of our party. Every one was 
shuffling and crowding with their shoulders, but still no one 
moved from his place. 

« Well," said Dick, the narrator, in a quiet subdued voice, " why 
don't one of you go and fetch a light ? Come, jump up, Bill, you 
topped it out." 

"Ay, ay," replied Bill, evidently shaking, "where's the candle?" 
"Here," said one of the boys, handing it to him. 
"Well, then, jump up yourself, you young whelp, you're 
younger than me!" 

" I didn't put it out," replied the boy, whining. 
« Up, immediately, or I'll break every rib in your body," re- 
plied Bill. 

The boy, who was terribly frightened, got up at this threat, 
and began to ascend the ladder ; he was about three steps up, 
when we heard, from the deck, a horrible miaw ! the boy gave a 
scream of terror, and fell down on his back among us all, smashing 
the glass and flattening the tin cans against the men's legs, who 
halloed with pain. At last there was a dead silence again, and 
I could plainly hear the loud throbbing of more than one heart. 

"Come," said Dick again, "• what was the fool frightened 
about ? Look for the candle, some of you ! " At last Bill found 
it in his breast, broke in two, and half melted away, and was pro- 
ceeding for a light, when the carpenter stepped to the hatch with 
his lantern and said, "Why, you're all in the dark there, ship- 
mates ! Here, take my lantern." I may as well here observe 
that the carpenter had been listening to the story as he sat by the 
hatchway on deck, and it was he who had favoured us with the 
miaw which had so frightened the boy. 

As soon as the lantern had been received and the candle 
relighted, Dick recommenced. 

"Well, my lads, I said that the captain went down below, 
brought up his gun, and let fly at the cat, and then — well, and then 
— the cat gave a loud shriek, and falls down upon the deck. The 

m 3 



166 POOR JACK. 

captain walks forward to it, takes it up by the tail, brings it aft, 
and shies it among the men. 

"'There, you fools,' said he, 'it is the cat himself ; will you 
believe your own eyes ? ' 

" And sure enough so it was ; for you see, when Jim tumbled over- 
board, it being then dark, and we so busy with Jim, we did not look 
after the cat, and so it must have crawled up the cable and run 
down into the hold, while the hatches were off; and all that noise 
heard aft must have been the brute chasing the rats, I suppose : 
Jim may have heard, but he could not have seen, the cat; that was 
all fancy and fright. You know how long a cat will live without 
much food, and so the animal was pretty quiet after it had killed 
all the rats. Then when the gale came on and the upper part of 
the cargo fetched way a little, for it was loosely stowed, we sup- 
pose that it got jammed now and then with the rolling, and that 
made it miaw ; and then, when we took off the hatches to look at 
the cargo, after we had sprung the leak, the cat o' course came 
out, and a pretty skeleton it was, as you may suppose. Now do 
you understand the whole of it?" 

" Yes, that's all clear," replied Bill, " and it was no ghost after 
all ; but still the cat did do mischief, for if the mate had not been 
frightened by it, he wouldn't have let go the wheel, and the masts 
would not have gone by the lee." 

" That's true enough, and he might have done more mischief 
still if the captain had not shot him ; for the men would never have 
gone to the pumps again ; but when they found out that it was 
nothing but the cat himself, then thny set to, and before the next 
evening the vessel was clear, and only required pumping out every 
two hours, for the leak wasn't great, after all. So there's a ghost 
story for you, and I believe that all others will be found, like mine, 
to end in moonshine. Now suppose we turn in, for we shall weigh 
at three o'clock in the morning." 

We all tumbled into the standing berths in the fore peak ; I 
dreamt of black torn cats all night. The next morning we weighed 
with a fair wind : as before, I stood beside Bramble, who pointed 
out to me every thing worth notice or memory as we passed ; but 



POOR JACK. 167 

at last the motion affected me so much that I could pay little atten- 
tion, and I remained by his side as pale as a sheet. We rounded 
the North Foreland, and long before dark anchored in the Downs. 
Bramble went no further with the vessel, the captain himself being 
a good pilot for the Channel. A Deal boat came alongside, we 
got into it, they landed us on the shingle beach, and I followed 
Bramble up to his abode. 



CHAP. XXIV. 

bramble's method of education proves very effective, he also 
points out a position in which you may prefer your enemies 
to your friends. 

The house of Philip Bramble was situated on the further side of 
a road which ran along the shore, just above the shingle beach. 
It was a large cottage on one floor, the street door entering at 
once into its only sitting room. It was furnished as such tene- 
ments usually are, with a small dresser and shelves for crockery, 
and a table and chairs of cherry wood : on the broad mantel- 
piece, for the fire-place was large, were several brass candlesticks, 
very bright, ranged with foreign curiosities, and a few shells ; 
half-a-dozen prints in frames ornamented the walls ; and on large 
nails drove into the panels, wherever a space could be found, 
were hung coats, P- jackets, and other articles of dress, all ready 
for the pilot to change whenever he came on shore wet to 
the skin. Every thing was neat and clean : the planks of the 
floor were white as snow, yet the floor itself was sanded with 
white sand, and there were one or two square wooden boxes, also 
filled with sand, for the use of those who smoked. When I add, 
that, opposite to the fire-place, there was a set of drawers of 
walnut wood, with an escritoire at the top, upon the flat part of 
which were a few books neatly arranged, and over it an old 

M 4 



168 POOR JACK. 

fashioned looking-glass, divided at the sides near to the frame 
into sections, I believe that I have given a catalogue of the whole 
furniture. When I followed Bramble into the room, a little girl of 
about nine or ten years old ran into his arms, as he stooped down 
to receive her. She was a pretty child, with a very fair skin and 
rosy cheeks, her hair and eyes of a very dark brown, almost ap- 
proaching to black ; but she was not, in my opinion, near so pretty 
as my sister Virginia. As Bramble kissed her, she exclaimed, " O 
father J I am so glad you are come home. Mrs. Maddox has been 
in bed ever since you left : her leg is very bad indeed." 

" Whew," whistled Bramble, " I'm sorry to hear that of the 
old lady ; and how have you got on without her assistance ? " 

" Why, don't you think I'm very tidy, father?" said she, looking 
round the room. 

" Yes, Bessy, you are very tidy ; and it's a pleasure to come 
home to a tidy clean house. Here is a companion for you. I told 
you he was coming, and you know his name." 

" It's Tom Saunders, isn't it, father?" 

" Yes, that's his name, for want of a better — so I leave you to 
make friends, while I go up and see the poor old lady." 

" You look cold and pale, are you not well ? " was the first 
question of little Bessy. 

" I'm cold, and not very well," replied I : "I have not been 
used to knocking about on board ship." 

" Very true; I forgot you had never been at sea before. Come 
to the fire, then, and sit in father's big chair." 

" I never knew that your father had been married. I thought 
Peter Anderson said that he was a bachelor." 

" And so he is," replied Bessy. " I'm not his daughter, al- 
though I call him father." 

" Indeed I then whose daughter are you ? and who is the old 
lady up stairs ? " 

" The old lady up stairs is the widow of the pilot with whom 
father served his time. Her husband was lost at sea, and she 
keeps father's house. Father picked me up at sea, and has taken 
care of me ever since." 



POOR JACK. 



169 



" Then you don't remember your own parents ? 
" No, I recollect nothing, till I found myself in this house. 
Father says I'm a Dutchman, because it was a Dutch ship or a 
Dutch boat which I was taken out of." 
" And how long was that ago ? 

" Nine years ago. I am now, I believe, about ten years old.' 
Bessy then catechised me relative to my own family, and I had 
not answered all her questions when Bramble came down stairs. 

" Bessy, dear, we must have the doctor to look at that leg again. 
I'm afeard that it will never get well. Missus is too old to shake 
it off." 

" Shall I go now, father?" 

" Yes, child, go now, for she's in great pain with it : and Tom, 
you go with Bessy, and take care of her. But, before you go, give 
me some 'baccy and the odds and ends." 

As soon as Bessy had put the tobacco pipes, some spirits, a 
rummer and water, on the table, and the spittoon at his feet, she 
put on her bonnet, and off we set to the doctor's house, about 
half a mile distant. I was soon on intimate terms with Bessy : 
there was something so frank and winning about her, such perfect 
honesty of character, that it was impossible not to like her. We 
delivered our message, returned home, and, being very tired, I was 
glad to go to bed. Bessy showed me my room, which was very 
comfortable ; and as soon as I laid my head on the pillow, I was 
fast asleep. 

I was awakened the next morning, by a knocking at the door, 
by little Bessy : it was broad daylight, and I dressed myself and 
went down stairs, where I found her very busy, putting every 
thing in order. 

« It was I knocked," said little Bessy : " I thought you would 
like to come and help me." 

" And so I will," replied I : " what shall I do ?" 
" Oh, there's plenty to do now that Mrs. Maddox is ill, and you 
and father are come back— almost too much for a little girl like me. 
Will you go to the pump and fetch the pails full of water, for they 
are too heavy for me ? " 



170 



POOR JACK. 



I did as she wished. " Any thing else, Bessy ?" said I. 

" Oh yes, plenty. You're very good-natured, Tom, and I'm so 
glad you're come." 

Bessy and I were fully employed for nearly an hour, in the front 
room and kitchen, clearing up and cleaning and preparing for 
breakfast. All was ready before Bramble came down and took a 
seat in his big chair, close to the breakfast table. 

" All ready, father," said little Bessy, going up to Bramble to 
be kissed. " Tom has been helping me." 

" All's right," said Bramble : " bring the book, dear. 

Bessy brought a large Bible, and read a chapter aloud, then 
closed it and put it away. 

" We can't always do this, Tom," observed Bramble, " when 
we're knocking about in the Channel : all we can do is to read it 
when we can. Come now to breakfast." 

When we had finished, I assisted Bessy to put every thing 
away ; and then Bramble said to me, " Anderson tells me you're a 
good scholar, Tom ; but you must now learn what will be of use 
to me as well as to you. The first thing you must learn, and which 
you can do on shore, are the points of the compass, to know them 
at sight and tell them quickly ; for you see it's of great importance 
to a pilot to know exactly how a ship's head is ; and the men at 
the helm, although good seamen and steering well, are not so 
ready at answering as a pilot wishes, and very often stammer at 
it — sometimes make mistakes. Now you see, when I'm piloting a 
vessel, if you stand at the binnacle, watch the compass, and answer 
me quickly how the ship's head is, you'll be of use to me in a very 
short time. Go up into my room, and under the bed you will 
find a compass ; bring it down carefully, and I'll give you a lesson 
at once." I brought the compass to him, and Bramble made me 
write down the whole thirty-two points at full length upon a piece 
of paper. When I had done so, he told me I must learn them by 
heart as fast as I could. 

I studied them the whole of that day ; and in the evening, finding 
myself perfect, I went up to Bramble and repeated them without 
one mistake. 



POOH JACK, 171 

" All's right," said Bramble. " Now, Tom, give me the paper : 
if you know them to-night, you ought to know them to-morrow 
morning. I'll hear if you do, after breakfast." 

I went to bed, was tapped up as before by Bessy, assisted her 
to clean every thing, taking off her hands all the heaviest of the 
work ; indeed, what I have narrated of the first day may be taken 
as a sample of my life on shore, at Deal. After breakfast I 
repeated the points of the compass correctly. 

" Well, Tom, you have a good memory, that's certain : all the 
better for you ; for pilots carry every thing in their heads, as you 
will find out. Now then, look here :" Bramble took the glass off 
the top of the compass box, lifted up the card, and then showed 
me the needle below, which pointed to the north. He then 
showed me the north point above, and then the other points, mak- 
ing me repeat them as he put his finger on them. As soon as I 
understood them, he would put the stem of his pipe to one, and 
ask me which it was. When I was perfect with the points, he ex- 
plained the half points and quarter points. In two days I had 
gained them all by heart. 

" And now," says he, " we must try you. This iron skewer is 
the ship's head, recollect, and I shall stick it into the table : when I 
do so, you must tell me what point of the compass stands to it, and 
then that will be the direction of the ship's head. Do you under- 
stand ? Practice makes perfect, and you must work at this all the 
time that you are ashore. When you know the compass well, 
then I'll teach you something else. Now, then, how's her head, 
Tom?" 

" North-half-west," said I, after a little time. 
" Yes, very true ; but you see, Tom, that wouldn't do aboard 
ship ; that's just the way most of the seamen Mould puzzle at it. I 
must have the answer in a moment, and that's why you must 
practise." 

In the evening, when Bramble was smoking his pipe, I was seated 
by him ; and every minute he would change the place of the iron 
skewer, with " How's her head, Tom?" 

" W T e must get your prentice papers signed before we go afloat 



172 POOR JACK. 

again," said Bramble ; " for they pick up boys as well as men for 
the king's service, and you're a stout boy for your age." 

" Were you ever pressed, yourself?" inquired I. 

" No, but I had a narrow chance once ; and had not our captain 
been a smart fellow, I and many more would have been serving the 
king at this present moment." 

" Tell me how that was," said I. 

" Well, as soon as Bessy has done rattling with the cups and 
saucers, I will." 

" I've done now, father," said Bessy, taking her seat on a stool 
close to Bramble's feet. 

" Well, then, before I passed for pilot, just after the breaking out 
of the war, I tookit into my head to try my chance at privateering — 
there was plenty to pick up at that time, and some of the Deal men 
had been very fortunate — so I went on board of a 12-gun lugger, 
commanded by Captain Shank, fitted out in the river, with a crew 
of sixty men. The press was very hot at that time, and our men 
were kept at the crimps' houses until all was ready, when we 
started, and got off clear into the Channel without being over- 
hauled. 

" We had been out a fortnight, keeping well on the French coast, 
and had picked up two good prizes, when one morning, as the fog 
was cleared up with a sharp northerly wind, we found ourselves 
right under the lee of an English frigate, not a mile from us. 
There was a bubble of a sea, for the wind had been against the tide 
previous to its changing, and we were then about six or seven miles 
from the French coast, just between Boulogne and Cape Grisnez, 
lying to for the fog to clear away. As soon as we saw the frigate, 
we knew that she would board us, and we were all in a terrible 
fright." 

Here Bramble shifted the skewer, and said, " How's her head, 
Tom ?" I replied ; and he proceeded : — 

" The frigate hoisted her colours, and of course we did the same ; 
she then fired a gun as a signal for us to remain, hove to, and we 
perceived her boats lowering down. ' Now, my lads,' said our cap- 
tain, < if you don't mind a shot or two, I think I will save you from 



POOR JACK. 173 

impressment this time. We all declared that we would stand a 
hundred, rather than be taken on board of a man-of war. < Very 
well,' says he — ' starboard a little, and keep her a little away, so 
as to let her go through the water; but keep the fore sheet to wind- 
ward, so that we may appear only to have fallen off.' By this plan 
we gradually increased our distance from the frigate, and got more 
on her bow. All this while the boat was pulling towards us, rising 
and tossing on the sea, but still nearing us fast. As she came nearer 
to us, we let the lugger come up in the wind again for a short time, 
that we might not appear to be dodging away ; and then, when the 
bowman was almost ready to lay in his oar, away we let her go 
through the water, so that she was left astern again. They could 
not well perceive this on board of the frigate, although the officer 
in the boat was very savage ; for at one time he had his bow oar 
in, and his boat-hook out. At last the frigate, perceiving that we 
were apparently slipping away, put her helm up, and fired a shot 
across our bows. < Now's your time, my boys,' said the captain ; 
'let draw the sheets, the breeze is strong; she must wait to pick up 
her boat, and that will give us a mile at least.' Up went the helm, 
and we made all sail right for the French coast. — How's her head, 
Tom ? " I replied ; and Bramble resumed : — 

" The frigate ran down to her boat, and then rounded to, to hoist 
it up : the sea was heavy, and she 'was delayed a minute or two, 
although, to do them justice, they were very smart on board of her. 
As soon as the boat was up, she made all sail, and came foaming 
after us, as if she were in as great a rage as the captain and those 
on board of her. Every now and then she yawed to throw a shot 
at us from her bow-chasers ; but that we didn't mind, as the yawing 
checked her way, and it's not very easy to hit a low vessel like a 
lugger in a toppling sea. Well, very soon we were not four miles 
from the French coast, so we hauled down our English colours and 
hoisted French. The frigate gained on us very fast ; but we con- 
tinued to steer on, and she in pursuit, until we were within gun-shot 
of the batteries. What the Frenchmen thought, we did not know; 
at all events they did not fire; and we steered right on as if we were 
chased, and the frigate followed after us, until we were within a 



174 POOR JACK. 

mile and a half of the batteries, when the frigate thought proper to 
haul her wind ; then the battery opened upon her, and we could 
see that she was hulled more than once ; and as she kept her wind 
along the shore, the other batteries opened upon her, and she got 
a good mauling. We saw her shift her fore-topsail yard as soon as 
she went about again, and we afterwards heard that she had several 
men hurt, which was a pity." 

"And did not the batteries fire upon you f" 

"No, for we kept the French colours up, and hove to within a 
mile of the coast. It was a lee-shore, and there was too much surf 
and sea for them to send off a boat and ascertain whether we were 
a French privateer or not ; so there we lay till dusk, and then made 
sail again, and, being so close into the French shore, we picked up 
a good prize that very night. When the cruise was over, I was 
satisfied. I got my prize money; and then, as I knew our own coast 
well, I passed for pilot, and have served as one ever since. — How's 
her head, Tom ? " 

" S.W. almost." 

" S.W. almost won't do, Tom. It's not quite S.W., quarter-south ; 
so you must say S.W. southerly. D'ye understand?" 

When Bessy knocked at my door the next morning, she cried 
out, laughing, " How's her head, Tom ? " and those words made me 
jump up like lightning. 



CHAP. XXV. 

IN WHICH BRAMBLE POINTS OUT TO ME THAT SINGING IS PART OF THE 
PROFESSION OF A PILOT. 

In about a fortnight from the time that Bramble commenced his 
tuition, I was quite perfect with the compass : his method certainly 
was very good, for, by such reiterated catechising, what you had to 
learn was graven on your memory. All day long the same system 



1'OOK JACK. 



was pursued. Even if dinner was on the table, the compass was on 
a chair close by ; and as I was putting my fork to my mouth, much 
to Bessy's amusement, out would come the question, " How's her 
head, Tom ?" Bramble soon gained his point : I could answer like 
lightning. But whether I was by the fire in-doors, or on the shin- 
gle beach, his system was ever the same : every time that Bramble 
opened his lips, I gained some information— he was never weary- 
ing, and often very amusing. 

One morning we were out on the beach — we had been con- 
versing with the other pilots, and examining the vessels in the offing 
with my glass — when he pointed out to me, it being low neap tide 
that the Godwin Sands were partially dry. " Tom," continued he, 
" of all the dangers, not only of the Channel, but in the wide ocean, 
there is none to be compared with those sands: — the lives that have 
been lost on them, the vessels that have been wrecked, and the 
property that has been sucked into them, would be a dozen kings 
ransoms ; for you see, Tom, they are quicksands, and the vessel 
which goes on shore does not remain to be broken up, but in two 
tides she disappears, sinking down into the sands, which never give 
her or her cargo up again. There must be a mighty deal of wealth 
buried there, that is certain. They say that once they were a flou- 
rishing fertile island, belonging to an Earl Godwin, whose name 
they now bear; it may be so —the sea retreats from one place 
while it advances at another. Look at Romney marshes, where so 
many thousands of sheep are now fed; they run up many miles in- 
land ; and yet formerly those very marshes were an arm of the sea, 
which vessels rode in deep water, and sea-fights, I am told, took 
place. Howsomever, when the sea took the Godwin island to it- 
self, it made the best trap for vessels that old Neptune now pos- 
sesses, and he may consider it as the most productive spot in his 
dominions. Lord help us ! what a deal of gold and merchandise 
must there be buried below yon yellow patch ! " 

" Do you never save any thing when vessels are run on shore 
there?" 

" When they only tail on, we occasionally get them off again ; 
but when once fixed, there's an end of it. Yes, we save life occa- 



176 POOR JACK. 

sionally, but at great risk of our own. I saved little Bessy from 
a vessel ashore on these sands." 

" Indeed ! pray tell me how it was." 

" Why you see, Tom, it was just at the breaking out of the war. 
It was in this very month of October, '93, that I was out in a galley, 
with some others, looking for vessels. I had just then left off 
privateering, and got my warrant as pilot (for you know I did 
serve my prenticeship before I went a-privateering, as I told you 
the other night). Well, it was a blowing night, and we were run- 
ning in for the Downs, intending to beach the galley and sleep on 
shore, for we had been out five days, and only put a pilot on board 
of one vessel. We were just to windward of the Sands, out 
there, where I am now pointing : the sea was very rough, but the 
night was clear, and the moon shone bright, when we saw a brig 
running down before the wind, under foresail and close-reefed top- 
sails. ' Why, Bill, as she steers she'll be right between the Callipers,' 
said I to the man sitting by me. 'There's no mistake about that,' 
replied he : ' let's haul the fore sheet to windward, and lay to, to hail 
him ; he's coming right down upon us.' Well, we did so, and we 
hailed some time without any answer. At last a man looked over 
the gunnel, just as she was flying past us, and told us in Dutch to 
go to the devil. ' 1 think you'll go there if you don't look sharp, 
replied Bill. ' Come, my lads, we may as well follow her, and see if 
we cannot prevent mischief.' So we bore up after her, and hailed 
her several times, for we sailed very fast, and there was a scuffling 
on deck : I think that the captain was drunk. All this passed in 
less than five minutes ; and then, as I knew would be the case, she 
struck on the sands, and with such force, that all her masts went 
over the side immediately. Now the sea rolls awfully over the 
shallow water of those sands, Tom. We had kept with her as far 
as we dared, and then hove to about two cables' lengths to wind- 
ward cf her, when she struck, for the ebb was still running strong 
under our lee, which only made the sea more cross and heavy. 
The waves made a clean breach over her, and we knew that she 
would go to pieces in less than half an hour ; but we did not like 
to leave so many to perish, without a trial to save them : so we 



POOR JACK 



177 



kept away, so as to get abreast of thern, and then lowered our sails 
and got out our oars. We pulled close to them, but it was impossible 
to board : we should have been stove to pieces, and swamped imme- 
diately. The moon still shone bright, and we saw them as plain as 
we could wish, and we made every attempt to save them, for they 
were all crowded together forward. Once the sea drove the boat 
so close that we touched her sides, and then a woman pressed be- 
fore the men, and reached over the gunnel, extending her arms 
which held the child, while several others attempted to get in, but 
the return of the wave carried us back so quick from the vessel, that, 
as they attempted to jump in, they all went to the water, and never 
appeared again ; but I had caught hold of the child, and laid it 
down in the stern sheets. We made a second and third attempt, 
but in vain. At last the vessel broke up, as it were, all at once : — 
there was one loud cry, and all was still, except the roaring and 
breaking waves which buried them. It wasn't a scene to make us 
very lively, Tom : we hoisted the sail, and ran on to the beach in 
silence. I took the child in my arms — it had been snatched out 
of its warm bed, poor thing, and had nothing on but a calico night- 
gown. I took it up to the cottage, which was then Maddox' s (I 
bought it afterwards of the widow with the money I made a-pri- 
vateering), and I gave it in charge to Mrs. Maddox. I did intend 
to have sent it to the workhouse, or something of that sort ; but 
Mrs. Maddox took a fancy to it, and so did I, and so I thought I 
would take care of it, and I christened it by the name of Betsy 
Godwin." 

" You have no idea who she may be ? " 

" Not half a one : her cotton gown and cap told nothing ; the 
vessel was Dutch, that's all I know. She may be the child of 
the stadtholder, or the child of the ship's cook. What's the 
matter?" 

" But did you notice any marks upon her person by which she 
might be reclaimed ? " 

* Not I. I only axed Mrs. Maddox whether it were a boy or a 
girl." 

« How old was she, then ? " 



N 



178 POOR JACK. 

" Well, how can I tell ? that's not in my way, but the knowing 
ones in these matters said that she must be about eighteen months 
old, so we have taken that for a departure as to her age. I love 
her now as if she were my own child ; and so will you, Tom, like a 
sister, when you know her. She calls me her father, and you may 
do the same, Tom, if you like, for I will be as good as a father to 
you, if you are as good a boy as you now seem to be. I like to be 
called father, somehow or another — it sounds pleasant to my ears; 
but come in now, I think you have compassed the compass, so 
you must learn something else." 

" There is another way, Tom," said Bramble, as he seated him- 
self in his large chair, " in which a smart prentice may be useful 
to his master ; and it is of quite as much importance as the compass 
— which is in heaving the lead. You see, Tom, the exact soundings 
being known will often enable a pilot to run over the tail of a bank 
and save a tide ; that is, when he knows that he can trust the man 
in the chains. Some seamen are very particular in giving exact 
soundings, but all are not : they care more for the song than they 
do for any thing else, and though the song is very musical, yet 
it wo'n't get a ship off when she's on shore. Now, two thirds of 
the seamen who are sent in the chains, will not give the soundings 
within half a fathom, and, moreover, they do not give them quick 
enough for the pilot in many cases ; if, therefore, you learn to 
heave the lead well, be correct in your soundings, and quick in 
giving them, you will become of great use to me. You understand, 
don't you ?" 

" Yes," replied I. 

" Well, go up into my room, and hanging on the nail behind 
the door you will see a lead line — bring it me down here." 

I did so, and then Bramble explained to me how the fathoms 
were marked on the line, and how the soundings were given out. 

" You see," said he, " wherever there is a mark with a piece of 
leather or bunting, whether it be white or red, it is called a mark ; 
and if you had five fathoms of water, you would cry out by the 
mark five ; but at the other depths there are no marks, but so 
many knots tied as there are fathoms, as here at nine ; and then you 



POOR JACK. 179 

would say by the deep nine. Now run the line through your hand, 
and see if you can repeat the marks and deeps as they pass." 

I did so. 

" Very well. Now for the song, for there is a sort of tune to 
it." Bramble then again passed the line through his hands, giving 
the song to each fathom, half fathom, and quarter fathom, and 
making me sing them after him, after which I had to repeat them 
by myself. The next day he took out the marks and knots from 
the whole line, and, giving me a two-feet rule to remeasure it, 
made me put them all in again. This I had to repeat three or 
four times. By this plan they were fully impressed on my 
memory ; and as for the song, he made me sing it almost every 
half hour for three or four days, Bessy generally repeating, in her 
clear voice, from the back kitchen, or up stairs, " and a quarter 
seven — by the deep nine." 

On the fourth day Bramble said, " Well, Tom, I think both you 
and Bessy may leave off singing now. You have yet to learn the 
most important part, which is to heave the lead ; but we must wait 
till we get on board of a vessel for that. Observe, Tom, it's all very 
well singing when you've plenty of water, and I like it, for it 
sounds musical and pleasant to the ear; but in shallow water 
the pilot's answer must be much shorter and quicker, as you will 
find out by-and-by." 



CHAP. XXVI. 

IN WHICH I GO AFLOAT, AND OBTAIN SOME KNOWLEDGE OF THE ENGLISH 

CHANNEL. 

It may be as well here to remark, that the system of pilotage is 
different now from what it used to be at the period of which I am 
writing. The Cinque Port pilots now carry vessels from the 
Downs to the River, and from the River to the Downs : their pilot- 

N 2 



180 POOR JACK. 

age extends no further. Vessels seldom require pilots for the 
Channel, and do not take them unless they are bound to some port 
in the Channel with which they are unacquainted, and those pilots 
who ply in the Channel are termed Hoblers ; but at the time I refer 
to, the regular pilots used to go out in their galleys to the chaps 
of the Channel, and take charge of vessels all the way up ; which, 
by the new regulations, they do not do. The arrangements for 
pilotage have been much improved of late years, and those em- 
ployed are better qualified. 

I had remained at Deal about three weeks, when an outward- 
bound Indiaman anchored in the Downs : her pilot came on shore, 
and she made the signal for another. It was Bramble's turn — a 
galley was launched, and we went on board. 

The ship was bound to Plymouth, from whence she was to sail 
with convoy to a certain latitude. The weather was now- fine 
and frosty, and we made sail when the tide served. As soon as 
we were fairly out in the Channel, Bramble went with me into the 
main-chains, and showed me how to heave the lead. After several 
attempts, in which I sometimes would hit the spare topsail yard 
upon which I stood, sometimes would nearly break my own head, 
and once contrived to throw the lead over the hammock rails in 
board, I succeeded in getting it round over my head ; and when I 
had once gained that point, I made fewer mistakes. In two days 
we arrived at Plymouth ; and as Bramble kept me at it till my arms 
ached, nearly half the day, I could by that time heave the lead pretty 
fairly, that is to say, without danger to myself or other people. 
The day after we arrived at Plymouth, we got into a pilot boat, and 
went out in search of employment, which we soon found, and we 
continued chiefly taking vessels up to Portsmouth and down to 
Plymouth, or clear of soundings, for some time. During this time, 
my practice at the lead was incessant, and I became very perfect. 
When I was not at the lead, Bramble would make me stand at the 
binnacle and watch the compass, so that, by the time we arrived at 
Deal again, I was pretty competent in those two branches of my 
art, except that, having practised the lead mostly in deep water, I 
had not acquired accuracy and expedition in giving the soundings. 




JACK H3AVTKG THE LEAP 



POOR JACK. 181 

But I learnt a great deal more of my profession ; Bramble ex- 
plaining to me the sails, rigging, and names and uses of the ropes, 
and the various manoeuvres practised, all of which he would catechise 
me in afterwards, to ascertain if I was perfect, and had remembered 
what he told me. I was, therefore, under excellent tuition. What- 
ever port we entered, Bramble would point out the landmarks to 
me, state the distances from point to point, and the dangers to be 
avoided. These I could not so well retain perfectly, and required 
occasional reminding, but altogether I gave him satisfaction. It 
was on New Year's day, 1800, that we boarded a large homeward- 
bound Indiaman, which had just struck soundings. She was a 
thousand ton ship, with a rich cargo of tea on board, and full of 
passengers, besides more than one hundred invalids from the regi- 
ments out there, who had been sent home under the charge of two 
officers. 

What a difference there appeared to me to be between the In- 
diaman going out and this one coming home : the first so neat and 
clean in her decks, and this so crowded and so weatherworn by her 
long voyage. What with troops in old jackets, which had once 
been scarlet, Lascars with their curly black hair, and dark hand- 
some features, yellow men, sickly women, and half-cast children, 
with their Hindoo Ayahs, tigers, lions, turtles, cows, sheep, 
goats, and pigs, on the booms and main-deck, the vessel was in a 
strange motley of confusion. 

As soon as we were put on board, the captain, officers, and pas- 
sengers crowded round to inquire the news. Bramble, according 
to pilot custom, had brought off one or two late Plymouth papers 
(one of which, I recollect, ^gave the account of the cutting out of the 
Hermione by Captain Hamilton) ; but the people on board were 
eight months behind hand at least as regarded what had passed : 
they had not even heard of Sir Sydney Smith's defence of Acre 
against Bonaparte, or any thing else which had subsequently oc- 
curred ; so that as soon as Bramble had taken charge, and put the 
ship's head the right course (for the wind was fair), there was no 
end to question and answer. And while Bramble was questioned by 
the captain and passengers, I was attacked by the midshipmen, or 

N 3 



.182 



POOR JACK. 



Guinea pigs, as they are called. Having a fair wind we ran right 
for the Downs, where we arrived on the morning of the second 
day. Here the purser of the ship went on shore with his despatches, 
and the ship anchored to await orders, by the next post, to go up 
the river. 

" Tom/' said Bramble, as the vessel anchored, " I cannot quit 
the ship, but you may ; so just get on shore in one of the boats, and 
see how little Bessy is, and poor old Mrs. Maddox's leg ; and, Tom, 
take our dirty linen on shore and bring off clean." 

I was glad enough to obey his orders, for I was very anxious to 
see dear little Bessy again ; so I dropped into a boat that was going 
on shore for fresh beef, taking with me two or three little presents 
for Bessy, out of the many which I had received when on board ; 
for the officers and men were very kind to me, and had given me 
many things, which they did not value, but which I did very much, 
as they were quite new to me. 

The custom officers at Deal were not very particular at that 
time. I was not searched ; and arrived at the cottage, where I found 
Bessy sitting at her needle : she threw down her work and ran to 
me, and as I kissed her the tears ran down her cheeks. 

" Where is father, Tom ? I'm so glad to see you ; but where is 
father ? I've been so frightened, the winter has been so rough." 

" He's on board of the Indiaman, but being in charge he cannot 
come on shore, so he sent me." 

" Oh ! I'm so glad — you have been away so long ; and we have 
had nothing but gales of wind ; and do you know that Williams 
and Steers are both drowned ? " 

" No, indeed, we know nothing ; but father will be sorry to hear 
of it, for they were friends of his." 

" Well, Tom, it's not fair to leave a little girl like me alone 
here, for Mrs. Maddox has kept her bed ever since you left. Her 
leg is better, but she has pains in her limbs, and groans so all 
night, and here I am left by myself, to hear her groan and the wind 
roar." 

Here Bessy began to cry, and I to console her as well as I could, 
a 1 though I did feel that it was hard that such a child should be left 



POOR JACK. 183 

so lonely. The presents I brought her made her wipe away her 
tears, and she was very soon as lively and joyous as ever. 

" I heard father say, Bessy," (I always called Bramble my father, 
as he had said I might,) M that he had picked up something this 
winter, for he has had none but heavy vessels ; and you know pilot- 
age is paid by the draught of water." 

<• Well, he may have made money, but I'm sure we haven't spent 
anv to matter ; for I have hardly been once a week to Mrs. Maddox 
for money since you have gone. She eats hardly any thing, and 
I can't eat my meals, when I'm alone down here. Will father come 
home after he has been up the river ? " 

" Yes, Bessy, he said that we should take a spell on shore." 
" Tom, don't you think I might go on board and see him for 
half an hour ? " 

" Yes, I don't see why not : speak to Mrs. Maddox.* 1 
Bessy ran up stairs, and came down with the required per- 
mission, provided a neighbour's girl would remain in the house, and 
that she went under my escort. Her bonnet was soon on, and we 
obtained a passage in one of the Indiaman's boats which was 
shoving off, for the water was quite smooth, and the ship's boats 
could lie on the shingle without difficulty. The officer took Bessy 
under his boat cloak, and we were soon on board. Bramble v, as 
not on deck at the time, and when I went down to look for him, 
Bessv remained on the quarter-deck in admiration of all she saw. But 
Bramble was not below as I supposed : he had gone into the'cuddy 
with the captain ; and when he came out, his first knowledge of 
Bessy's being on board was being embraced by the waist with her 
little arms. 

u Why, Bessy, my child ! " said Bramble, just as I returned on 
deck. " This is Master Tom's doing," continued he, kissing her ; 
" so you have come to see your father ? " 

" Why, you would not come on shore to see me, father," said 
Bessy, as Bramble took her up and kissed her again. 
" Well, Tom, have you brought the clean things ? " 
" No, I must go on shore again with Bessy, father." 
" Very true, so you must." 

N 4 



184 POOR JACK. 

Bessy was taken much notice of by the captain and all on board. 
No wonder; her fair skin, and clear transparent red and white, 
were in such contrast with the bilious-looking passengers, that she 
appeared as if she was not of the same race. She was much ad- 
mired, and received many little presents ; and when she left the 
ship, after staying on board an hour, she was much delighted with 
her trip, and still more so with the promise of Bramble, that he 
would stay ashore for some time, as soon as he came back from the 
river. I remained with her on shore till dusk, and then, having 
collected the clean linen, as we were expected to sail early the 
next morning, I returned on board the Indiaman. 



CHAP. XXVII. 



SHOWING THE IMPORTANCE, ON BOARD SHIP, OF A ROPE S END WELL 

APPLIED. 

The next morning, as we expected, the orders came down for the 
Indiaman to go round to the river. The wind was fair, but light : 
we hove up and made sail, stemming the last of the ebb. When 
the flood made, the wind died away, so that we made but little 
progress ; much to the annoyance of those on board, who were 
naturally impatient to land after so tedious a voyage. Towards 
the evening it fell calm, and a fog bank rose on the horizon 
to the eastward. There were still two hours of daylight, when, as I 
was sweeping the horizon with my glass, I discovered the three 
masts of a vessel with no sails set on them. As she was a long 
way off, I went half way up the main rigging to have a better view 
of her, and made her out to be a large lugger. I went down to 
the poop, where Bramble stood smoking a cheroot with some of the 
officers of the ship. " Father," says I, u there's a large lugger on 
our beam, with her sails lowered down. I caught her masts with 
the glass just now." 



POOR JACK. 



185 



" Then she's a French privateer, you may depend upon it." re- 
plied Bramble, ' ; and she means to try to take us by surprise 
to-night.'' 

The officers went down and reported it to the captain : the 
glasses were fixed upon her, and there was little doubt as to what 
she was. 

" Lucky you discovered her, boy, for we might have been sur- 
prised, that's a fact;' said the captain ; " however, now she shall 
catch a Tartar." 

« She's waiting for the fog, captain," said Bramble, " which 
will come rolling down with the shift of wind in about an hour or 
two, I expect ; and then we must allow her another hour to get 
alongside of us. Depend upon it she has plenty of men, and 
intends to try to board us in the fog." 

Every body was now on the qui rive ; the women were, as 
usual, frightened ; the men passengers looked grave ; the Lascars 
rather unsteady ; but we had forty English seamen, and a hundred 
invalid soldiers on board, who could all be depended upon. The 
guns were loaded and shotted ; and the invalid soldiers were mus- 
tered ; muskets and ammunition handed up ; the bayonets fixed, 
unfixed again, and then they were ordered to remain on the booms 
with their accoutrements on and their muskets by their sides. 
The officers still kept their glasses on the lugger, until at last the 
fog came down and we could see her no more. 

The officers who commanded the invalids, after a consultation 
with the captain, at which Bramble assisted, told off their men into 
two parties, one of them being appointed to assist the seamen with 
their bayonets in repelling the boarders (should the attempt be 
made), and the other to fire upon them, and into the deck of the 
vessel, when she came alongside. The Lascars were stationed at the 
guns, in case they might be required; but no great dependence 
was placed upon their services. 

By the time that these arrangements had been made, the fog 
had reached the Indiaman, and we were at the same time taken 
aback with the easterly breeze which brought it down to us : being 
uear to the land, we put the ship's head off shore. The wind con- 



186 POOR JACK. 

tinued light and the water smooth, but the fog thickened every 
minute : at last we could hardly see as far as the foremast of the 
vessel. 

" He'll be puzzled to find us, I think," said the captain. 

" He'll find us, never fear," replied Bramble. " He has calcu- 
lated the time of the fog reaching us, and he knows that we must 
lay our head off shore — to be sure, we might give him the go-by 
if we bore up and ran back again to the Downs." 

u I think I see myself bearing up and running away from a 
rascally French privateer," said the captain. " Keep a sharp look 
out there forward." 

" Ay, ay, sir/' replied the chief officer. 

Half an hour more passed, and by our calculation the privateer 
should have been on board of us, but we could see nothing of her, 
although the fog had cleared up a little. The soldiers were now 
ordered to load their muskets. I was on the poop with Bramble, 
when, happening to turn and look aft (the very opposite direction 
from which the privateer was to be expected), I saw her three lug 
sails looming in the mist, just on the quarter, not half a cable's 
length from us. I jumped down to where the captain was stand- 
ing, and said to him, " There she is, sir, close on our lee quarter. 
The captain sprang on the poop, saw the vessel, and ordered the 
men to come aft in silence. The tramp of the soldiers' feet was 
scarcely over when the lugger was alongside of us, her masts bang- 
ing against our main and mizen chains, as she rolled with the swell 
under our lee. The Frenchmen gave a cheer, which told us how 
very numerous they were : they climbed up the side and into the 
chains like cats, and in a few seconds all was noise, confusion, and 
smoke. It was impossible to know what the result was to be for 
about a minute, when the cheers from our own men announced that 
the assailants had been beaten back. But hardly had the cheering 
ceased on our side when another cheer was heard from the lugger, 
and the attempt to gain our decks was repeated. This time the 
Frenchmen fought more obstinately than before, and it w r as nearly 
five minutes before they were repelled. It was not yet dark 
(although the fog was thick), and you could make out their coun- 



POOK JACK. 187 

tenances pretty clear : a more wild reckless set of fellows I never 
beheld, and they certainly fought very gallantly, but they were 
driven back again ; and once more were the cheers from the British 
seamen and soldiers mixed up with the execrations and shouts of 
the still contending, although retreating, Frenchmen. 

Just at this period of the conflict, I was standing on the poop by 
Bramble, who had been watching the result, when he said, " Tom, 
come with me : do you jump into the main chains with a double 
part of the topsail haulyards fall, and when the lugger's mast 
strikes against the chains, as she rolls in to us, pass the fall round 
it underneath the rigging, and hand the end in to me." 

We both leapt off the poop : he gave me the bight of the haul- 
yards. I crept out of the port into the chains and passed it round 
the lugger's mainmast, as he told me, handing in the bight to him 
which he belayed slack to the main-sheet kevel. At the time I 
perceived a man lying wounded or dead in the main chains, but I 
paid no attention to him until, as I was about to get on board, he 
attracted my attention by seizing my leg, and making his teeth 
meet in the small part of it, above the ankle. I could not help 
crying out, I was so taken by surprise with the pain ; however I 
kicked him off, and turning to look at him, I found it was a 
wounded Frenchman, who, perceiving what I was about, had paid 
me that compliment. As soon as I was on board I heard the 
captain say to Bramble, " Well, pilot, he has had enough of it." 

" Yes, and he wo'n't escape, captain, for Tom has got him fast 
by the mast-head, and they dare not climb up to cut themselves 
adrift. All that you have to do now is to let the soldiers fire on 
his decks until they run below, and then our men can board and 
take possession of her." 

The captain, perceiving that the vessel was made fast, gave the 
necessary orders. The soldiers lined the hammock nettings and 
chains, and such a shower of musketry was poured into her decks 
that the Frenchmen were soon driven below, and our seamen then 
slipped down her rigging, boarded, and took possession of her. The 
prisoners having been ordered up and passed into the forehold, the 
wounded men were then looked after. We had eleven wounded, 



188 POOR JACK. 

but none killed ; the Frenchman had eight killed and seventeen 
wounded ; among others, the captain, who had headed the second 
attempt to board. She was called the Pucelle d'Orleans, of twelve 
guns and a hundred and twenty-five men. 

It was two or three hours before we were again all to rights, 
and a party sent on board of the prize ; and then there was again 
another kind of confusion, from the congratulations, drinking 
healths, the women coming up on deck, &c. ; however the weather 
continued light, so it was of no consequence. That Frenchman 
bit very hard, and I limped for three or four days afterwards. 

" Well, Tom/' said Bramble, " I see you've got nerve, so all's 
right. You had better go and lie down now, for you must be 
tired ; I'll call you in the morning." 

Very glad was I to limp to bed. All night I dreamt of nothing 
but volleys of musketry, and boarding and reboarding, and being 
wounded in the leg, and then I would awake with the smart of the 
Frenchman's teeth. 

The next morning when I came on deck, the captain thanked 
me for my services, and said that the lugger would have escaped 
had it not been for me. I replied that it was Bramble who pre- 
vented her escape, as I should not have thought of making her 
fast if I had not been told. 

" That's all true enough," replied the captain ; " but how many 
of your age, having been told to do it, would have done it, Tom ? 
I shall not forget you." 

I went on the poop to Bramble, who, as usual, had his short 
pipe in his hand ; and I certainly was pleased when I saw what a 
beautiful craft we had helped to capture. She sat like a swan on 
the water, and sailed round and round us with the greatest ease. 

In the afternoon we anchored at the Nore, and sent away all the 
prisoners to Sheerness. I must not forget to say how very kind 
and generous the passengers were to me. They made a great many 
presents, some of value, as I afterwards found out; and I was glad 
to receive them that I might give them to Virginia, and those who 
had been friendly to me. 

The next morning we arrived off Greenwich, and Bramble told 



POOR JACK. 



189 



me to go on shore and remain with my father and mother until he 
came down, which he would do in a few days, and pay a visit to 
his old friend Anderson. I landed with all my contraband articles 
in the boat, but no one thought of stopping or searching the former 
« Poor Jack." My insignificance was my protection ; and I arrived 
safely at Fisher's Alley with all my curiosities and prohibited effects. 
When I entered the house, I perceived that there was a third 
person sitting in company with my mother and Virginia ; but Vir- 
ginia sprang to me, and I threw down my bundles with which I 
was loaded, and pressed her in my arms. Although I had been 
absent but four months, she appeared to be very much grown, and 
in every way improved. As soon as I had released her, I offered 
my hand to my mother, who took it very coldly, and then ob- 
served, " Tom, you will be so ungenteel ; don't you see there is a 
gentleman here ? " 

« I beg his pardon, mother," replied I ; » but I could only see 

my sister just then." 

« And I admire your feeling, Tom," replied the party. " Mrs. 
Saunders, you must not scold him for that. How do you do, Tom, 
and how do you like your profession ?" continued he, holding out 

his hand. 

I took his hand, and looking at him I recognised him. « Oh, 
sir! you are the gentleman who was sitting in the room when we 
called upon Sir Hercules and her ladyship." 

« I am so, Tom, and I promised Sir Hercules that I would 
have an eve to you all, and be of any use to you that I could. 
My name is Wilson, and I'm what the sailors call a shark, that is, 

I'm a lawyer." 

« Well, you don't appear as if you would bite, sir," replied I, as 
I looked at his venerable and kind face. 

« No, no, we never frighten people by our looks : we don't 
carry our teeth with us; but I have several rows of them, all upon 
shelves in my chambers, called the ' Statutes at large,' and by 

other names." 

He then entered into conversation with me, and I told him most 
of what had passed, of course not forgetting that the Indiaman 



190 POOR JACK. 

we had brought up the river had captured a privateer. He sat 
about an hour, and then went away, desiring me to call upon him. 
I was not sorry when he went, as I wished to show my presents 
to Virginia, and give her those which she liked best. When Vir- 
ginia had selected for herself, or rather I had forced upon her all 
she most admired, I gave a cut ivory card- case, a filigree needle- 
case, and a small red scarf to my mother, who, for the first time 
in her life, appeared pleased with me, and said that they were 
very genteel, and she was much obliged to me. The remainder I 
put away in my room up stairs, intending to keep some for Bi 
and give the others to Mrs. St. Felix, the doctor, and old Nanny. 
I then went to the Hospital, and found out my father, old An- 
derson, and Ben. I narrated to them much more circumstan- 
tially than I did to the old lawyer the particulars of the capture of 
the privateer. Anderson put a great many inquiries to me, as to 
my liking my profession, and also concerning little Bessy, whose 
history I communicated to him. After my father and Ben had 
left, he gave me a great deal of advice, all of which I trust that I 
treasured up. 

" I hear," said he, " that Spicer has been talking a good deal 
about you, and inquiring very often when you were expected to 
return. Were you very intimate with that man ?" 

I replied in the negative, and then narrated the whole history 
of the spy-glass, the erasure of the name by Mrs. St. Felix, and 
the recognition of it by Spicer. 

" You did right to leave him in his error relative to where you 
received the glass from," said Peter Anderson : " there is some 
mystery there which time may unravel, but do not say a word of 
it to any one, Tom. I am glad that you have told me, as in case 
you are away, and any thing should occur, I shall know how to 
act." 

I must acknowledge that I now walked proudly through the 
streets of Greenwich. I was no longer Poor Jack, but I was 
earning my livelihood in my profession. I had reason to be still 
prouder when, two days afterwards, Mr. Wilson came to my 
mother's with the newspaper in his hand in which there was a 



POOR JACK. 191 

long account of the capture of the privateer, and the conduct of 
Bramble and of me spoken of in the highest terms. This he read 
aloud to my mother and Virginia. I watched my sister : the tears 
filled her eyes as she listened ; and when Mr. Wilson had done, 
her arms were round my neck, and her smiles were mixed with her 
tears, and sometimes she would laugh as she cried. Oh ! how I 
loved her then, for I felt how dearly she loved me ; even my 
mother appeared gratified, although she said nothing, but con- 
tinued to repair the lace veil upon which she had been employed. 
That evening I went with Virginia to eall upon Mrs. St. Felix, 
taking with me the presents I had laid aside for her. She wel- 
comed me as usual, and accepted what I brought for her with- 
out hesitation and with many thanks. 

" Well, Mr. Tom," said she, " I'll just put away all your nice 
little remembrances, and then I'll tell you that I've heard all about 
vour behaviour in the fight with the privateer ; and I've no doubt 
but that, if you continue to go on as you've begun, you will one 
day have a leg the less, as your father has before you." 

" I hope not," replied I : t; two legs are better than one.'' 

- Yes, when you want to run away, that's true. I see now why 
you're so anxious to save your legs."' 

"But, Mrs. St. Felix, if it had not been for that good spy-glass 
you gave me, I never should have discovered the privateer, and 
we should not have been prepared for her." 

" Well, that's fortunate : it didn't prove a glass too much, any 
how, or you'd have seen double. I suppose, then, all these pretty 
things are my share of the prize money." 

'•' No. they are no value, except to prove to you that Poor Jack 
has not forgotten your kindness, and never will." 

" That I believe : and believing that, I suppose you have not 
forgotten old Nanny.'' 

" Xo ; but I have not seen her yet. I intend to go to-morrow; 
but I have something for the doctor. He is not at home, will you 
give it to him ?" 

(i Certainly, you know I am as good as a mother to him." 

" I think the doctor would rather vou'd be a wife to him." 



192 



POOR JACK. 



"That's a foolish idea that's in many people's heads, Tom, 
which I'll thank you to contradict. I never intend to change my 
name." 

" Don't make too sure," replied I ; and I added at a venture, 
(why, I know not, but I had formed the idea in my mind that 
St. Felix was not her proper name,) " you may change it yet for 
your real name." 

" Tom, Tom ! " cried the widow, " what do you mean ? " 

" Nothing," replied I; "I was only joking." 

" Well then, don't talk such nonsense, or I shall send you out 
of the shop." 

I had, however, it appeared, struck upon a chord which jarred, 
and all the spirits of Mrs. St. Felix vanished at once. So Virginia 
and I wished her a good evening, and returned home. 




POOR JACK. 193 



CHAP. XXVIII. 

SOME LITTLE DIFFERENCE IN THE PROCEEDS OF THIS CHAPTER, AND MY 
FORMER " COPPER FOR POOR JACK, YOUR HONOUR." 

On our arrival at my mother's, I found a letter from Bramble, 

stating that he would be at Greenwich in two days, and, further, 
informing me that the Honourable Company had been pleased, in 
consequence of the report made of our good behaviour, to award 
to him the sum of two hundred pounds, and to me the sum of one 
hundred pounds, as a remuneration for our assistance in the cap- 
ture of the privateer. 

This was news indeed. One hundred pounds ! I never thought 
that I should possess such a sum in my life. One hundred pounds ! 
what should I do with it ? My mother was astonished, and then 
fell into a very grave mood. Virginia was pleased, but appeared 
to care less about it than I thought she would have done. My 
father came in as usual with Ben the Whaler, and I read the letter. 

" Why, Tom, that's about as much prize-money as I have made 
in all my sarvice," said my father, " and you've been afloat only 
four months. Come, missis, send for some beer, and let us drink 
Tom's health, and success to him. God bless you, my boy ; the 
papers say you deserved it, and that's better than your getting 
it. I'm proud of you ; I am indeed, my boy : your father's 
proud of you, Tom," — and here my father showed more emotion 
than ever I witnessed in him before ; however, he put his lips to 
the porter pot, and when he had drained it nearly to the bottom, 
he had quite recovered himself. 

" Well, Tom," said Ben, after he had finished the small modi- 
cum of beer left him by my father, " and what do you mean to do 
with all that money ? " 

" I'm sure I don't know — I have no want of it — I have even- 
thing I wish for." 

" Come, missis," said my father, " we must have another pot, 
for I drank deep, and Ben has been shared out." My mother very 



194 POOR JACK 

graciously sent for another pot of porter, which, with the news- 
paper, occupied Ben and my father till it was time for us to break 
up and go to bed. 

The next morning when I went down I found Virginia alone, my 
mother having returned to her room. 

" Tom," said she, " what do you think my mother said to me 
when we were going to bed last night? " 

" Tell me." 

" She said, ' Tom says he don't know what to do with his money. 
I only wish I had it ; I would turn it into three times the sum in 
three years, and have a better home for you, my dear.' " 

" Did she say how ? " 

' Yes, I asked her how ; she said that she should take a new 
house with a shop up the town, and set up as a milliner, with ap- 
prentices ; that, as soon as she was fairly employed, she should give 
up getting up fine linen, and only take in laces to wash and mend, 
which was a very profitable business." 

" Well," says I, " Virginia, my mother is a hard-working woman, 
and a clever woman, and I dare say she would do very well, and, 
as she says she would have a better home for you, I think I shall 
let her have the money ; but I won't say so yet, I must talk about 
it to Peter Anderson, and if he don't say no, she shall have it with 
pleasure." 

" That will be very kind of you, Tom ; and I hope mother will 
feel it, for you don't owe her much." 

" Never mind that ; after breakfast I'll see Peter Anderson : 
don't say a word about it till I come back." 

At breakfast-time my mother still appeared to be very thought- 
ful : the fact was, that the idea of what advantage the money 
would be had taken possession of her mind ; and perhaps she 
thought that there was no chance of obtaining it. Perhaps she 
felt that, had she treated me better, she would have had it without 
difficulty — it was impossible to say exactly. 

After breakfast I walked with Virginia to her school ; and then 
set off to Anderson, to whom I immediately imparted what had 
taken place. His answer was decided — 



POOR JACK. 195. 

" I think, Jack, you can't do better ; but, at the same time, 
let us go to your father and hear his opinion." 

My father coincided with Anderson and me ; and he added, 
ft I tell you what, your mother is not parfect exactly — though I 
say it, as shouldn't say it — but still she does work hard — and she 
will work hard — she has paid my little girl's schooling out of 
her own arnings ; and, moreover, she has found me one pot of 
porter at least, every night, which has made me very comfortable 
Now I've still a matter of forty pounds in the lieutenant's hands; 
I'll add it to Tom's hundred pounds, and then she will have a 
fair start. What d'ye think, Peter ? " 

" I think you are both right; and, Tom — you are doing your 
duty." 

I knew what Anderson meant. I thanked him for his advice ; 
and my father and I went to my mother's house. I requested my 
father to stand spokesman, which he did, ending by telling my 
mother, that my hundred pounds and his forty pounds were very 
much at her sarvice, and good luck to her. Virginia's eyes glis- 
tened as she took me by the hand. My mother replied, 

" Very well, if we pleased, she would do her best for us all." 

The answer was hardly gracious ; but I watched her counte- 
nance, and saw she was moved. Her thin lips quivered, as she 
turned away and went up stairs, which she did immediately after 
her reply. In about half an hour, during which I was laughing 
with Virginia, my mother came down stairs in her shawl and 
bonnet. 

" Tom," said she, in a kind manner, " will you walk with Virginia 
to school this afternoon, as I am going to have some conversation 
with Mr. Wilson ? " 

The alteration in her tone of voice to me was immediately per- 
ceived by Virginia. 

" You are a dear good Tom," said she, kissing me, as soon as 
my mother had left the house. 

As soon as I had left Virginia at school, I went to call upon old 
Nanny, whom I found quite brisk and lively, sorting old keys and 
rusty hinges. 

o 2 



196 POOR JACK. 

" Well, Jack," said she, " so you are come at last ; I thought you 
would have been here yesterday, but nobody cares about an old 
woman like me. I heard all about you, and how you took the 
privateer, and how the Company have given you a hundred pounds; 
and when I heard that, I said, < Now Jack (Poor Jack that was, who 
came begging to old Nanny to lend him money) will not come to 
see me ; he'll be too proud. Besides, I said, his family is getting up 
in the world : there's a baronet and his lady who have taken them 
under their protection, and there's Lawyer Wilson calls at the 
house. O dear me ! it's the way of us all.' " 

" And so you said all that to yourself, did you ? " replied I. 
" Yes, and a great deal more too." 

" Then, mother, you did me injustice. I could not well come 
before ; I had to see my father and mother, and my sister, and I 
had business to transact." 

" Mercy on us ! business to transact ! Poor Jack had business 
to transact ! Here's a change from the time that his whole business 
was to touch his hat for coppers, and dip his head in the mud for 
a penny." 

" Nevertheless, what I say is true, and you are very unjust to 
accuse me as you have done : I have always thought of you, and 
have now with me several things that I have collected for you." 

" Yes, you promised me — Jack, you do keep your promises ; I 
will say that for you. Well, what have you got? " 

I opened my handkerchief, and pulled out several little articles, 
such as fine worked baskets, shells, &c, and, among the rest, a 
pound of tea, in a leaden canister. 

" There, mother, I have brought you them as a present, and I 
hope you will take them." 

Old Nanny turned them over one by one, rather contemptuously, 
as I thought, until she came to the tea. " That may do," said she. 
" Why, Jack, those are all very pretty r things, but they are too 
pretty for my shop : why didn't you bring me some empty ginger- 
beer bottles ? I could have sold them this very morning." 
" Why, mother, I really did not like to ask for such things." 
" No, there it is ; you've grown so fine all of a sudden : these are 
no use, for nobody will come to my shop to buy them." 



POOR JACK. 197 

" I thought you would like to keep them yourself, mother." 

" Keep them ; O ! they are keepsakes, are they ? Look you, 
Jack, if they are to be kept, you had better take them away at 
once, and give them to the young girls. Girls like keepsakes, 
old women like money." 

" Well, mother, sell them if you please ; they are your own. 

" Sell them : let me see — yes — I think I know where there is a 
sort of curiosity shop, in Church Street ; but it's a long way to 
walk, Jack, and that — let me see," continued she, counting the 
different articles — " one, two. three — seven times, Jack." 

" But why not take them all at once ? " 

" All at once, you stupid boy ? I should get no more for two 
than for one. No, no; one at a time, and I may make a few 
shillings. Well, Jack, it's very kind of you after all, so don't mind 
my being a little cross ; it was not on account of the things, but 
because you did not come to see me, and I've been looking out 
for you." 

" If I had thought that, I would have come sooner, mother, 
although it would not have been convenient." 

" I believe you, Jack, I believe you ; but you young people 
can't feel as an old woman like I do. There is but one thing 
I love in the world, Jack, now, and that's you ; and when I get 
weary of waiting for that one thing, and it don't come, Jack, it 
does make a poor old woman like me a little cross for the time." 

I was touched with this last speech of old Nanny's, who had 
never shown me any such a decided mark of kindness before. 
" Mother," said I, "depend upon it, whenever I return to Green- 
wich, you shall be the first person that I come to see after I have 
been to my mother's." 

"That's kind, Jack, and you keep your promise always. Now, 
sit down ; you don't want to go away already, do you ? " 

" No, mother, I came to spend the whole morning with you." 
" Well, then, sit down ; take care, Jack, you'll knock down that 
bottle. Now tell me, what do you intend to do with vour hun- 
dred pounds ? " 

" I have settled that already, mother. I have given it away." 

o 3 



198 



POOR JACK. 



" Already ! Why, the boy has one hundred pounds given him 
on the morning, and he gives it away before night. Mercy on 
us ! who would ever think of leaving you any money ? " 

" No one, mother, and I never expect any except what I earn." 

" Why, Jack, do you know how much one hundred pounds is ? " 

" I think so." 

" Now, Jack, tell me the truth, who did you give it to, your 
father, or your little sister, or who ? for I can't understand how a 
person could give away one hundred pounds in any way or to any 
body." 

" Well, then, I gave it to my mother." 

(i Your mother I your mother, who has hated you, wished you 
dead, half-starved you ! Jack, is that possible ? " 

" My mother has not been fond of me, but she has worked hard 
for my sister. This hundred pounds will enable her to do much 
better than she does now, and it's of no use to me. Mother may 
love me yet, Nanny.*' 

" She ought to," replied old Nanny, gravely ; and then she 
covered her face up with her hands. "Oh, what a difference!" 
ejaculated she at last. 

" Difference, mother, difference ? in what ? " 

" Oh, Jack, between you and — somebody else. Don't talk 
about it any more, Jack," said Nanny, casting her eyes down to 
the presents I had brought her. " I recollect the time," continued 
she, evidently talking to herself, " that I had plenty of presents ; 
ay, and when it was thought a great favour if I would accept 
them. That was when I was young and beautiful ; yes, people 
would laugh if they heard me, — young and very beautiful, or 
men's smiles and women's hate were thrown away — 

' Why so pale and wan, fond lover ; 
Prithee, why so pale?' 

Yes yes, by-gones are by-gones." 

I was much surprised to hear old Nanny attempt to sing, and 
could hardly help laughing ; but I restrained myself. She didn't 
speak again, but continued bent over one of the baskets, as if think- 
ing about former days. I broke the silence by saying — 



POOR JACK. 199 

" What part of the country did you live in when you were 
young, mother ? " 

" In the north part : but never ask questions." 

•• Yes, but, mother, I wish to ask questions. I wish you to tell 
me your whole history. I will not tell it again to any one, I 
promise you." 

" But why should you wish to know the history of a poor old 
thing like me ? " 

" Because, mother, I am sure you must have seen better days." 

" And if I have.. Jack, is it kind to ask me to bring up to memory 
the days when I was fair and rich, when the world smiled upon 
me, and I was fool enough to think that it would always smile ? is 
it kind to recall what was to an old, miserable, deserted wretch like 
me, struggling to keep out of the workhouse ? Look at me now, 
Jack, and see what I now am : is it not cruel to bring to my mind 
what I once was ? Go to, Jack, you're a selfish boy, and I don't 
love you/' 

" Indeed, mother, if I thought it would have given you pain, I 
never would have asked you ; but you cannot wonder at me. 
Recollect that you have ever been my best friend : you trusted me 
when nobody else would ; and can you be surprised at my feeling 
an interest about you ? Why, mother, I don't even know your 
name." 

" Well, Jack, you have put things in a better light. I do 
believe that you care for me, and who else does ? but, Jack, my 
name you never shall know, even if I am to tell you all the rest." 

" Were you ever married, mother?" 

" Yes, child, I was married. Xow, what's the next question ?" 
continued she, impatiently. 

u Had you any children ? " 

" Yes, boy, I had one — one that was a source of misery and 
shame to his doting mother." Old Nanny pressed her eveballs 
with her knuckles, as if in agony. 

u I won't ask you any more questions," said I, mcurnfullv. 

Cl Not now, Jack, that's a good boy ; some other day, perhaps, 
I'll tell you all. There's a lesson in every life, and. a warning in too 

o 4 



200 POOR JACK. 

many. You'll come again, Jack ; yes, I know you'll come to hear 
my story ; so I shall see you once more before you leave — go 
now." Old Nanny rose and went in-doors, taking her stool in 
her hand, and leaving the presents where they lay, outside, — a 
proof that she was in great agitation. I put them inside the 
threshold, and then went homewards. 

I could not help remarking, as I walked home, that old Nanny's 
language and manner appeared very superior when she broke out 
in these reminiscences of the past, and I felt more interest in her 
than I ever had before. 

On my return, I found Bramble, who had come down sooner 
than he was expected, sitting in the parlour with Peter Anderson 
and my father, all smoking, with porter on the table. 

" Well, Tom," said Bramble, " here I am two days before my 
time, but that's better than being two days after it, and, what's 
more, I've got the money, both yours and mine. They told me I 
should not get it for three months at least ; but I sent up my name 
to the Board, and explained to them, that a pilot could not wait 
like a purser, while they were passing accounts, so the gentleman 
laughed, and gave me an order for it, and I've got all my pilotage 
too; so I'm a rich man just now. Come, I'll give you yours at 
once, and I hope it may not be the last hundred pounds that you'll 
pick up." 

Bramble pulled his leathern case out of his pilot jacket, and 
counted out ten ten-pound notes. " There, Jack, you ought to 
give me a receipt, for I signed for you at the India House." 

li Oh, you've plenty of witnesses," replied I, as I collected the 
notes, and giving them to Virginia, told her to take them to my 
mother, who was up stairs in her room. 

" To tell vou the truth, Jack, this two hundred pounds, which I 
earned so easily, has just come in the right time, and with it and 
my pilotage I shall now be able to do what I have long wished." 

" And what's that ? " inquired I. " Something for Bessy, I 
suppose." 

" Exactly, Tom : it is something for Bessy, that is, it will be by 
and by. I've a good matter of money, which I've laid by year 



POOR JACK. 201 

after year, and worked hard for it, too, and I never have known 
what to do with it. I can't understand the funds and those sort 
of things, so I have kept some here and some there. Now vou 
know the grass land at the back of the cottage : it forms part of 
a tidy little farm, which is rented for seventy pounds a year, bv a 
good man, and it has been for sale these three years ; but I never 
could manage the price till now. When we go back to Deal, I 
shall try if I can buy that farm ; for, you see, money may slip 
through a man's fingers in many ways, but land can't run awav ; 
and, as you say, it will be Bessy's one of these days — and mpre 
too, if I can scrape it up." 

" You are right, Bramble," said Peter Anderson ; " and I am 
glad to hear that you can afford to buy the land."' 

" Why, there's money to be picked up by pilotage, if you work 
hard, and ar'n't afraid of heavy ships," replied Bramble. 

" Well, I never had a piece of land, and never shall have, I 
suppose," said my father. " I wonder how a man must feel, who 
can stand on a piece of ground, and say ' This is my own.' " 
" Who knows, father ? it's not impossible but you may." 
" Impossible ! no, nothing's impossible, as they say on board of a 
man-of-war ; it's not impossible to get an apology out of a midship- 
man, but it's the next thing to it." 
f< Why do they say that, father ? " 

" Because midshipmen are so saucy — why, I don't know. Thev 
haven't no rank as officers, nor so much pay as a petty officer, and 
yet they give themselves more airs than a lieutenant." 

" I'll tell you why," replied Anderson. " A lieutenant takes care 
what he is about. He is an officer, and has something to lose ; 
but a midshipman has nothing to lose ; and therefore he cares 
about nothing. You can't break a midshipman, as the saying is, 
unless you break his neck. And they have necks which arn't 
easily broken,, that's sartain." 

" They do seem to me to have more lives than a cat," observed 
my father ; who after a pause continued, — 

" Well, I was saying how hard it was to get an apology out of a 
midshipman ; I'll just tell you what took place on board of one 



202 POOR JACK. 

ship I served in. There was a young midshipman on board who 
was mighty free with his tongue : he didn't care what he said to 
any body, from the captain downward. He'd have his joke, come 
what would, and he'd set every body a-laughing : punish him as 
much as you please, it was all the same- One day, when we were 
off Halifax harbour, the master, who was a good-tempered fellow 
enough, but not over bright, was angry with this young chap for 
something that he had not done, and called him a ' confounded 
young bear.' Upon which the youngster runs to the Jacob ladder 
of the main rigging, climbs up, and as soon as he had gained the 
main rattlings, he cries out, ' Well, if I'm a bear, you ar'n't fit to 
carry guts to a bear.' ' What, sir ? ' cried the master. l Mutiny, by 
heavens! Up to the mast-head, sir, directly.' ' Don't you see that 
I was going of my own accord ? ' replied the midshipman ; for, you 
see, he knew that he would be sent there, so he went up the rigging 
on purpose. Well, this was rather a serious affair ; and so the 
master reports it to the first lieutenant, who reports it to the cap- 
tain, who sends for the youngster on the quarter-deck, at the time 

that the ship's company were at quarters. ' Mr. ,' (I forget 

his name) said the captain (drawing himself up to his full height, 
and perhaps an inch or two above it, as they say), ' you have been 
guilty of disrespect to your superior officer, in telling him that 
he was not fit to carry guts to a bear ' (the captain could hardly 
help laughing); ' now, sir,' continued he, recovering himself, < I give 
you your choice ; either you will make an apology to Mr. Owen, on 
this quarter-deck, or you must quit my ship immediately.' ' Sir,' 
replied the midshipman, ' I don't think it quite fair that the master 
should first punish me himself, and then complain to you after- 
wards. He has taken the law into his own hands already, by 
mast-heading me for eight hours, and now he makes a complaint 
to you ; but I am always ready to do as you wish ; and, to please 
you, 1 will make an apology.' ' There is some truth in your ob- 
servation,' replied the captain, ' and I have pointed the same out to 
the master ; but still this is a breach of discipline which cannot 
be passed over, and requires a public retraction before the whole 
ship's company. I, therefore, insist upon your retracting what 



POOR JACK. 203 

you have said.' < Certainly, sir/ replied the youngster. < Mr. 
Owen,' continued he, turning to the master, 'I said that you were 
not fit to carry guts to a bear : I was in the wrong, and I retract 
with pleasure, for I am perfectly satisfied that you are Jit to carry 
them.' ' Sir ! ' cried the captain. ' O, captain G ! ' inter- 
rupted the master, who did not take the joke, ' I'm perfectly 
satisfied. The young gentleman sees his error, and has retracted ; 
I ask no more.' ' If you are satisfied, sir,' replied the captain, 
biting his lips, < of course I have nothing more to say. Youngster, 
you may go to your duty, and recollect that you never again use 
such expressions to your superior officer ; ' and, said he, in a low 
tone, ' I may add, never venture in my presence to make such an 
apology as that again.' " 

I never saw old Anderson laugh so much as he did at this story 
of my father's. They continued to talk and smoke their pipes till 
about nine o'clock, when my father and he went to the Hospital, 
and Bramble took possession of a bed which had been prepared 
for him in my mother's house. 



CHAP. XXIX. 

IN WHICH I LEARN THE HISTORY OF OLD NANNY. 

The next day, as soon as I had finished a letter to Bessy, in which 
I gave her a detail of what had passed, I went to old Nanny's, to 
persuade her, if possible, to tell me her history. She was not at 
home, the door of her house was locked, and the shutters of the 
shop fastened. I was about to return to Fisher's Alley, when I per- 
ceived her hobbling down the street. I thought it better to make 
it appear as if I met her by accident ; so I crossed over the way, 
and walked towards her. " Well, mother," said I, " are you out 
so early ? " 



204- POOR JACK. 

" Ah, Jack ! is it you ? yes : it is through you that I have had to 
take so long a walk." 

" Through me ? " 

" Yes ; those presents you brought me. I'm almost dead. Why 
do vou bring such things ? But I did not do badly, that's the truth." 

I knew from this admission that old Nanny had sold them for 
more than she expected ; indeed she proved it, by saying, as she 
arrived at her house, " Well, Jack, it's very troublesome to have 
to walk so far ; but as you cannot get me bottles or those kind of 
things, you must bring me what you can, and I must make the best 
of them. I don't mind trouble for your sake, Jack. Now take 
the key, unlock the door, and then take down the shutters ; and 
mind how you walk about, Jack, or you'll break half the things in 
my shop." I did as she requested, and then we sat down together 
at the door as usual. 

" I think I shall go away to-morrow, or early the next morning, 
mother," said I ; " for Bramble is here, and he never stays long 
from his work." 

" That's all right ; he sets a good example ; and, Jack, if you do 
go, see if you can't beg a few more shells for me : I like shells." 

" Yes, mother, I will not forget ; but, as this is the last day I 
shall see vou for some time, will you not keep your promise to me, 
and tell me your history ? " 

" Jack, Jack, you are the most persevering creature I ever did 
see. I'm sure I shall be worried out of my life until I tell you, 
and so I may as well tell you at once, and there'll be an end of it ; 
but I wish you had not asked me, Jack, I do indeed. I thought of 
it last night when I was in bed, and at one time I made up my 
mind that I would not tell you, and then I thought again that I 
would ; for, Jack, as I said yesterday, there's a lesson in every life, 
and a warning in too many, and maybe mine will prove a warning 
to you, so far as to make you prevent a mother from being so 
foolish as I have been. 

" Now, Jack, listen to me ; mine is an old story ; but in most cases 
the consequences have not been so fatal. I shall not tell you my 
name ; it was once a fair one, but now tarnished . I was the only 




I 



POOR JACK. 205 

daughter of a merchant and shipowner, a rich man, and the first 
person in consequence in the seaport town where I was born and 
brought up. I never knew my mother, who died a year after I 
was born. I was brought up as most girls are who "have no 
mother or brothers ; in short. I was much indulged by my father, 
and flattered by other people. I was well educated, as you may 
suppose ; and, moreover, what you may not credit quite so easily, 
I was very handsome. In short, I was a beauty and a fortune, 
at the head of the society of the place, caressed, indulged, and 
flattered by all. This, if it did not spoil me, at least made me 
wilful. I had many offers, and many intended offers, which I 
nipped in the bud ; and I was twenty-three before I saw any 
one who pleased me. At last, a vessel came in consigned to 
the house, and the captain was invited to dinner. He was a hand- 
some careless young man, constantly talking about the qualities of 
his ship ; and, to my surprise, paying me little or none of that 
attention which I now considered as my due. This piqued me, 
and in the end I set my affections on him : either he did not or 
would not perceive it, and he sailed without showing me any 
preference. In six months he returned ; and whether it was that 
he was told of by others, or at last perceived, my feelings towards 
him, he joined the crowd of suitors, made a proposal in his off- 
hand manner, as if he was indifferent as to my reply, and was 
accepted. My father, to whom he communicated the intelligence 
as carelessly as if he were talking about freight, did not approve 
of the match. ' Very well,' replied he, ' I shall say no more ; as 
long as a man has a ship, he does not want a wife.' He returned 
and stated what had passed, and my father also spoke to me. I 
was self-willed and determined, and my father yielded. We were 
married ; and I certainly had no reason to complain of my hus- 
band, who was very kind to me. But I was jealous of, what do 
you think? of his ship ! for he cared more for it than he did for 
me : and three months after our marriage, notwithstanding all my 
tears and entreaties, and the expostulations of my father, he would 
sail again. He offered to take me with him, and I would gladly 
have gone ; but my father would not listen to it. He sailed, and 



206 POOR JACK. 

I never saw him again ; his vessel, with ail hands, foundered, with 
many others, in a heavy gale. The news did not arrive until 
many months afterwards ; and I had not been a mother more than 
six weeks when I found that I was a widow. I have passed all 
this over quickly, Jack, because it is of less moment — my trials 
had not commenced. 

« The loss of my husband, as may be supposed, only endeared 
my child the more to me, and I wept over him as he smiled upon 
me in his cradle. My father had reverses in his business, but those 
I cared little for. He did, however : he had been the richest man 
in the town, he was now comparatively poor; his pride was 
crushed ; it broke his heart, and he died ; the whole of his assets at 
the winding up of his affairs not exceeding ten thousand pounds. 
This was, however, quite enough, and more than enough, for me. 
I thought but of one object — it was my darling boy ; he represented 
to me all I had lost ; in him I saw my husband, father, and every 
thing. I lived but for him. He was my idolatry, Jack. I wor- 
shipped the creature instead of the Creator. 

" As he grew up, I indulged him in every thing ; he never was 
checked ; I worried myself day and night to please him, and yet 
he never was pleased. He was so spoilt that he did not know 
what he wanted. He was a misery to himself and all about him, 
except to me, who was so blinded by my love. As he advanced 
to manhood, his temper showed itself to be violent and uncon- 
trollable ; he was the terror of others, and prudent people would 
shake their heads and prophesy. He would not submit to any 
profession ; the only wish that he had was to go to sea, and that 
was my terror. I implored him on my knees not to think of it, 
but in vain ; at first he used to threaten when he wanted money 
for his extravagancies, and it was a sure way to obtain it ; but one 
day I discovered that he had quitted the port without saying fare- 
well, and that he had sailed in a vessel bound to the coast of Africa. 
A short letter and a heavy bill was received from Portsmouth, and 
I did not hear of him for two years. I was heart-broken, but not 
weaned from him ; I counted the days for his return. At last he 
came browned by the climate, full of oaths, savage in his bear- 



POOR JACK. 207 

ing, and occasionally referring to scenes which made me shudder. 
But he was my son, my only son, and I loved him as much as 
ever. He was now but seldom at home, for he lived almost at the 
gaming tables ; if he came to me, it was to extort money, and he 
never failed. I sold out my property to support his extravagance, 
and by degrees it was rapidly diminishing. I begged him, I 
entreated him, to be more prudent ; but he laughed, and promised 
to return me all the first lucky hit he should make ; but that lucky 
hit never came, and at last I had but two thousand pounds left. 
This I positively refused to part with, the interest of it was barely 
sufficient for my wants ; I asked no more, — but I expostulated 
and I reasoned with him in vain. He only begged me for five hun- 
dred pounds ; if I sold the money out, he would tell me where I 
might have as good interest for the fifteen hundred pounds as I now 
received for the two thousand pounds. He begged and entreated 
me, he kissed, and he even wept ; I could not withstand his importu- 
nities. I sold out the money, and gave him the sum he wanted; the 
fifteen hundred pounds I put by in my desk, to invest as he had 
pointed out. That very night he forced the lock, took out the 
money, and left me without a sixpence in the world." 

" What a villain ! " exclaimed I. 

" Yes, you may say so, Jack ; but who made him such a villain, but 
his foolish doting mother ? Had I done him justice, had I checked 
him when young, had I brought him up as I ought to have done, 
he might now have been a happiness and a blessing to his mo- 
ther. I was the person to blame, not he ; and many years of 
anguish have I lamented my folly and my wretchedness." 

"You loved him too much, mother; but it Mas a fault on the 
right side." 

" No, Jack, that is i\n error of yours; it was a fault on the wrong 
side. There is no credit to a mother in loving her children, for 
she cannot help it. It is a natural instinct implanted in the 
mother's heart by the Almighty, and, in following this instinct, we 
do no more than the beasts of the field. The duty of a mother is 
to check that feeling as far as it interferes with the happiness and 
well-doing of her children ; and it is her duty to do so, and to 



20S poo:t jack. 

punish herself in correcting her children. Jack, it is a selfish 
feeling which induces mothers to spoil their children." 

i( At all events, my mother has never spoilt me," replied I. 

" No, Jack, she has not; but observe the consequence. You 
said just now that excessive tenderness was a fault on the right 
side ; now, how completely have you proved the contrary ! I 
do not intend to defend your mother's conduct towards you ; she 
has been unkind to you in your childhood, and has never shown 
the affection that a mother ought ; but is not her fault a fault on 
the right side ? Jack, you recollect my saying ' what a difference,' 
when you told me what you had done for your mother ; I then 
referred to my son and to you. I indulged him in every thing, 
sacrificed every thing, and he robbed me and left me a beggar. 
Your mother has been severe upon you, and yet, the first time you 
have the means of showing your duty, you give her all the money 
you have in the world. Your mother may not be right, Jack, but 
I was dreadfully wrong, and the result has proved it." 

iS Well, mother, go on, pray." 

" My story is now soon told. I struggled on how I could, for 
more than two years, by selling my furniture and a few ornaments : 
then the blow came. When I heard it, I would not remain in the 
town ; I left for London, picked up my liying how I could and 
where I could, till at last I came down here. Time was as a dream ; 
reflection was too painful. I felt that it was all my fault, all my 
own doing. My heart became hardened, and continued so till I 
loved you. Jack ; and now I have better feelings, at least I think 
so." 

" But, mother, what was the blow ? Is he dead? " 

" Yes, Jack, dead — dead on the gibbet. He was hanged for 
piracy, at Port Royal, Jamaica. — Jack," said Nanny, seizing my 
hand, and pressing it in her long fingers, " this is a secret ; recol- 
lect, a secret deep as the grave ; promise me, as you hope for 
heaven ! " 

(i I do, mother, as I hope for heaven." 

" Now, Jack, leave me. Good-by. You will come and see 
me when you return, and never bring this subject up again. Bless 
you, my child ! bless you ! " 



POOR JACK, 



209 



I left poor old Nanny with her face buried in her apron ; and it 
was in a very melancholy mood that I returned home ; I could 
not help thinking of the picture in the spelling-book, where the 
young man at- the gallows is biting off the ear of his mother, who, 
by her indulgence, had brought him to that disgrace. 



CHAP. XXX. 



STRONG SYMPTOMS OF MUTINY, WHICH IS FORTUNATELY QUELLED BY 
GRANTING A SUPPLY 

It was a beautiful sunshiny warm morning when I arose, and, as 
Bramble intended that we should leave Greenwich the next day, I 
thought I might as well call at the house of Dr. Tadpole, and try 
if I could see him before I went. When I arrived there, he was 
not at home, but my namesake Tom was, as usual, in the shop. 
Tom was two or three years older than me, being between seven- 
teen and eighteen, and he had now grown a great tall fellow. \\ e 
always were very good friends, when we occasionally met, and lie 
generally appeared to be as good tempered and grinning as ever ; 
but when I now entered the shop, I found him very grave and 
dejected so much so that I could not help asking him what was 
the matter. 

" Matter enough, I think," said Tom, who was pounding some- 
thing in the mortar. " I'll not stay here, that's flat. I'll break my 
indentures, as sure as my name's Tom Cob, and I'll set up an oppo- 
sition, and I'll join the Friends of the People Society, and the Anti- 
Bible Society, and every other opposition Anti in the country." 

" Why, what has happened, Tom?" 

« I'll make speeches against Church and against State, and 
against the Aristocracy, and Habeas Corpus, and against Physic, 
and against Standing Armies, and Magna Charta, and every other 



p 



210 POOR JACK. 

rascally tyranny and oppression to which we are subjected; that I 
will." Here Tom gave such a thump with the pestle, that I thought 
he would have split the mortar. 

" But what is it, Tom?" inquired I, as I sat down. " What 
has the Doctor done ? " 

" Why, I'll tell you ; the liquorice is all gone, and he won't 
order any more." 

" Well, that is because you have eaten it all." 

" No, 1 haven't ; I haven't eaten a bit for these five weeks : it's all 
been used in pharmacopey, honestly used, and he can't deny it." 

" Who used it? " 

" Why, I did ; he said he wouldn't stand my eating liquorice, 
and I told him that I shouldn't eat any more. No more I have, but 
I a'n't well, and I prescribes for myself. Haven't 1 a right to do 
that ? Mayn't I physic myself? I'm a doctor as well as he is. Who 
makes up all the medicine, I should like to know ? who ties up the 
bottles, and writes directions ? Well, my insides are out of order, 
and I prescribes for myself — black draughts ' omnes duas horas 
sumendum ;' and now he says, that, as the ingredients are all gone, 
I shan't take any more." 

" And pray what were the ingredients, Tom ? " 

" Why, laxative and alterative, as suits my complaint — Extract, 
liquor. — aqua pura — haustus." 

" And what is that ? " 

" Liquorice and tcater, to be sure ; there's nothing else I can 
take : I've tasted every thing in the shop, from plate powder to 
aqua fortis, and every thing goes against my stomach." 

" Well, Tom, it's a hard case ; but perhaps the doctor will think 
better of it." 

" He'd better, or I'll set up for myself, for I won't stand it any 
longer ; it a'n't only for myself but for others that I care. Why, 
I've a hankering for Anny Whistle, (you know her, don't you?) 
a pretty little girl with red lips — lives in Church Street. Well, 
as long as I could bring her a bit of liquorice when I went to see 
her, all was smooth enough, and I got many a kiss when no one 
was nigh ; but now that I can't fork out a bit as big as a marble. 



POOR JACK. 211 

she's getting quite shy of me, and is always walking with Bill, the 
butcher's boy. I know he gives her bulls'-eyes — I seed him one 
day buying a ha'porth. Now, a'n't that hard ?" 

" Why, certainly, the affair becomes serious; but still, how you 
are to set up for yourself I don't know. You are not qualified." 

" O ! a'n't I ? just as much as most doctors are. There must 
be a beginning, and if I gives wrong medicine at first, then I'll 
try another, and so on until I come to what will cure thein. Soon 
learn, Tom." 

" Well, but how will you do about surgery?" 
" Surgery, oh I'll do very well— don't know much about it just 
now — soon learn." 

" Why, would you venture to take off a man's leg, Tom ? do 
you know how to take up the arteries?" 

" Would I take off a man's leg ? to be sure I would, as quick as 
the doctor could. As for the arteries, why I might puzzle a little 
about them ; but, by the time I had taken off three or four legs, I 

should know something about them. Practice makes perfect 

soon learn, Tom." 

" But all your first patients would die." 

" I don't know that. At all events I should do my best, and no 
man can do more ; and if they did die, why it would be by the 
visitation of God, wouldn't it ? " 

" Not altogether. I'm afraid. It won't do, Tom." 
" It has done from the beginning of the world, and will do. I 
say there's no learning without practice — people spoil at first in 
every trade, and make afterwards ; and a man a'n't born a doctor 
any more than he is a carpenter." 

" No ; but, if I recollect right, to be a surgeon you ought to 
walk the hospital, as they term it." 

" Well, and haven't I for these last four years ? When I carries 
out my basket of physic, I walks the hospital right through, twice 
at least every day in the week." 
" That's Greenwich Hospital." 

" Well, so it is ; and plenty of surgical cases in it. However, 
the doctor and J must come to a proper understanding : I didn't 

p 2 



212 POOR JACK. 

clean his boots this morning. I wish, if you see him, Tom, you'd 
reason with him a little." 

" I'll see what I can do ; but don't be rash. Good-by, Tom ; 
mind you tell the doctor that I called." 

" Well, I will ; but that's not in my indentures." 

I called in at the widow's after I left the doctor's shop, and 
communicated the intended rebellion on the part of Tom. 

" Well," said Mrs. St. Felix, " I shall not forget to make the 
Spanish claim, and prevent Tom from walking Spanish. The 
doctor is very inconsiderate ; he forgets that Tom's regard for 
liquorice is quite as strong as his own liking for a cigar. Now, 
if the doctor don't promise me to have a fresh supply for Tom, I 
won't let him have a cigar for himself." 

The doctor was compelled to surrender at discretion. The next 
wagon brought down one hundred weight of liquorice, and Tom 
recovered his health and the smiles of Anny Whistle. 

When I left the widow's I proceeded to the Hospital, to find 
Anderson and my father. As I walked along I perceived Dick 
Harness on a bench, who hailed me. 

" Well, Tom, I haven't seen any thing of you for I don't know- 
how long, since you've taken to a seafaring life. This is a beau- 
tiful day, is it not ? it makes one feel so happy and cheerful such a 
day as this. Every body and every thing looks gay; the birds 
seem so merry, and the little clouds seem to scud away as if their 
hearts were as light as themselves. Come, sit down a minute ; 
here's a song for you you've never heard — one I don't often sing, 
because they say it's all about myself." 

" Well, then, I should like to hear that." 

" Here goes, then : — 

" Sam Swipes, he was a seaman true, 
As brave and bold a tar 
As e'er was dressed in navy blue 
On board a man of war. 

One f. ult he had — on sea or land 
He was a thirsty dog, 
For Sammy never could withstand 
A a;lass or so of grog. 



POOR JACK. C -13 

He always liked to be at sea, 
For e'en on shore, the rover, 
If not as drunk as he could be, 
Was always ' half seas over.' 

The gunner, who was apt to scoff, 
With jokes most aptly timed, 
Said, Sam might any day go off, 
'Cause he was always ' primed.' 

Sam didn't want a feeling heart, 
Though never seen to cry, 
Yet tears were always on the start, 
« The drop was in his eye.' 

At fighting, Sam was never shy, 
A most undoubted merit ; 
His courage never failed, and why — 
He was so full of < spirit.' 

In action he had lost an eye, 
But that gave him no trouble, — 
Quoth Sam, I have no cause to sigh, 
I'm always ' seeing double.' 

A shot from an unlucky gun 

Put Sam on timber pegs ; 

It didn't signify to one 

"Who ne'er could ' keep his legs.' 

One night he filled a pail with grog, 
Determined he would suck it ; 
He drained it dry, — the thirsty dog ! 
Hiccupped — and ' kicked the bucket.'" 

« There's Bill's fiddle, Dick," said I, getting up ; "I thought 
you would bring him out." 

" Yes, I was sure of that ; I'll sing another verse or two, and 
then be off to the Park, and leave him in the lurch." 

" I can't wait any more, Dick ; I must go to my father," said 1. 

" Well, off with you then, and I'm off too. Sing tura la, tura la, 
tura lura la. Bill's coming down. How savage the nigger will be ! " 



p 3 



214 POOR JACK. 



CHAP. XXXI. 

IN WHICH MY FATHER PROVES HE CAN GIVE GOOD ADVICE AS WELL 
AS PETER ANDERSON. 

I found my father under the colonnade, and inquired of him if 
Anderson was there. 

" No, he's not," replied my father ; " he has been sent for by 
the officers ; so stop, Tom, that is, if you can spare a minute for 
your own father." 

" Of course I can," replied I, taking my seat by him. 

" Why, you see, boy," said my father, " I have but very little of 
your company ; and I feel it, Tom, I do indeed. Fm not jealous, 
and I know that Peter Anderson has done more for you than ever 
I could, for I've no laming to signify; but still, Tom, I am your 
father, and I don't think Peter, although he may be proud of your 
turning out so well, can feel exactly for you what a father does. 
I'm proud enough of you, Heaven knows; and it does hurt me 
a little when I find that, whenever you come here, it is for Peter 
Anderson, and it makes me wish sometimes that I had been Peter 
Anderson instead of your father." 

" Indeed, father," replied I, " I hope you don't think that I like 
Anderson better than I do you ; but you recollect that I have been 
accustomed all my life to take his advice." 

" I know it, boy, I know it. I was serving my country, and 
doing my duty on board of a king's ship, and you were left here, 
and therefore lucky it was that you fell in with old Peter ; but, 
Tom, I could not be in two places at the same time, and if I did 
not do my duty as a father towards you, at all events I was doing 
my duty to my country." 

" To be sure you were, and it was of more importance than 
looking after a brat like me," replied I, soothingly ; for I really 



POOR JACK. 215 

never had the idea that my father could have showed so much 
feeling. 

" Why, Tom, I can't say that I thought so ; for the fact is, I 
didn't think about it ; indeed, I thought about nothing. Sailors afloat 
have little time to think : they can't think when it's their watch on 
deck, for they are too busy ; nor at their watch below, for they're 
too tired ; nor at meal times, for they must look after their share of 
the victuals ; indeed, there is not any time to think on board ship, 
and that's a fact. But, Tom, since I've been laid up here I have 
thought a good deal ; all is calm and quiet, and one day passes just 
like the other, and no fear of interruption when one don't wish it ; 
and I have thought a good deal. At first I thought it a hard case 
to be shoved on the shelf at my age ; but I don't think so now ; I'm 
quite satisfied." 

" I'm glad to hear you say so, father." 

" Yes, Tom ; and then, you see, when I was afloat, I didn't think 
any good of your mother, and I was glad to keep out of her way ; 
and then I didn't care about my children, for I didn't know them ; 
but now I've other thoughts, Tom. I don't think your mother so 
bad, after all : to be sure, she looks down upon me 'cause I'm not 
genteel ; but I suppose I ar'n't, and she has been used to the com- 
pany of gentlefolks ; besides she works hard, and now that I don't 
annoy her by getting tipsy, as I used to do, at all events she's civil ; 
and then I never knew what it was to have children until 1 came 
here, and found Virginia and you ; and I'm proud of you both, and 
love you both better than anything on earth; and, although I 
may not be so well brought up or so well taught as you both are, 
still, Tom, I'm your father, and all I can say is, I wish for your 
sakes I was better than I am." 

" Don't say so, father; ycu know that Virginia and I are both as 
fond of you as you are of us." 

" Well, mayhap you are ; I don't say no : you are both good 
children, and at all events would try to like me ; but still I do feel 
that you can't look up to me exactly ; but that's my misfortune, 
Tom, more than my fault. I haven't laming like Anderson, or 

p 4 



216 POOR JACK. 

gentility like your mother: I've only a true heart to offer to you. 
You see, Tom, I've said all this because you are always after An- 
derson ; not but that I like Anderson, for he's a good man, and has 
been of sarvice to me, and I don't think he would ever say any 
thing to you that would make you think less of me." 

" No, indeed, father ; on the contrary, I once asked him his 
opinion about you, and he spoke most highly of you ; and whenever 
I go to him for advice, he always sends me to you to approve of 
what he has said." 

" Well, he is a good man, and I'm very sorry to have any feeling 
of envy in me, that's the truth ; but still a father must have a 
father's feelings. Don't let us say anything more about it, Tom ; only 
try next time, when you want advice, whether I can't give it. You 
can always go to Peter afterwards, and see whether I'm right or 
wrong." 

"I will indeed, my dear father, now I know that you wish it." 

I never felt so warm towards my father as after this conversation ; 
there was so much affection towards me, and yet so much humility 
shown by him, as respected himself, that I was quite touched with 
it, and I began to think that he really had had occasion to com- 
plain, and that I had not treated him with that respect which he 
deserved. 

" Now, Tom, I've something to say to you. When Anderson, 
Bramble, and I were taking a pipe together last night, Bramble said 
that he had a letter from the captain of the Indiaman, offering you 
a berth on board as guinea-pig, or midshipman. He said that he 
had not shown it to you as yet, because it was of no use, as he 
was sure you would not accept it. Well, Anderson and I said that 
at least you ought to know it, and have the refusal ; and your 
mother pricked up her ears and said, that it was much more genteel 
than being a pilot ; so I now put the question to you." 

" Thank you, father ; but Bramble was right. I shall not accept 
of it, although I am much obliged to the captain." 

Here my father stopped me. " First, Tom," said he, " we must 
overhaul the pros and cons, as people call them. Old Anderson 
weighed them very closely, and now you shall hear them." Here 



POOR JACK. 



217 



my father commenced a long story, with which I shall not tire the 
reader, as to the prospects on either side ; but as soon as he had 
finished, I replied, 

" That all he said was very true ; but that I had made up my 
mind that, if ever I were regularly to serve, it should be in a 
man-of-war, not in a merchant vessel ; that it was certainly possible 
that I might, after serving many years, become a captain of an 
Indiaman, which was a high position, but I preferred being a pilot, 
and more my own master ; that if there were no other objections, 
that of being absent for three years at a time from him and Vir- 
ginia would be more than sufficient ; and that I was very happy 
where I was, as Bramble and little Bessy were almost equal to 
another father and another sister. A rolling stone gathers no 
moss, they say, father. I have entered into the pilot service, and 
in that I hope to remain." 

" Well, you're right, Tom ; Bramble said you would decide so. 
There's nothing like being contented with what we are and what 
we have got." 

" I might probably become a richer man if I were to be a cap- 
tain of an Indiaman," observed I ; " but I'm sure if ever I'm able 
to buy a little farm, as Bramble is now able to do, I shall think 
myself quite rich enough." 

" You see, Tom, it all depends upon what people's ideas are. 
One man thinks himself rich with what another would think that 
he was a beggar. Now I dare say old Nanny thinks that shop of 
old iron and rubbish that she has got together, the finest shop in 
all Greenwich." 

" I believe she does, and the prettiest," replied I, laughing. 

" Well now, Tom, an odd thing happened the other day while 
you were away, just to prove how true that is. You may recollect 
a little old man in our ward, Phil Nobbs they called him, who 
walked with his chin half a yard before him. Well, he took to 
the sick ward and died, since you have been gone. I went to see 
him of course, and he was always talking about his property; and 
none of us knew where it was, but we supposed that he had it 
somewhere. One dav, as I was sitting by his bed, he says, 



218 POOR JACK. 

* Saunders, the doctor's coining round, just tell him I want to make 
my will, for I feel as if I were slipping my wind.' Well, the doc- 
tor and the chaplain both came to his bedside with the paper, and 
Nobbs raised himself on his elbow, and said, ' Are you ready, sir? 
Well, then, I'll make short work of it. This is my last will and 
testament : first, I wish a white pall over me when I'm buried, and 
that expense must be deducted ; after which I bequeath to my 
nephews and nieces, James Strong, Walter Strong, Ellen Strong, 
Mary Williams, the one married, Peter Strong, all of Rotherhithe, 
and to Thomas Day, Henry Day, and Nicholas Day, of Eltham, 
the whole of my money and personal effects, share and share alike, 
equally divided among them all. There, sir, that will do. I can't 
write, but I'll put my cross to it.' Well, the old fellow died that 
night, and notice of his will was sent to his nephews and nieces, 
who all came on the day of his burial dressed in their best, for 
they were all mechanics and labourers, poor people, to whom, I 
suppose, a legacy was a great object. The chaplain had asked 
Nobbs where his money was, and he replied that it was in the 

hands of Lieutenant , who knew all about his affairs. After 

the funeral, they all went in a body to the lieutenant, who stated 
that he had ten shillings belonging to Nobbs, out of which, seven 
shillings were to be deducted for the white pall ; and that, as for 
his other effects, they must be in his cabin, as he never heard of his 
having any thing but what was there. So we went to his cabin, 
and there we found five or six penny prints against the wall, two 
pair of old canvass trousers, and an old hat, six cups and saucers, 
cracked and mended ; and this was all his property, altogether not 
worth (with the three shillings) more than seven or eight at the 
outside, if so much. You may guess the disappointment of his 
nephaws and nieces, who had lost a good day's work, and come so 
far for nothing; and I must say they were not very dutiful in their 
remarks upon their old uncle as they walked off. Now you see, 
Tom, this old fellow had been in the Hospital for more than twenty 
years, and had been able to save no more than what he had out of 
his shilling per week, and in his eyes this small property was very 



POOR JACK. 219 

large, for it was the saving of twenty years. He thought so, poor 
fellow, because be probably had never saved so many shillings in 
his life. There was no joking about it, I can assure you." 

" Well, father, 1 hope I may be able to save more than seven 
shillings before I die, but no one knows. I have made my decision 
as I think for the best, and we must leave the rest to Providence. 
We never know whether we do right or wrong." 

" Never, Jack ; things which promise well turn out bad, and 
things which look very bad often turn out just as well. I recollect 
an instance which was told me, which I'll give you as a proof that 
we never know what is best for us in this world. A man may 
plan, and scheme, and think, in his blindness, that he has arranged 
every thing so nicely that nothing can fail, and down he lies on 
his bed, and goes to sleep quite satisfied that affairs must turn 
out well as he has ordered them, forgetting that Providence dis- 
poses as it thinks fit. There was a gentleman by birth, of the 
name of Seton, who lived at Greenock ; he was very poor, and, 
although he had high friends and relations well to do, he was too 
proud to ask for assistance. His wife was equally proud ; and at 
last one day he died, leaving her with hardly a penny, and two 
fine boys, of the names of Archibald and Andrew. Well, the widow 
struggled on ; how she lived no one knew, but she fed the boys and 
herself, and was just as stately as ever. Her relations did offer to 
educate the boys, and send them to sea, but she refused all as- 
sistance. There was a foundation or chartered school at Greenock, 
to which she was entitled to send her children to be educated with- 
out expense, and to that school they went. I don't know why, but 
they sav the master had had a quarrel with their father when he was 
alive, and the master had not forgotten it now he was dead, and in 
consecmence he was very severe upon these two boys, and used 
to beat them without mercy ; at all events it did them good, for 
thev learnt faster than any of the others who were at all favoured, 
and they soon proved the best boys in the school. Well, time ran 
on. till Archibald was thirteen, and Andrew twelve years old ; and, 
beins; verv tired of school, they asked their mother what profession 



220 POOR JACK. 

they were to be of, and she answered., < any thing except going to 
sea, for there you will never get on.' But times became harder with 
the widow ; she had not enough to give the boys to eat, and they 
complained bitterly ; but it was of no use, so they got on how they 
could, until, one day, Archy says to Andrew, ' Why, brother, we 
have nothing but ferrule for breakfast, dinner, and supper, and I 
see little chance of our getting any thing more. Mother, poor soul ! 
has not enough for herself to eat, and she very often gives us her 
dinner, and goes without. I can't stand it any longer ; what shall 
we do, shall we seek our fortunes?' ' Yes,' says Andrew, < and when 
we are gone, mother will have enough for herself.' 

" ' Well, they say any thing is better than going to sea, but I 
don't know how we can do any thing else.' 

" ' Well, Archy, going to sea may be the worst of all, but it's 
better than taking the victuals out of poor mother's mouth.' 

" < That's very true ; so we'll be oft 1 , Andrew.' 

" They walked down to the pier, and then they fell in with the 
captain of a vessel going foreign, and they asked him whether he 
wanted any boys on board. 

" ' Why,' says he, ' I wouldn't care, but you've never been to 
sea before.' • 

" ' No/ said Archy; 'but there must be a beginning to every 
thing.' 

" ' Well,' said the captain, ' I suppose you've run away from 
your friends, and, as I can't get apprentices now, I'll tell you what 
I'll do. I'll take you on board, and as soon as we get round to 
another port in the channel, I'll bind you as apprentices for three 
years. Will you agree to that ? ' 

" The boys said ' yes,' and the captain told them that he should 
sail the next morning about daylight, and that they must be down 
at the pier by that time ; so they went back again to their mother, 
and said nothing about what had passed. There was no supper 
that night, which confirmed them in their resolution ; they kissed 
their mother, and went up to bed, packed up all their clothes, and 
before she was down stairs the next morning they were on board 
of the vessel. 



POOR JACK. 22] 

" Well, they were duly apprenticed when the ship arrived at 
Weymouth, and then oft' they went. The other men on board 
were, as usual, very much afraid of being pressed, and every plan 
was hit upon for stowing away when they were boarded by a man- 
of-war. Well, time passed, and after many voyages they had both 
nearly served their time ; they were tall stout young men, and 
looked older than they really were. At last, one day, when off the 
Western Isles, they were boarded by a frigate, and the officer who 
came in the boat asked Archy what he was, and he replied he was 
an apprentice. 

" ' You an apprentice ! ' cried he, ' that won't do.' 
" ' But here are the indentures.' 

" ' All forged,' cried the officer; 'just get into the boat, my 
lad.' (You see that's a very common trick of officers ; if a boy's 
grown up and fit for service, they don't care about indentures.) 
; Well, Archy found it was of no use; so he gets his kit and steps 
into the boat, shaking hands with Andrew, who was shedding tears 
at the thoughts of parting with his brother. 

" ' It's no use crying, Andrew,' says he ; 'I might have been 
second mate in three months, as the captain promised me, when 
my time was up, and then I should have been protected, and 
might have risen from mate to captain ; but now it's all over with 
me. May you have better luck, and I hope the captain will give 
you the berth instead of me.' Well, away went Archy on board 
of the man-of-war, looking "very gloomy as you may suppose. 
When he went aft on the quarter-deck, the captain asked him his , 
name, and where he came from. 

" ' Ah ! ' said the captain, ' and who are your friends? ' So Archy 
told him that he had only his mother left. The captain asked him 
a good many more questions as to whether he had been educated or 
not, and what he knew; and then rated him A.B., and put him into 
the main top. Well, Archy remained there for about six months, 
and found that a man-of-war was not so bad a place after all; and 
he was well treated by the captain and officers, the more so as he 
was a good scholar. After the cruize was over, the frigate ran 
into the Channel, and anchored in Portland Roads, where there 



222 POOR JACK. 

were a great many vessels wind-bound. As usual, they sent round 
to press the men. Now Archy was one of those sent in the boats, 
and by this time, being a man-of-war's man all over, he was just as 
eager to get the men as the others were. They boarded several 
vessels, and got some men ; about dark they boarded one which 
laid well in the offing. The captain was not on board, and the 
men were turned up, but they were very few, and all protected. 
Now Archy, who was up to the hiding places on board a merchant 
vessel, goes down with his cutlass, and crawls about in the dark, 
until at last he gets hold of a man by the heels. ■ Come out, you 
thief,' cries he, ' come out directly, or I'll give you an inch of my 
cutlass;' so the man, finding that he could not help himself, backs 
out, stern foremost. Archy collars him, and takes him on deck, 
when who should it prove to be but his own brother Andrew ! 

" ' Oh, Archy, Archy ! I didn't think this of you.' 

" '• Well, Andrew, I didn't know it was you, but there's no help 
for it ; you must come and serve in the main top along with me, 
and give up all chance of being a mate or captain of a merchant 
vessel. We're in bad luck, that's clear ; but it can't be helped.' 
There was a good laugh on board of the man-of-war at Archy 
pressing his own brother, and the captain was very much amused. 
1 I'm very sorry for it,' said Archy. 

Now the captain was short of midshipmen, and, being obliged 
to sail immediately, he determined to put Archy on the quarter 
deck, and so he did, while Andrew served in the main top. But 
this did not last long ; the captain, who liked Andrew quite as 
well, and who knew their family and connections, put Andrew 
also on the quarter deck ; and what was the consequence ? Why. 
they are now both post captains, commanding fine frigates ; so 
you see, going on board of a man-of-war, which they conceived 
a? their ruin, was the means of their rising to rank and riches, for 
they have been very lucky in the service. I heard Captain Archi- 
bald tell the story himself one day, as I helped at dinner in the 
cabin, when I was coxswain with Sir Hercules." 

" Well, father, that's a good story to the point ; but I do not 
see that. I ever have any chance of being a post captain." 






/ \ - \x 



^W^rnt 




POOR JACK. 223 

" Don't seem much like it, certainly ; but you've a good chance 
of being a pilot." 

" Yes, that I certainly have ; and a pilot is always respected, go 
on boanj what ship he may." 

" To be sure he is ; because he is supposed to have more know- 
ledge than any one on board." 

" Then I am contented, father, with the prospect of being re- 
spectable ; so there's an end of that business, except that I must 
write and thank the captain for his kindness." 

" Just so, Tom ; do you dine with me ? " 

" No, father. I promised to meet Bramble at the Jolly Sailors. 
We are going up to Mr. Wilson's." 

" Ay, about the farm he wants to buy. Well, the clock is 
striking, so good-by till this evening." 

I must explain to the reader that Mr. Wilson, having heard of 
Bramble's intention to purchase the farm, very kindly interfered. 
He had a son who was a solicitor at Dover, and he recommended 
Bramble not to appear personally, but let his son manage the 
affair for him, which he promised should be done without expense. 
The next morning Bramble and I took our leave and quitted 
Greenwich, taking the coach to Dover ; for Bramble, having a 
good deal of money in his pocket, thought it better to do so, than 
to wait till he could take a ship down the river. On our arrival 
at Dover, we called upon Mr. Wilson's son, who had already made 
inquiries, and eventually obtained the farm for Bramble for two 
hundred pounds less than he expected to give for it, and, very 
handsomely, only charged him for the stamps of the conveyance. 
When we arrived at Deal, we found Mrs. Madd.ox quite recovered, 
and sitting with little Bessy in the parlour below. After Mrs. 
Maddox and Bessy went up stairs tp bed, Bramble said to me, as 
he knocked the ashes out of his pipe, — 

II Tom, I've got this farm 'for Bessy for two hundred pounds 
less than I expected to give for it ; now, I've been thinking about 
this two hundred pounds, which I consider, in a manner, as her 
property ; and what d'ye think I mean to do with it ? — I'll tell 
you — I'll give her education as well as money. This sum will 



224 



POOR JACK. 



keep her at a good school for a matter of four years, and I've 
made up my mind that she shall go. I don't like to part with her, 
that's certain; but it's for her good — so all's right — don't you 
think so ? " 

" I do indeed, father," replied I. " I shall miss her as much as 
you do ; but, as you say, it's all right ; and I'm very glad that 
you have so decided." 



• ^ -^^sa=sk± 



'.■Ss 




POOR JACK. 225 



CHAP. XXXII. 

IN WHICH THERE IS A HOP, SKIP, AND A JUMP. 

Life has often, and with great truth, been compared to a river. In 
infancy a little rill, gradually increasing to the pure and limpid 
brook, which winds through flowery meads, " giving a gentle kiss to 
every ridge it overtaketh in its pilgrimage." Next it increases in 
its volume and its power, now rushing rapidly, now moving along in 
deep and tranquil water, until it swells into a bold stream, coursing 
its way over the shallows, dashing through the impeding rocks, de- 
scending in rapids swift as thought, or pouring its boiling water over 
the cataract. And thus does it vary its velocity, its appearance, and 
its course, until it swells into a broad expanse, gradually checking 
its career as it approaches, and at last mingles with the Ocean of 
Eternity. I have been led into this somewhat trite metaphor, to 
account to the reader for the contents of this chapter. As in the 
river, after many miles of chequered and boisterous career, you 
will find that its waters will for some time flow in a smooth and 
tranquil course as almost to render you unconscious of the never- 
ceasing stream ; so, in the life of man, after an eventful and adven- 
turous career, it will be found that for a time he is permitted to 
glide gently and quietly along, as if a respite were given to his 
feelings, preparatory to fresh scenes of excitement. Such was the 
case with me for some time. I had now been under Bramble's 
tuition for more than a year and a half, and was consequently be- 
tween fifteen and sixteen years old. The years from 1800 to the end 
of 1804 were of this description in my stream of life, unmarked by 
any peculiar or stirring events worthy of occupying the attention 
of my readers. It is therefore my intention, in this chapter, to 
play the part of the chorus in the old plays, and sum up the events 
in few words, so as not to break the chain of history, at the same 

Q 



POOR JACK. 



time that I shall prepare my readers for what subsequently took 
place. 

I will first speak of myself. Up to the age of nineteen I continued 
my career under the care of Bramble ; we seldom remained long 
on shore, for neither Bramble nor I found home so agreeable since 
little Bessy had been sent to school, and Mrs. Maddox, assisted by 
a little girl, had charge of the house ; indeed, Bramble appeared 
resolved to make all the money he could, that he might the sooner 
be able to give up his profession. Mrs. Maddox I have spoken 
little of, because I had seen but little of her : now that she was 
down stairs, I will not say I saw, but I certainly heard too much 
of her, for she never ceased talking ; not that she talked loud or 
screamed out. — on the contrary, she was of a mild amiable temper, 
but could not hold her tongue. If she could not find any one to 
talk to, she would talk to any thing ; if she was making the fire, 
she would apostrophise the sticks for not burning properly. I 
watched her one morning as she was kneeling down before the 
grate : — 

" Now, stick you must go in," said she ; " it's no use your re- 
sisting, and, what 's more, you must burn, and burn quickly too, 
do'ye hear, or the kettle won't boil in time for breakfast. Be 
quick, you little fellow — burn away and light the others, there's a 
good boy." Here she knocked down the tongs. " Tongs, be quiet, 
how dare you make that noise? " Then, as she replaced them, "Stand 
up, sir, in your place until you are wanted. Now, poker, your 
turn's coming, we must have a stir directly. Bless me, smoke, 
what's the matter with you now? can't you go up the chimney? 
You can't pretend to say the wind blows you down this fine morn- 
ing, so none of your vagaries. Now, fender, it's your turn — stand 
still till I give you a bit of a rub. There, now you're all right. 
Table, you want your face washed — your master has spilt his grog 
last night — there now, you look as handsome as ever. Well, old 
chair, how are you this morning ? You're older than I am, I reckon, 
and yet you're stouter on your legs. Why, candle, are you burning 
all this while ? Why didn't you tell me?— I would have put you out 



rooR jack. 227 

long ago. Come now, don't be making a smell here — send it up 
the chimney." 

Thus would she talk to every tiling. We only had two animals in 
the house — a cat and a canary bird: of course they were not 
neglected ; but, somehow or another, the cat appeared to get tired or 
it, for it would rise, and very gently walk into the back kitchen; 
and as for the canary bird, like all other canary birds, as soon as 
he was talked to, he would begin to sing, and that so loud, that Mrs. 
Maddox was beaten out of the field. Bramble bore with her very 
well ; but, at the same time, he did not like it : he once said to me, 
" Well, if Bessy were at Deal, I think I would take a short spell 
now ; but as for that poor good old soul, whose tongue is hung on 
the middle, and works at both ends, she does tire one, and that's 
the truth." But she really was a good-natured, kind creature, 
ready to oblige in every thing ; and I believe that she thought that 
she was amusing you, when she talked on in this way. Unfor- 
tunately she had no anecdote, for she had a very bad memory, and 
therefore there was nothing to be gained from her. By way of 
amusing me, she used to say, ' f Xow, Tom, sit down here, and I'll 
tell you all about my bad leg." And then she would commence 
with the first symptoms, the degrees of pain, the various plasters, 
bandages, and poultices, which had been applied, and what the 
doctor had said this day and that clay. I bore this very patiently 
for four or five times ; but at last, after several days of increasing 
impatience (somewhere about the fifteenth time, I believe), I could 
stand it no more, so I jumped off my chair, and ran away, just as 
she commenced the interesting detail. 

" Mrs. Maddox," said I, "I cannot bear to hear of vour suffer- 
ings ; pray never mention them again." 

" What a kind-hearted creature you are ! " said she. " Well, I 
won't, then. It's not many who have such pity in them. Cotton, 
where have you got to — always running away ? One would think 
you don't like to be knitted. Xow, cotton, don't be foolish ; where 
have you hid yourself? You make others as bad as yourself. Scis- 
sors have got away now; — there now, sit on my lap, and be 
quiet." 

Q 2 



228 POOF. JACK. 

However, if Mrs. Maddox got back cotton and scissors, she did 
not get me back,.for I bolted out of the front door, and joined the 
men who were lolling against the gunnel of a galley, hauled up on 
the shingle. 

During the period of which I am speaking, I continued every day 
to add to my knowledge of my profession, and eventually I was 
competent to pass my examination at the Trinity House. When I 
went on board a vessel with. Bramble, he would often give me 
charge of her, never interfering with me (although he watched me 
carefully), unless he considered that it was absolutely necessary, 
which I believe took place but twice. He used to tell the masters 
of the vessels that I was quite as good a pilot as he was, which 
certainly was not quite correct : however, it was of great conse- 
quence to me, as it gave me that confidence so necessary in my 
profession, and in due time I passed for a river pilot at the Trinity 
House. Some alteration occurred at the Hospital during this 
interval. Anderson had been promoted from boatswain of the 
ward to Inspecting boatswain, a place of trust, with very comfortable 
emoluments, his weekly allowance being increased to five shil- 
lings ; and on his promotion my father was made a boatswain's 
mate of the Warriors' ward. This was at first satisfactory to my 
mother, who was pleased that my father should wear lace upon his 
pensioner's coat ; but, as she advanced in the world, she did not 
like the idea of my father being in the Hospital, nor did she want 
him to be at her house — in fact, she could have done better with- 
out him ; but as that could not be, she made the best of it. It must 
be acknowledged that my father's boisterous and rude manner 
had been softening down ever since he had been in the Hospital, 
and that he had become a very well-behaved, quiet, and sober 
person, and was very respectable in his appearance ; but I shall say 
more about him when I talk of my mother again. Old Xanny 
went on much as usual, but on the whole she improved. I used 
to pick up for her any thing I could, and put it in a large bag 
which I occasionally brought to Greenwich ; and this bag, with its 
multifarious contents, would give her more pleasure than if I had 
brought her any single object more valuable. Old Anderson used 



POOR JACK. 229 

to call upon her occasionally, but he did not do her much good. She 
appeared to think of hardly any thing but getting money. She 
was alwavs glad to see me, and I believe thought more of me than 
of any body else in the world, and I seldom failed to pay her a visit 
on the first day of my arrival." 

Dr. Tadpole and his apprentice Tom went on pretty well 
together until the hundred-weight of liquorice was expended, and 
then there was a fresh rising on the part of the injured and op- 
pressed representative of the lower orders, which continued till a 
fresh supply from London appeased his radical feelings which had 
been called forth, and then the liquorice made every thing go on 
smoothly as before ; but two years afterwards Tom was out of 
his time, and then the doctor retained him as his assistant, with 
a salary added to his board, which enabled Tom to be independent 
of the shop, as far as liquorice Mas concerned, and to cut a very 
smart figure among the young men about Greenwich ; for, on 
Tom's promotion, another boy was appointed to the carrying out of 
the medicine as well as the drudgery, and Tom took good care 
that this lad should clean his boots as well as the doctor's, and not 
make quite so free with the liquorice as he had done himself. I 
found out also that he had cut Anny Whistle. 

Mrs. St. Felix continued to vend her tobacco, and I never failed 
seeing her on my visits to Greenwich. She appeared to look just 
as young as she did when I first knew her, and every one said that 
there was no apparent alteration. She was as kind and as cheerful 
as ever ; and I may as well here remark that during this period a 
great intimacy had grown up between her and my sister Virginia, very 
much to the annoyance of my mother, who still retained her feel- 
ings of ill-will against Mrs. St. Felix — why, I do not know, except 
that she was so good-looking a person, and such a favourite with 
every body. But my father, who, when he chose, would not be 
contradicted, insisted upon Virginia's being on good terms with 
Mrs. St. Felix, and used to take her there himself; and Virginia, 
who had never forgotten the widow's kindness to me, was ex- 
tremely partial to her, and was much more in her company than 
my mother had any idea of, for Virginia would not vex my mother 

Q 3 



230 POOR JACK. 

unnecessarily by telling her she had been with the widow, unless 
she was directly asked. 

It was about four months after my father and I had given our 
money to my mother, that I returned to Greenwich. A letter from 
Virginia had acquainted me with the street and the number of the 
house which my mother had taken, and I therefore walked from the 
beach right to it ; and I must say, that when I came to the new 
abode I was very much surprised at its neat and even handsome 
appearance. The ground- floor was fitted up as a shop with large 
panes of glass, and inside upon stands were arranged a variety of 
bonnets and caps, set off with looking-glass and silk curtains, in the 
arrangement of which no little taste was displayed. Behind the show 
goods was a curtain hanging on a brass rod, drawn so as to con- 
ceal the work-people who were within. There was a private door 
as well as a shop door, and I hardly knew which I was to go in at : 
however, as the shop door required no knocking, I went into that, 
and found myself in the company of eight young damsels, very busy 
at their needles, sitting on each side of a long table covered with 
half-made dresses. I inquired of them whether my mother was at 
home, and was answered by one. who was apparently the eldest, that 
she was down below getting the breakfast ready. 

" I suppose," continued she, " you are Mr. Tom Saunders, the 
pilot ? " 

" I suppose I am," replied I; " and pray who are you ? " 

" I am Miss Amelia Gozlin, apprentice to Mrs. Saunders, mil- 
liner, — a t your service, sir : and, in consequence of my being so 
very quiet and sedate, I have charge of all these young ladies you 
see with me." 

Here the others burst into a laugh. 

" Thev are in very good hands. Miss Amelia," replied I, "and 
under your care, and with your example, I have no doubt but they 
will turn out very useful members of society." 

" Thank you, sir ; but allow me to say that I cannot permit 
voung men. especially such enchanting young men as Mr. Tom 
Saunders, to remain here ; as, if I do, your amiable mother would 
give me what is genteelly termed a whigging ; so if you will be 



POOR JACK. 



231 



pleased, sir, just to remove yourself from our presence," continued 
she, with a mock courtesy, " and not make your appearance here 
again until you are certain your mother is gone out, you will oblige 
us very much." 

I obeyed the wishes of Miss Amelia Gozlin, who certainly was 
a very handsome girl, with fine black eyes, apparently about fifteen 
vears old. I walked into the passage, and found my way down into 
the kitchen, where my mother and Virginia were employed as 
they had told me above. My mother received me kindly, but 
said little, for she appeared to be fully occupied ; and Virginia 
had no time to dedicate to me until the breakfast was ready, when 
she called the apprentices, and we all sat down together ; Miss 
Amelia and her companions looking so demure, that, if I had not 
seen them before, I should have thought that they could not 
speak. 

After breakfast was over, Virginia showed me the house. The 
first floor was to let furnished ; the second was occupied by my 
mother and Virginia; and the attics were appropriated to the 
apprentices. Every thing appeared clean, neat, and well ar- 
ranged ; and I could not imagine how my mother had contrived 
to do so much with so little money ; but Virginia told me that she 
thought Mr. Wilson had assisted her. 

When I returned, which might have been in six months, I found 
a great improvement, and every appearance of my mother succeed- 
ing well in her speculations. She had now a maid-servant, and her 
apprentices were increased to twelve, and there was every appear- 
ance of brisk and full employment. In 1803, I found that Vir- 
ginia, who was then fourteen years old, had left school. She had 
told my mother that, during the last half year, she had only re- 
peated over again what she had learnt the half year before., and 
that she thought she could employ her time better at home and 
assisting her. My mother was of the same opinion, and Virginia 
now superintended the cutting-out department, and was very 
useful. She said that the increase of business had been very 
great, and that my mother could hardly execute the orders which 
she received. There were now two servants in the house, and 

Q 4 



232 POOR JACK. 

additional workwomen. My mother, also, had very much altered 
in appearance : before, she was usually clean and neat; now she 
was well, if not elegantly dressed, and appeared much younger and 
better-looking. I must do her the justice to say, that prosperity 
had not spoiled but improved her : she was more kind and more 
cheerful every time that I went to see her ; and I may add that, 
with the exception of a little necessary castigation to Miss Amelia 
and her companions, she never scolded, and was kind to her ser- 
vants. The last year she had been even more successful, and was 
now considered the first milliner in the town. I believed that she 
deserved her reputation, for she had a great deal of taste in dress ; 
and when she had gone up stairs to decorate, previous to the hour 
of arrival of her customers, and came down in a handsome silk 
dress, and an elegant morning cap, I would often look at her with 
surprise, and say to myself, " Who would think that this was my 
mother, who used to shove the broom at me in the little parlour 
at Fisher's Alley ? " 

The reader may inquire how my father and mother got on after 
such an alteration in her circumstances. I can only reply, that 
they got on better than they did before ; for my mother, who did 
not wish my father's company in the house, pointed oat to him, 
that, with so many young people living with her, it would be very 
inconvenient if he came there in the evenings to smoke his pipe ; 
and that it would be better if he could smoke and drink his beer 
any where else. My father perceived the propriety of this, and 
assented with a good grace : my mother was very liberal to him, 
and he was now enabled, when he chose, to ask a companion or two 
to join him ; so that it suited both parties. My father, therefore, 
never came to the house, except after the Hospital supper, when 
he remained a few minutes to see Virginia, and then departed. On 
Sundays he spent the whole day there, and was kindly welcomed, 
but he always left in the evening to smoke his pipe elsewhere. As 
for me, when I did come, I was always kindly received, and slept in 
a spare bed on the same floor with my mother and Virginia. Before 
my time was out, I was too well supplied by Bramble ever to want 
any thing, and afterwards I made plenty of money, and seldom 



POOR JACK. 233 

came home without bringing a present both to my mother and Vir- 
ginia. 

Having thus given a general outline of affairs, I shall in the 
next chapter enter more minutely into some particulars, without 
which, the detail of events will not be complete. 



CHAP. XXXIII. 



IN WHICH THE SINE QUA NON OF ALL NOVELS IS, FOR THE FIRST TIME, 
INTRODUCED. 

In the last chapter, I have said in few words that Bessy Goodwin 
had been sent to school, and had since returned home. She had 
been home nearly a year before the period to which I brought up 
my history, but now she no longer was employed in any menial 
service, the girl who had been hired during her absence being still 
retained. Bessy now superintended the household, but did nothing 
more ; and there was a greater degree of comfort and expend- 
iture than had formerly been the case. Whether this was on 
Bessy's account, or from Bessy's imbibed ideas, I cannot pretend 
to say ; but certainly there was a great change in our style of living, 
which Bramble appeared to sanction. Mrs. Maddox remained as 
a mere pensioner, sitting by the fire, and perhaps finishing a pair of 
stockings about every five or six weeks, talking as usual at and to 
everybody, and with everything. In another point, also, there was 
a change in Bramble's house : it was much oftener filled with com- 
pany ; this was, I presume, to be ascribed to Bessy's personal charms, 
which certainly were very great. She was of a peculiar and much 
admired style of beauty, a description which strikes some people 
at first sight, and not others — those not perceiving it at first 
eventually admiring it even more than the others. She was 
taller than the middle height, her person finely developed, yet not 
so much so as to take away from its grace : her complexion was 



234- POOR JACK. 

pale and clear, her eyes and hair very dark ; there was a coldness 
about her beauty when in repose, like statuary marble ; but if the 
least excited or animated, the colour would mantle in her cheek ; 
her eyes would beam, till they appeared as if. like bright planets., 
they could almost cast a shadow ; and dimples, before concealed, 
would show themselves, when she indulged in her silvery laugh. 
Although her form was commanding, still she was very feminine : 
there was great attraction in her face, even when in repose — 
she was cold, but not chilling. 

I had seen little of her for three years, during which she had 
sprung up to womanhood, for she was now seventeen, and appeared 
to be at least eighteen years old before. Before, when we were 
living together, we kissed as brother and sister: since we had again 
become inmates of the same house, we had been friends, but nothing 
more. Bessy certainly showed as great a preference to me as 
our relative situations would admit ; but still it appeared as if the 
extreme intimacy of childhood had been broken off, and that it was 
necessary that a renewed intimacy under another aspect should take 
place, to restore us to our former relations. Here it was for me 
to make the first overtures : not for her, as maidenly reserve would 
not permit it. Bramble seemed to be most anxious that such should 
be the case — indeed, considered it as a matter of course : perhaps 
Bessy thought so too in her own bosom ; and the continual raillery 
of Bramble did more harm than good, as it appeared to warrant 
her thinking that it ought to be so. Why it was not I will now 
explain to the reader. 

I have already made mention of Mr. Wilson, the lawyer, whose 
acquaintance we procured through Sir Hercules and his lady. 
This intimacy had very much increased ; and a Miss Janet Wil- 
son had come home from a finishing seminary near town. Be- 
tween this young lady and my sister Virginia a certain degree of 
intimacy had been formed, and of course I had seen a great deal 
of her at the times when I was at Greenwich. She was a very 
pretty and very diminutive girl, but beautifully proportioned, 
although so very small ; indeed she was considered quite a model 
in figure, at least my mother used to say so, and I never heard 



POOR JACK. 235 

any one disagree with her. Janet had, moreover, large eyes, pen- 
cilled eye-brows, and a dimpled chin. Now, as Bessy was away 
at the time when I first made her acquaintance, if all these 
perfections were not enough for me to fall in love with, I 
must have been difficult to please at the age of eighteen, when 
one is not so very difficult ; and the consequence was, I was her 
most devoted slave. Mr. Wilson laughed at us, and seemed 
either to think that it would end in nothing, or that, if it 
did end in something, he had no objection. Thus was I fixed ; 
and with Virginia for a confidant, what was to prevent the 
course of true love running smooth? Janet received all my sighs, 
all my protestations, all my oaths, and all my presents — and 
many were the latter, although perhaps not equal to the former 
three. It was, therefore, not surprising that Bessy, who had been 
out of the way, had been forestalled by this diamond edition of 
Nature's handy-work. Such was the state of my heart at the 
commencement of the year 1805. 

I have mentioned, that my mother had taken a house in the 
principal street; but I must now add, that in the year 1804- she 
found it necessary to remove into one much larger, and had 
therefore shifted more to the upper part of the town. Instead of 
being in a row, this house was detached, with a small garden in 
front, and a good piece of ground at the back, which looked down 
towards the river. The situation not being so central, did no harm 
to my mother, as she was so well known ; on the contrary, it made 
her even more fashionable. She now kept no shop, but a show 
room; and had not only accommodation for more work-people, 
but very handsome apartments to let. In another point it was 
advantageous, which was on account of my father. At the end of 
the garden there was an octangular summer-house, looking upon 
the river : it was a good-sized room, boarded floor, and moreover 
it had a fire-place in it, and, when shut up, was very warm and 
comfortable. My mother made this house over to my father as his 
own, to smoke and drink beer in ; and my father preferred a place, 
in which he could sit alone with his friends, to a public-house, 
especially as the garden had a gate at the end of it, by which he 



236 



POOR JACK. 



could admit himself whenever he pleased. Here my father, Ben 
the Whaler, Anderson, and others, would sit, having a commanding 
view of the Thames and the vessels passing and repassing; — in 
the summer time, with all the windows open, and enjoying the 
fresh air and the fresh smoke from their pipes — in winter time 
surrounding the fire and telling their yarns. It was an admirable 
arrangement, and Virginia and I always knew where to find him. 

I have said but little of my sister Virginia. I may be considered 
partial to her — perhaps I was ; but to me she was, if not the hand- 
somest, certainly one of the most captivating persons I ever saw : 
to prove that I thought so, I can only say, that, deeply as I was 
smitten with Miss Janet Wilson, I often thought that I wished 
she was a facsimile of my sister. Virginia was now seventeen 
years old, slender and very graceful : she reminded me more of an 
antelope in her figure than any thing I can compare her to ; her 
head was so beautifully placed on her shoulders, that it was the 
first thing which attracted your notice when you saw her. Her 
eyes were of a deep hazel, fringed by long black eye-lashes, and 
her arching and delicate eye-brows nearly met; her nose was 
perfectly straight, but rather small ; and her face ended in a sharp 
oval, which added to the brilliancy and animation of her counte- 
nance : her mouth was small and beautifully formed, and her 
little teeth like seed pearl. Every one declared that she was the 
handsomest creature that ever they had seen ; and what every 
one says must be true. She was so ; but she was not always lively 
— she was only so at times : she appeared to be of a serious, re- 
flective turn of mind, and she read a great deal ; but at times she 
was mirth personified. To my mother she was always dutiful and 
attentive, and was very useful to her. 

I could not at first imagine what made my mother so anxious to 
have lodgers in the house, as they must have proved a great nui- 
sance to her, and her circumstances were above such an infliction. 
I was not long before I discovered the cause of this ; it was no 
other but to make up some good match for my sister, whose beauty 
she considered would effect her purpose. Many were the appli- 
cations for her lodgings, made by highly respectable gentlemen ; 



POOR JACK. 237 

but when she discovered, either that they were married, or that in 
other points they did not suit, she invariably refused, and for 
months her apartments continued vacant ; but if any body at all 
aristocratical, who was single, wished to inspect them, my mother 
was all smiles and eagerness. It may be supposed that she was 
not likelv to meet with such people as she solicited, at such a town 
as Greenwich, but such was not the case : before steam-boats made 
Greenwich so come-at-able, there were many families of distinction 
who resided there and in its environs — especially in the autumn 
of the year, when the river offered such amusement. It was just 
at that period that the white-bait parties became so much in vogue, 
and Greenwich was considered a pleasant retreat for a few months 
by many of the fashionable world. 

Although Virginia never mentioned her surmises directly, I 
perceived, by her occasional remarks, that she had latterly become 
aware of what were my mother's views ; indeed, how could she 
do otherwise, when my mother would refuse her lodgings one day 
to a gentleman because he was married, and let them the next time 
merely because he was a single man ? and that she was disgusted 
with my mother's conduct, I was convinced; at the same time, 
she certainly kept her thoughts to herself, merely telling me how 
very uncomfortable it was to have lodgers, and to be obliged to 
go into their rooms with messages from my mother. There was an 

Honourable Mr. , I really forget his name — indeed I should 

not have mentioned him, except that he was the introduction of 
another personage — who was several months in my mother's house, 
a harmless old bachelor. How old he was I cannot say, as he wore 
a very youthful wig and also false whiskers, but I should think 
about sixtv. He was a great admirer of the fine arts, and a still 
greater admirer of his own performances in painting. He took 
lessons twice a day from two different masters, who came from 
London ; and he was at it from morning to night. He came 
down to Greenwich, as he said, to study lints, and get up his 
colouring. I cannot say I thought his performances very good, 
but perhaps I was not a judge. My mother, who would, I believe, 
have sacrificed my sister to an ourang-outang, provided he was an 



238 POOR JACK. 

Honourable, took every opportunity of sending Virginia in to him, 
that he might study the delicate tints on her cheeks ; but it would 
not do, even if Virginia had been a party to it. He looked at his 
palette instead of her pretty mouth ; and his camel-hair pencils 
attracted his attention more than her pencilled eye-brows : he was 
wrapt up in his art, and overlooked the prettiest piece of nature in 
the world ; and Virginia, seeing this to be the case, had no longer 
any objection to go into his room, But this gentleman had a 
nephew, a very different sort of a personage, a young heir to a 
marquisate, who used to pay attention to his bachelor uncle, by 
paying him visits, at first because he was ordered so to do, and after 
once or twice because he had seen Virginia, and was struck with 
her appearance. He was a good-looking young man, about nine- 
teen, but not very bright— indeed I ought to say very silly, although 
at the same time not at all bashful. He made an acquaintance 
with my mother, who was delighted with his condescension, and de- 
clared that he was one of the most pleasant young men she had ever 
met with ; and he would have been very intimate with Virginia, had 
she not repulsed him. As soon as the leaves dropped off the 
trees, the old bachelor declared that there were no more tints 
worth remaining for, and he took his departure. About a month 
afterwards, his nephew came down, accompanied by a young man 
who was his tutor, and hired the apartments, much to the joy of my 
mother, who now had hopes ; and much to the annoyance of my 
sister, who had fears of being persecuted. 

And now having, in this chapter, brought up my history to the 
commencement of the year 1805, I shall again enter into a more 
detailed narrative. 



POOR JACK. 239 



CHAP. XXXIV. 



MORE CRY THAN WOOL. — BRAMBLE WOULD DIG A PIT FOR ANOTHER 
AND TUMBLES IN ALONG WITH HIM. 



It was in the month of March, 1805, when the easterly winds pre- 
vailed, and vessels were detained in the chops of the Channel, that I 
agreed with Bramble that we would return together and halve the 
pilotage. About eight leagues from the Lizard Point, we boarded 
a small ship which had hoisted the signal ; the weather at that time 
being fine, and the wind variable. When we went on board, it 
was but just daylight, and the captain was not yet on deck ; but 
the mate received us : we were surprised to find that she mounted 
twelve brass guns remarkably well fitted, and that every thing was 
apparently ready for action ; rammers and sponges, shot and 
wadding, being all up and at hand. 

" A prime morning, shipmate," said Bramble ; — then casting his 
eye over the deck, i( A letter of marque, I presume." 

" Yes," replied the mate, " we have the papers, but still she has 
never run without convoy since I have been in her ; we lost our 
convoy three days back, and the captain has been rather uneasy 
ever since." 

" Uneasy ! why, I should think that you could beat off a good 
stout privateer with these guns of yours." 

" Well, I don't know but what we might ; but our cargo is 
valuable, and we might be overpowered." 

" Very true ; and the captain must be anxious. Where are you 
from?" 

" Smyrna." 

" What's your cargo ? " 

" Why, we have raw silk and dry-salter's goods chiefly. D'ye 
think we shall have a fair wind ? I don't care how soon, for we've 



240 POOR JACK. 

at least twenty passengers on board, and our provisions and 
water are running rather short. Here's the skipper." 

The captain, who now made his appearance, was a tall good- 
looking young man, about thirty, dressed rather fantastically, as I 
thought ; having a laced cap on his head, and a party-coloured 
silk sash round his waist, such as they wear in the Mediter- 
ranean. 

" Well, pilot, what do you think of the wind ? " 

" Well, sir, I expect we'll have a slant which will enable us to 
fetch well to windward of the Lizard, at all events ; and then, when 
the tide turns in shore, we must stand out again." 

" Mr. Stubbs ! turn the hands up to make sail." 

" Ay, ay, sir !" replied the mate. 

The men came on deck, but the captain roared out for the 
idlers ; these were the passengers who had agreed to work during 
the passage : at last they came up, a queer-looking set ; and the 
captain sending down for his speaking-trumpet, sail was made on 
the ship. 

" Why, captain," said Bramble, " you do it in man-of-war 
fashion." 

" Well, I've not served the king for seven years for nothing," 
replied he; "and I hope, sir, not heard the bullets whistling about 
my head like hail in a hail storm, without knowing how to take 
care of my ship. I like every thing man-of-war fashion, and 
then one's always prepared. Where's the boatswain ? Pipe to 
breakfast." 

" You've plenty of hands on board, mate," said Bramble. 

" Yes, plenty of them, such as they are ; we've twenty of the 
ship's company, and twenty-five passengers from Malta." 

After breakfast, the captain ordered up the small-arm men ; 
five seamen and fifteen of the passengers made their appearance 
with their muskets, which were examined, and they were dismissed. 
At eleven o'clock, as we neared the land, the men were ordered to 
quarters ; the guns cast loose, and they were exercised as on board 
of a man-of-war ; the captain giving his orders with his speaking- 
trumpet. " Double-shot your guns ! Run out ! Point your 



POOH JACK. 241 

guns ! Fire ! Repel boarders on the bow ! Repel boarders 
on the quarter!" &c. This continued for more than two hours, 
when the guns were again secured. 

" Well, pilot/' said the captain to Bramble, " what do you 
think ? do you fancy a privateer could take us in a hurry ? " 

" Why, captain, if the men fight, I should say not ; but, you see, 
these guns, handsome as they are, won't fight of themselves." 

" I'll answer for the men fighting ; they'll have but their choice, 
— fight, or the contents of my pistol through the first man's head 
who quits his gun. I'll nail the colours to the mast, and see who 
will be the man who will haul them down. Why, pilot, this vessel 
is insured at 30,000/." 

" Then she'll be a famous prize, if they should contrive to take 
her, that's all," said Bramble. " Halloo ! what vessel's that coming 
down ? Tom, hand your glass here." 

" I hav'n't got it with me." 

" Well, give me that one on the skylight. I can't make her 
ou t — but I don't much like the looks of her." 

" Heh ! what's that?" said the captain. "Let me look: — oh, 
she's a square-rigged vessel, a'n't she ? " 

" Can't tell." said Bramble. 

The mate, who had fetched his glass from below, looked at her, 
and said it was a coasting schooner. 

" Are you sure of that ? " said the captain. " Let me see : — 
well, I don't know what to say — ■ she does look rakish — I'll go 
forward and make her out." 

"Why, it's a coaster, Bramble," said I, as the captain walked 
forward. 

" I know that," replied Bramble, with a wink. 

The captain returned, probably satisfied that it was only a 
coaster, but he did not choose to say so. " Well, I don't know 
what to make of her ; but at all events there's nothing like being 
readv. She's coming down fast upon us; Mr. Stubbs. we'll beat 
to quarters." 

Again the people were called up and the guns cast loose ; the 
powder was handed up, and all was preparation. I did not think, 

R 



242 POOR JACK. 

however, that the passengers appeared at all zealous ; but that I 
was not surprised at : the captain harangued them, calling them 
Britons, &c, and, hoping that they would show what stuff they 
were made of; talked about the honour of Old England, and a 
great deal more, and then examined the vessel again with his glass. 
" We'll give her the starboard broadside, and then wear round his 
stern and give her the other. Hoist the colours !" 

As soon as we hoisted the colours, the schooner hoisted English 
colours also. 

"English colours, sir !" said the mate, grinning. 

tl English colours, heh ! Very well ; but that may be a feint — 
keep to your guns, my lads." 

The vessel now ran by us ; she was deeply laden, and as broad 
as she was long. 

" No privateer this time, captain," said Bramble, laughing. 

" No, all's right ; secure the guns, my lads. We'd have given 
her a nice peppering if she'd been a French privateer." 

The captain then went down below to put away his sword and 
pistols, which the cabin-boy had brought on deck. 

" It's my opinion, Tom," said Bramble, " that this skipper a'n't 
quite so fond of fighting as he pretends to be. I'll see if I can't 
frighten him a little." 

As soon as the captain came on deck again, Bramble said, 
" WV11 go about, if you please." 

'* What ! about already ? why, we're good three leagues from the 
shore." 

" Yes, sir, but the tide has made, and we must now make a long 
stretch-out towards the French coast. We won't tack again till 
about dark." 

"Not tack till dark, pilot? surely we will do better keeping on 
the English coast." 

" No no, sir; if we were not so well manned and so well armed 
I should do it; but, as we are a match for any privateer, why, we 
may as well make a long leg — we shall be up channel sooner." 

" Well, I don't know what to say ; I've a heavy responsibility 
with such a valuable cargo " 



POOR JACK. c 24-3 

" Well, tack if you please, sir," said Bramble, shortly. 
" Oh, certainly ; — hands about ship !'" 

The vessel's head was put off shore, and, with a smart breeze, 
we walked away fast from the land. At twelve o'clock the captain 
proposed standing in-shore again, but Bramble refused. At three 
o'clock he became very uneasy, and expostulated with Bramble, 
who replied, " Well, sir, I'm doing all for the best ; but if you are 

afraid " 

" Afraid ! " cried the captain ; " afraid of what, I should like to 
know? No. I'm not afraid ; but it appears to me that we ought 
to make the land again before night."' 

"Ill answer for knowing where we are, sir, if that is your 
reason ; at all events, I wish to stand out till six o'clock." 

"Well, do so, then, if you choose — I'm sure I don't care if you 
stand to within gun-shot of the French coast;" and the captain, 
evidently very much annoyed, went down into the cabin. 

About half-past four o'clock the mate came aft and took 
up the glass, saying that there was an awkward-looking craft on 
the weather-bow. He came aft again, and said, " Pilot, I wish 
you would take a squint at that craft, for I don't much like the 
look of her." 

Bramble went forward, and I followed him. " I say, Tom, that's 
a French privateer, as sure as we stand here," said he. "Look at 
her. Well, now we shall see what these guns are made of." 

•< Don't put too much trust in them," said the mate ; " I know 
what sort of people we have here. Had we only ten good men, 
I wouldn't care for a privateer ; but I'm afraid that we have not 
many we can trust to. However, we'll do our best, and we can 
do no more. I'll go down and tell the captain." 

"It is a Frenchman," replied I, "and no mistake — every rope 
and every sail on her are French;" for the vessel, which was a 
lugger, was not more than four miles from us. 

••Well," replied Bramble, "it would be odd if we were to be 
taken into a French port after all, wouldn't it ? — not verv pleasant, 
though." 



241 POOR JACK. 

" We've men enough to beat her off, or two of her, if that's all,* 
replied I. 

" Yes, Tom, but I doubt the captain ; and without example men 
don't fight well. However, we'll do our best; and if he flinches, 
we won't." 

The captain now came forward as red as a turkey-cock ; he said 
nothing — looked at the vessel — and then turned as white as a 
sheet. 

" She's more than our match, if she's an enemy," said he. 

" I should rather think not, sir," replied Bramble. " All you 
have to do is to make your men fight, and nail your colours to the 
mast." 

" That's very true when there's a fair chance of success, but it's 
useless sacrificing the men against so very superior a force," re- 
plied the captain. 

" But it a'n't superior, nor in guns is she your equal, if I know 
anything about a vessel. At all events, I suppose you'll have a 
trial for it ? Won't you beat to quarters, captain ? " 

" Oh, to be sure ; Mr. Stubbs, beat to quarters. I think it 
would not be a bad thing to fire off our broadsides now, and let 
them see that we are well armed." 

The men were summoned up to quarters, and very unwillingly did 
they obey : some said that they did not come on board to fight ; 
others, that they had agreed to work^the passage home, but not to 
stand to be shot at ; and some were actually going down below again, 
when Bramble and the mate spoke to them and persuaded them 
to remain on deck. Still there was no willingness shown; and 
although Bramble told them how many privateers had been beaten 
off, and mentioned particularly the Leith smack having the other 
day fought with one an hour and a half, and knocked her all to 
pieces, they still appeared uneasy and wavering. 

In the mean time the privateer was within a mile of us, and had 
hoisted French colours. 

« We'll keep away and give her the first broadside," cried the 
captain. 



POOR JACK 24j5 

" You'd better hoist your colours first," observed Bramble, 
quietly. 

" Hoist the colours, Mr. Stubbs! Port the helm ! Look out, 
my men ! Point the guns to the object! Fire !" 

Off went all the guns, not only on the starboard side, in the 
direction of the privateer, but all those on the larboard side as 
well; and this circumstance probably gave the people on board of 
the privateer some idea of the state of confusion we were in. She 
now rounded to, and gave us her broadside of three guns : they 
were well directed, and did us some damage in the upper works 
and rigging ; but still more in frightening the people, who were 
now running down below, notwithstanding the exertions of the 
mate, Bramble, one or two of the seamen, and myself; but our fate 
was soon decided by the captain, who cried out, " It's useless con- 
tending against such a superior force. " With this observation he 
ran aft and hauled down the colours. As soon as the men per- 
ceived this, they all left the guns ; at another broadside from the 
privateer they all scampered down below, and at the same time 
the captain went down into his cabin. There was none but the 
mate, the boatswain, Bramble, and myself, left on deck. 

" Pleasant," said Bramble. u I thought as much. Well, Tom, 
here we are in for it. Come with me to the helm, for these 
French fellows will board, and they make very free with their 
cutlasses, even after colours are hauled down. Well," said he, as 
he walked aft, " I did not think to see the English flag so dis- 
graced. Poor Bessy, too! Well, never mind. I say, mate, just let go 
the weather main braces and bow lines, and square the yards, for 
it's better to be as humble as possible, now that we can't help our- 
selves ; and do you and the boatswain go down below, for they cut 
right and left, these fellows. They do pay a little more civility to 
pilots, as they ar'n r t belonging to the ship." 

This advice of Bramble's, which was very good, was followed by 
the mate and boatswain. 

" Shall I run down and look after our kits ? " said I to Bramble. 

" No, Tom, don't have anything in your hand, or they will take 
it from you, and most likely give you a rap on the head with a 

R 3 



246 POOR JACK. 

cutlass at the same time ; for privateer-men of all nations are little 
better than pirates, and don't know how to behave in victory. 
Just keep where you are — look as if you had nothing to do with 
the ship, except the steering of her. Here they come !" 

As he spoke, the lugger touched our weather side, at the same 
time lowering down her foresail and mainsail with no little noise 
and confusion ; in a second or two there were thirty of their men on 
our decks, flourishing their cutlasses, and looking round with their 
pistols ready cocked in their left hands for somebody to let fly at. 
At last they came aft. " Pilot ! " cried Bramble, taking off his hat. 
I did the same. With reiterated sacres and diables of every descrip- 
tion, some now rushed down into the cabin, while others went 
down the fore-hatchway, while more of the men from the lugger 
poured upon our decks ; but none of them molested Bramble or me, 
as we continued standing at the wheel. In about ten minutes order 
was to a certain degree restored by the captain of the privateer, who 
had come on board. I perceived him express his surprise to his 
officers who were with him at the armament of the ship, and he 
appeared very much pleased : it was not necessary to understand 
French for that. He then came up to Bramble, and spoke to him 
in French ; but Bramble only pointed to me and then to himself, 
and said " pilot." The captain called for a young Frenchman who 
could speak English, and then asked Bramble what was the 
cargo. 

Bramble, to please him, replied that it was silk and o:her goods 
to the value of 30,000/. English. 

ie How many men ? " 

" Forty-five men." 

The French captain rubbed his hands with ecstasy, as well he 
might. Just at this moment, the English captain came upon deck, 
followed by two of the privateer's men; one of whom had taken pos- 
session of his laced cap, and the other of his silk sash. He brought 
his sword in his hand, and presented it to the captain of the 
privateer, saying, " It is no disgrace for one brave man to deliver 
up his sword to another." 

" Que dit il ? " said the captain of the privateer to the young 



POOR JACK. 247 

man who interpreted. The young man translated this fine speech, 
upon which the French captain called the English one by a very 
contemptuous title, and turned away. The privateer's men now 
made their appearance from below, having helped themselves to 
every thing they could find : the orders were then given for the 
prisoners to be brought upon deck ; they were driven up, many 
of them bleeding from wounds received in attempts to rescue 
their personal property, and were handed over to the lugger. 
A prize master with twenty men were put on board ; the lugger 
was hauled off, the only Englishmen allowed to remain in the cap- 
tured vessel being Bramble and myself. As soon as the vessels 
were clear, they made sail, running about two points free for the 
French coa.su 



CHAP. XXXV. 

WE HAVE GREAT HOPES OF NOT SEEING THE INSIDE OF A FRENCH 
PRISON, BUT WE ARE DISAPPOINTED. 

" Well, Tom, this is a bad job," said Bramble to me, taking his 
seat upon the hencoop aft. " By to-morrow at noon, unless we 
fall in with a cruiser, — and I see little chance of that, — we shall be 
locked up in a French prison ; ay, and Heaven knows how long 
we may stay there ! What's to become of poor little Bessy ? I'm 
sure I don't know. I must contrive to write over to lawver 
Wilson, and put him in charge of every thing ; but I'm sorry for 
you, my poor lad — it's hard for you to be locked up, perhaps for 
years, when you might have been making money for yourself." 

" Well, it can't be helped, father ; we must make the best of it," 
replied I, with a deep sigh ; for I was anything but happy at the 
prospect. 

u If it had not been for that swaggering coward, this might not 

r 4 



218 POOR JACK. 

have happened," replied Bramble: u it's somewhat my own fault — 
I was so anxious to frighten him about nothing ; but at last I run 
us into real danger ; and I might have known that he never would 
have fought, although I certainly had no idea of falling in with a 
privateer. Well, Tom, we must not lose a chance." 

" How do you mean ?" 

" I mean that, if there is any possibility of getting away, I shall ; 
and you, of course, will not stay behind. I don't know where they 
are going to ; but you see, Tom, our only chance of getting off is 
while we are on the coast ; if once we are marched into the in- 
terior, why then it will be almost hopeless. What we must try for 
is, to get away at the port where we land. We shall see." 

" I am afraid that there's very little chance for us," replied I ; 
" but I'm ready to attempt anything." 

" We shall see, Tom — where there's a will there's a way : how- 
ever, it's no use talking about it just now." Here Bramble filled 
his pipe, took out his flint and steel, and lighted it. 

After smoking for ten minutes, during which I stood by him, 
he said, i( I wonder where they will take us to, St. Malo's or Mor- 
laix, for the course they are steering will fetch, I should think, 
thereabouts. One thing is certain — they've got a good prize, and 
thevmean to keep it if they can ; and, my eyes! if they won't make a 
fuss about it ! A ship with twelve guns taken by a lugger with only 
six ! They'll make the ship mount eighteen or twenty guns, and 
have a hundred and fifty men on board, and they'll swear they 
fought us for three hours. They have something to boast of, that's 
certain; and I suspect that French captain is a brave sort of 
chap, from the sneer he gave when our cowardly English lubber 
gave him so fine a speech. Well, it's our disgrace !" 

Here Bramble was silent for some time, when I said to him, 
i; You were stating to the men how a Leith smack beat off a 
privateer the other day ; I never heard of it." 

u Yes, I heard it when I was up above Greenwich. J met an old 
friend who was on board of her, for he took his passage in her 
from London. 

" ' Why,' says he to me, • Bramble. I thought we never should 














m JACK CARRIED ] 



POOR JACK. 24-9 

have got away from the river, for the old captain, who was as big 
round as a puncheon, and not unlike one, declared that he would 
not sail until the powder came up from Woolwich ; for the Queen 
Charlotte (that was the name of the smack) carried six eighteen- 
pound carronades. We waited nearly a week for the powder, 
and many a laugh we all had about it, thinking old Nesbitt was 
not much of a fighter, from his making so much fuss. Well, at 
last we boomed her off from the wharf, and about seven that night 
got clear of the Thames ; it was a fine breeze all night, and we 
ran through the Swin by the lead, which is what every one won't 
attempt: next morning we were off Yarmouth Roads, with the 
water as yellow as pea soup ; never saw it otherwise, and I'm an old 
collier ; reason why, the swells of the ocean thrashes up the sands 
oft" there — ay, and shifts them too, occasionally, which is of more 
consequence. Well, Bramble,' says he, ' well, on we went ; 
hauled in through Harborough Gut ; then the sun had so much 
power — for it was in the dog days — that it eat up the wind, and 
we were obliged to content ourselves with getting four knots out of 
her. Just as we made the Dudgeon Light-boat, old Xesbitt's son 
comes aft to his father, who was steering the craft, and says, 
' f Father, do you see that 'ere brig crowding all sail after us ? I 
think it be the New Custom House brig trying his rate of sailing 
with us," 

u i "Never you mind what she is, boy," says the captain, " but 
away up and furl the gaff-topsail." 

" ' Meanwhile the brig overhauled us fast, and old Xesbitt kept 
a-looking round at her every two or three minutes. At last he 
says to the-mate, " Take the wheel a bit/' and he goes first and 
looks over the quarter. " I see," says he ; iC I say, you sergeant 
and corporal " (for we had a recruiting party on board), " sup- 
pose now you just help us to load our guns and work them a little, 
for I expect this here craft will give us plenty to do." 

" ■ Well, Bramble, as I stand here, if six of them lobsters didn't 
say nothing, but just walk down below: but the sergeant was a 
trump of a fellow, and so was his wife; he threw off his coat and cap 
covered with ribands, tied a handkerchief round his head, and set 



250 POOR JACK. 

to work with a will ; and his wife backed him to the last, handing 
the powder and every thing else. Well, we had with us ten men 
who all stood to guns ; but the passengers went down below with 
the soldiers. Well, on comes the brig upon our starboard quarter 
as if to board ; all her forerigging, and forechains, and forecastle, 
being full of men as bees in a swarm. 

a i a A re you all ready, my men?" said the captain. 

« < " Yes, all ready, sir." 

" ' " Yes, and I be ready too, massa ! " cried the black cook, 
bringing out from the caboose the red-hot poker. 

" ( a Well, then, up on the wind with her, and fire when the 
guns bear." 

" * The men kept their eyes on the guns ; and when they cried 
" fire ! " the cook set them all off, one after another, with the hot 
poker, and no small mischief did these three guns do. His fore- 
castle was cleared of men in no time; down came his gaff and fore 
topsail, and being now right on our beam, he put his helm up to 
lay us on board ; but we were too quick for him — we wore round 
too, and gave him the three other guns, which did him no good. 

" < Well, he came after us on the other tack, and pelted us with 
musketry in a cruel way. The mate was hit in the head, and 
taken down below ; and poor old Nesbitt, who was at the wheel, 
steering the craft beautifully, had a bullet right into his bow-win- 
dow, as they call it. " Well," the old fellow says, " here's a shot 
between wind and water, I reckon — we must have a plug ;" so he 
puts his flippers into his waistband, and stuffs his flannel jacket 
into the hole. Then we throws her up in the wind again, and 
rakes him with our three guns well into him, and carries away 
more of his gear, and stops his sailing, — and so we goes on for a 
whole hour and thirty-five minutes ; and, to make a long story 
short, we beat him off, and he turned tail and ran for it with both 
pumps going.' 

" Now you see, Tom, that's the account of the affair given to 
me by a man who I can trust ; and there you see what can be done 
if men are resolute and determined to fight. Some little difference 
between that affair and this one, Tom." 



POOR JACK. 251 

u Did old Kesbitt die or recover ? " 

"I asked that question: be was doing well when my friend left ; 
somehow or another no vital part was injured, and he has had 
many presents made him for his gallant conduct ; and the sergeant 
was well rewarded also. Well, my pipe's out, and it's not far from 
midnight; I should think we may just as well try for a little sleep, 
Tom, for perhaps we may not get any for some time to come." 

Bramble coiled himself up under the bulwark ; I did the same ; 
and in a few minutes we both had forgotten whether we were in 
our beds at our house at Deal, or prisoners bound for the French 
coast. 

At daylight the next morning Bramble roused me up. 
" Here we are now, Tom ! here's the French coast not four 
leagues from us ; but it's hazy, and I cannot make it out very clear; 
however, the sun will soon drive all this away, and we shall have a 
fine day ; bat the wind has gone down, and I think we shall have 
still less of it." 

And so it proved ; for, as the sun rose, the wind became very 
light, so that we did not go through the water more than three knots. 
We were looking at the coast, when the report of a gun saluted 
our ears ; it was from the privateer ; we turned to that quarter, and 
found that there was a cutter about two miles from the privateer, 
crowding all sail towards us. 

-Tom!" cried Bramble, " there's a chance for us yet — that's 
an English privateer, and she will try to retake us for the sake of 
the salvage. But here's a boat coming from the Frenchman — what 
can that be for ?" 

The boat rowed alongside of us, and out jumped the captain of 
the French privateer with twenty of his best men, and the boat 
was then dropped astern. 

The Frenchmen immediately cast loose the guns, went down 
for the powder, and prepared for action. 

" I see, Tom," said Bramble, " he's a clever fellow, this skipper ; 
he knows that this ship and cargo is worth a dozen of his little 
privateer, and his object is to get her in — so he's come with all 
his best men on board of us, leaving his first officer to make the 



252 POOR JACK. 

best fight with the privateer that he can. Well, he's right ; and if 
it wasn't that I don't like to go to prison, I wish he may succeed, 
for he has got sense as well as courage, I think." 

The ship was now kept away two points more, that she might 
go through the water a* fast as she could ; and in the meantime 
the action commenced between the English cutter and the French 
privateer, the latter evidently attempting to cripple the masts and 
rigging of the former. The cutter, however, steered right for us, 
and evidently came up fast; the French privateer, weak handed, as 
she must have been, behaved very well, throwing herself across 
the cutter's bows, and doing every thing she could to prevent her 
coming up with us : both vessels were very much cut up before 
the cutter came within three cables' length of us, when the French 
captain ordered French colours to be hoisted, and, rounding to, 
poured in a well-directed broadside, which quite astonished the 
English privateer, who imagined that we were an unarmed mer- 
chantman. The action now became very warm ; we standing on, 
and every now and then rounding to and raking the cutter, while 
the French privateer engaged her broadside to broadside. The 
French captain was abaft, giving his orders with the greatest cool- 
ness and ability, when a shot from the cutter came in on deck, 
and a large splinter which it tore off knocked him down on his 
back. Bramble and I both ran to him and helped him up — we 
could not help it, although he was an enemy. He was not hurt, 
and as soon as he was on his legs he laughed, and thanked us in 
French. The cutter still continued the fight until we were within 
three miles of the coast, when, all her spars and sails being cut to 
pieces, she hauled to the wind and stood out to the offing. 

" Well, Tom, there's all our hopes ended," said Bramble ; " so 
now I'll light my pipe. Well, I will say it's been a good fight on 
both sides." 

Here the captain came up to us and said, " Bien oblige, — tank 

»> 
you. 

The cutter did not, however, stand out for more than a few 
minutes, when she hove to and repaired damages, evidently intend- 
ing to renew the action. I pointed this out to Bramble. " I see, 




w 







"->- - m «.v 






.... 



POOR JACK. 



253 



I see," replied he ; " she intends to try and cut us off from Morlaix, 
which is to windward, and oblige us to fight or run for St. Malo's, 
which is a long way to leeward ; in either case she will be able to 
attack us again, as she outsails us : perhaps the fight is not over 
yet." 

But the Frenchman also understood what he was about, and 
he now steered a course. When we were about two miles from 
the land, and about the same distance from the cutter, the latter 
kept away so as to oblige the ship to come to action again before 
she reached Morlaix ; but, before she closed with us, we discovered 
that we were entering a small French port, which had not been 
visible to us, called (I think) Lanion, situated between Isle Bichat 
and Morlaix. When within half a mile of the land, French over 
English was hoisted at our peak, and a French pennant over an 
English pennant at our main. 

" I told you so," said Bramble ; " they have made a man-of-war 
out of us, and now there'll be no end to the lies that they will tell ; 
for though these French fellows do not fight quite so well as we 
do, at lying they'll beat us hollow, any day of the week. Never 
mind, Tom ! we must keep a sharp look out, and there's no 
saying — keep your eyes open as we go into the harbour; — I 
never was here before, but I suspect it's nothing better than a 
poor fishing town." 

In a quarter of an hour, the ship and privateer were both made 
fast to an old stone pier which ran out from the town ; but there 
were no other vessels in the harbour except two small coasting 
chasses marees, and about a dozen fishing boats. 

The harbour was formed by the mouth of a small river, which 
ran down through a very narrow alluvial flat, backed by precipitous 
rocks. On the right side of the river on entering, and on the 
level ground above mentioned, which extended back perhaps 
two hundred yards, until it was met by the rocky cliffs, was 
situated the village which, centuries back, must have been the town 
of Lanion. It consisted of perhaps one hundred to one hundred 
and twenty houses, few of them of any size, the major portion with 
walls built of mud and whitewashed over. The only remains of 



254 POOR JACK. 

the former town were a stone built market-place, the portion 
of the Hotel de Ville in which the mayor resided, and the old 
church, which, although perfect in its walls, was sadly dilapidated 
in the roof. It had long been deserted, and a small chapel had been 
built in lieu of it, in which the only cure of the place performed 
the service. The massive stones of which the now neglected pier 
had once been built proved that at one time considerable expense 
had been incurred in the formation of this small harbour. 

A battery mounting two guns at the end of the pier protected 
the mouth of the harbour ; and there was a guard of a sergeant 
and twelve invalids, who were stationed there to man the guns 
upon the approach of an enemy. 

It would be difficult to describe the confusion which took place 
as soon as the two vessels were fairly alongside the wharf, and 
made fast with hawsers to the massive iron rings which had for 
centuries been fixed in the ponderous stones of which the pier was 
composed. There was the mayor with his cocked-hat on, but his 
leather apron still tied in front, for he had been working at his 
calling ; there was the sergeant of the invalids, who, perhaps, was 
a greater man than the mayor, all beard and mustachios, but so 
thin in his person, that he looked as if a stout breeze would have 
blown him away ; and there were the soldiers leaning on their 
muskets. These were the most important personages, but they 
were backed by. the whole population of the town, amounting to 
about three hundred men, women, and children, all talking, jabber- 
ing, and screaming: add to them the captain of the privateer, 
so important that he could not attend to even the mayor or the 
sergeant ; and the privateer's men, dressed in every fashion, armed 
to the teeth, all explaining, or pushing away, or running here 
and there obeying orders ; then the wounded men — for they had 
several men killed, and others hurt in the conflict with the cutter 
— handed up one by one, bandaged here and there, and exciting 
the compassion and even screams of the women ; the prisoners, 
who had been ordered to come on deck, half dressed and chap- 
fallen ; the sails of the vessels only clewed up, and still fluttering ; 
ensigns and pennants hoisted upon every mast, and waving over 



POOR JACK. 255 

the heads of the crowd assembled at the pier, and you may have 
some idea of the confused and bustling scene. 

At last, as there appeared no chance of anything being arranged 
while the people crowded round, the captain of the privateer 
ordered his men to draw their weapons and drive back the 
crowd, — which was soon effected, notwithstanding many oaths 
and more screaming on the part of the fairer sex ; and when 
the crowd had been thus driven, the men were stationed so as 
to keep them back. At first, this gave offence to all parties ; — 
to the crowd, because they didn't like to be driven away — to 
the mayor, who remained with the sergeant and invalids in the 
area which had been cleared by the privateer's people, because 
he thought that they had interfered with his civil authority — 
and to the sergeant of invalids, because he thought that the marine 
force had interfered with his military authority ; but the captain 
of the privateer having taken off his hat and bowecl, first to the 
mayor and then to the sergeant, and saying how much he was 
obliged to them for their assistance, both parties were satisfied : 
and now a consultation was held between them how to proceed ; 
while the privateer's men, who kept back the crowd, amused them 
by giving a detail of the two desperate actions which had been 
fought, — no two accounts agreeing, certainly ; but that was of no 
consequence. 

The first question to be canvassed was, what was to be done 
with the prisoners ? Morlaix was the nearest town in which they 
would be under safe keeping, but that was twenty miles distant, and 
it would be necessary to send over an express, so that a sufficient 
force might be despatched to Lanion to escort the prisoners 
there. This Mr. Mayor undertook to do immediately : a boy was 
summoned to take over the communication, and the mayor went 
up to write his letter to the authorities, while the wounded men 
were carried away, and, by the direction of the cure, who had just 
arrived and joined the consultation, billetted upon different houses 
in the town. The express having been despatched, and the wounded 
safely housed and under the care of the village ^Esculapius, who 
never had such a job in his whole life, the next point of consultation 



256 



POOR JACK. 



was how to dispose of the prisoners until the force should arrive 
from Morlaix. Here the sergeant became the principal person, 
being military commandant : forty-seven prisoners were a heavy- 
charge for twelve invalids ; and as for the privateer's men, there 
was no dependance upon them, for, as the captain said, they had 
had enough to do to take them, and it was the business of the 
authorities to look after them now, while the privateer's men made 
merry. 








1 ~~~^E I -^jP^^ 



THE PRISON. 



POOR JACK. '257 



CHAP. XXXVI. 

WITH THOSE POWERFUL AGENTS. FIRE AND WATER, WE CONTRIVE TO 
ESCAPE FROM A FRENCH PRISON. 

After more than an hour of confusion and loud talking, it was 
at last proposed and agreed to, nem. con., that the prisoners 
should be confined in the old church ; the twelve invalids to be 
divided into two parties, who were to be sentinels over them, 
relieving each other every four hours. The mayor immediately 
went forward with the village blacksmith to examine the state of 
the church doors, and ascertain how they might be secured ; while 
the prisoners, having been summoned out of the privateer, were 
escorted up between two files of the privateer's men with their 
swords drawn, and followed by the whole population. As soon 
as we arrived at the church door, the name of every prisoner 
was taken down by the mayor, attended by a notary, and then 
he was passed into the church. Bramble and I of course 
were marched up with the others ; the captain of the privateer 
talking with us the whole way, through the young man who 
interpreted, informing us that an express had been sent over to 
Morlaix, to which town we should be escorted the next day, 
and then have better accommodation. As we stood at the 
huge doors of the church, which were opened for our reception, 
we perceived that the altar and all the decorations had been 
removed ; and that, with the exception of the large wooden 
screen of carved oak, near the altar, the church was completely 
bare. Bramble spoke to the interpreter, and said that he hoped 
the captain would request the mayor to allow the prisoners to have 
straw to lie down upon, as the pavement would be very cold. 
Although the mayor at first demurred at this demand, yet the 
captain of the privateer, probably out of good will to Bramble, 
insisted, and the straw was ordered to be sent in. At last, 
the mayor became impatient, we could delay no longer, and the 
doors were closed. 

s 



258 poou jack. 

I had surveyed the church as we were escorted up to it : it was 
very large, capable, I should think, of holding more than two 
thousand people. The walls of the church were very massive, and 
the windows had but very few panes of glass remaining in them, 
but they were so very high as to prevent our climbing out of them, 
even if there had not been six sentinels guarding us outside. At one 
corner, to the right of the end of the church where the altar-piece 
had been, was a narrow stone tower, apparently an addition made to 
the Lady's chapel, long after the church had been originally built. 
When we were shut up, we were enabled to survey the interior at 
our leisure. The whole was completely bare to the pavement until 
you came to the chancel part, near to which the altar had been, 
where the wooden screens and seats still remained, in a sad 
dilapidated state ; but they must have once been very handsome, 
for the carving, where it was perfect, was very beautiful. A small 
thick wooden door, loaded with iron work, communicated with the 
narrow tower, which had a flight of stone steps running up to the 
top, and narrow loop-holes to give light as you ascended. While 
the majority of the prisoners were sitting down here and there on 
the pavement, few of them entering into conversation, Bramble 
had, with me, taken a full survey of our locality. 

" I tell you what, Tom ; if we once get to Morlaix, all chance is 
over," said he : " we must either get out of this church this very 
night, or we must make up our minds to remain in prison, Heaven 
knows how long." 

" Have we any chance ? " 

" I'll tell you more about that in a little while." 

The door of the church now opened, and the people brought in 
the straw for the beds, which they threw all in a heap in the 
centre of the church, and the doors were again closed. 

" I see daylight now," said Bramble. " Tom, find the mate and 
boatswain, and bring them here to me quickly." 

I did so, and Bramble asked them whether they were inclined 
to make an attempt to get clear. 

They replied that they would join us in any thing : they did not 
care what it was, and against any odds. 



POOR JACK. 259 

" Well, then/' said Bramble, " my idea is this. You see there are 
but twelve old soldiers to guard us ; for you may be certain that, 
before long, all the privateer's men will be as drunk as owls — 
that's but natural ; not that I think of coming to any fight with 
them, but I make the observation because, if we get out, we shall 
have little to fear afterwards. Now, you see, I asked for the straw 
because the idea came in my head that it might be useful. You 
see what I propose is, as there is plenty of wood in this part of the 
church, that we should wait till about three hours after dark — 
that is, until ten or eleven o'clock — and then set fire to the church. 
They must come and let us out, you know ; at least I take it for 
granted that they will before the roof comes down : if they don't, 
we must force the doors ourselves — I've looked at them — and 
until we do, there is no fear of suffocating, for there are no panes 
to the windows ; so, after all, it will only be a bonfire, without 
danger to any body." 

"Well, but what shall we gain by it?" said the mate: "we 
shall be walked out with the other prisoners, and how shall we 
then escape ? " 

" There it is : we will not be walked out with the other pri- 
soners ; and, in the confusion and hurry of taking them away to 
one place or another, they will not be likely to miss us. "We will 
all go up this narrow tower, where we may remain, till the church 
falls in, with perfect safety ; and then, when all is quiet again, and 
the people have left the spot, we will make for the pier, get one of 
the fishing boats and be off. How do you like the idea?" 

We all agreed that the plan was very feasible, and would at- 
tempt it. 

" Well, then, we must remain quiet for the present ; all you have 
to do is to fetch as much straw this way as you can by degrees : 
I expect they will bring us something to eat before long." 

We removed a large portion of the straw to the chancel ; in half 
an hour afterwards the doors were opened and rations of bread 
were brought in. 'What still more assisted our plans was, that the 
captain of the privateer at the same time, very good-naturedly, 
brought a demijohn of brandy, which he gave to Bramble. 

s 2 



260 POOR JACK. 

Bramble thanked him through the interpreter, and told him that 
he would get well drunk that night. 

« Yes, drive away care, captain says," replied the interpreter. 

Once more the doors were closed, and we had no chance of 
further interruption. 

By Bramble's direction, the mate, assisted by me and the boat- 
swain, cast loose the remaining bundles of straw and shook them 
down as beds for the prisoners at the end of the church nearest to 
the door ; and as soon as they had eaten their bread, Bramble gave 
them all a portion of the brandy, advising them to turn in soon, 
as we were to march very early the next morning. We remained 
with them at first, having taken our seats on the straw as if we 
also intended to repose. At last it became dusk, and then dark ; 
the prisoners settled themselves to sleep ; we left them and joined 
Bramble. Having arranged our straw so as to secure ignition, 
and leaving the mate and boatswain down below, Bramble and 
I, now that there was no chance of our being seen by the 
sentinels, ascended the tower. It commanded a view of the town 
and harbour : we looked down upon the main street — all was 
mirth and revelry ; fiddling and dancing and singing were to be 
heard from more than one house ; women in the street laughing, 
and now and then running and screaming when pursued by the 

men. 

" This is all right," observed Bramble ; " in an hour or two you'll 
see how quiet every thing will be ; but I shall not let them all go 
to bed before I set fire, for there may be some difficulty in waking 
them. I don't see that there's any lights down at the pier, where 
the vessels lie." 

We staid up there till about eleven o'clock, Bramble watching 
the lights and sounds; and when he considered that they had 
sufficiently decreased, he said, " Now we'll try it, Tom, and may 
success attend us ! " 

We descended and found the mate and boatswain anxiously 
waiting for us. Bramble struck a light with his flint, and we 
carried it to the screen where we had piled the straw under the 
seats and against the panels. 




'ACK A PRISON EH. 



POOR JACK. 261 

" Now then, messmates," said Bramble, " as long as the others 
sleep the better ; but if they waken, in the confusion bring here 
all the straw you can collect, for we must not fail for want of fuel." 
But of this there was no chance, for the wood of the screen and 
benches was so dry that it was a-light immediately. For ten 
minutes the other prisoners and the guard outside did not appear 
to be aware of what was going on ; but at last the church was so 
rilled with smoke that they were roused up : still the principal 
smoke was in that portion of the church where we were ; at the 
other end they were not much inconvenienced, as it found vent 
by the windows. What the invalids were about outside I do not 
know, but they did not perceive it ; probably they had left their 
guard to go and carouse. At all events the flames had climbed up 
from the screen and had caught a portion of the roof before the 
Frenchmen knew that the church was on fire ; the smoke was now 
exchanged for a bright clear flame, which had already found its 
way through the slating, and the prisoners were hallowing and 
screaming as loud as they could. We went to the part of the 
church where the others were, and joined the outcry. The voices 
of the people outside were now to be heard, for men and women 
had been summoned by the cry of the church being on fire : still 
there was no danger until the roof fell in, and that would not be 
the case for perhaps an hour, although it was now burning furiously, 
and the sparks and cinders were borne .away to leeward by the 
breeze. The screams of the prisoners now became dreadful ; 
frightened out of their wits, they fully expected to be burnt alive ; 
still the door was not opened, although we heard a loud con- 
sultation of many voices without. 

" Well," said Bramble, " I hope they really don't mean to let 
us burn here ; at all events, if they do, I can save the poor devils, 
for there's room enough on the stairs of the tower for twice as 
many. At all events we must hold on till the last moment." 

As he said this we heard them outside put the key in the door, 
and immediately Bramble, the boatswain, mate, and I, retreated 
from the crowd and gained the other portion of the church, which 
was most in flames. As the door opened we hastened to the tows? 

s 3 



262 POOR JACK. 

door, and closing it after us, gained the staircase near the top, 
where we remained quiet ; there Mas no want of smoke there, 
but still we could breathe pretty freely, as the fire from the roof 
was borne down by the wind from us and towards the people, who 
Avere at the front of the church. How they disposed of the other 
prisoners we do not know, as we dared not show ourselves ; but 
in about half an hour the whole of the roof fell down upon the 
pavement, and nothing but the bare walls of the church were left 
standing. 

After the roof fell in the light from the flames was so small, that 
we ventured to the top of the tower to look out. There were still 
many people standing about, but the major part of them were 
gone. As the fire sunk down, so did the people go away ; at last 
there was no one to be seen : we remained more than half an hour 
watching ; light after light disappeared, and all was quiet as death. 

" Now's our time," said Bramble, " but still we must be 
cautious ; let us follow one another at about ten yards apart : if 
we meet with any one, pretend to be reeling as if drunk, and they 
may think we are privateer's-men not yet gone to bed." 

We followed him down the stairs, gained the church, and trod 
over the still burning embers ; as soon as we were clear of the 
walls, we turned to the right in our way down to the harbour, 
keeping in the gloom as much as possible. We arrived safely at 
the pier, for there was not a soul stirring ; all our fear was, that 
we should find some one keeping watch on board of the vessels, 
which we must pass after we had possession of one of the fishing 
boats, as they laid inside of them. But fortune favoured us every 
way ; the boat we selected had her sails bent, and was not fastened 
with a chain : we were, therefore, in the stream in a moment ; the 
tide was also running out strong, and we passed the vessels with- 
out having occasion to use our oars. The battery at the entrance 
of the harbour was also without its usual sentry, for the men had 
been called up to guard the prisoners. In half an hour we were 
clear of the harbour, and steering with a fine breeze for the 
English coast ; and when daylight broke, the French land was but 
just perceptible. 




3RAK . 



THE ESCAPE. 



POOR JACK. 



263 



"Well," said Bramble, "praised be Heaven for all things; I 
expected to have lost my precious liberty for years, and I have 
only lost two shirts, one pair of trousers, and three pairs of 
worsted stockings." 

We had nothing to eat or drink, but that we cared little for, as 
the wind was fair : about ten o'clock that night we landed at 
Cawsand Bay near Plymouth, where we sat down to a hearty 
supper ; and when we went to bed. I did not forget to thank 
Providence for my unexpected escape. 




s 4 



264? POOR JACK, 



CHAP. XXXVII. 

ANOTHER ESCAPE, MORE FORTUNATE THAN THE ONE RECORDED IN THE 
PRECEDING CHAPTER. 

From the time that I had passed my examination and worked as a 
pilot on my own account, until the period of our escape, which I 
have narrated in the preceding chapter, I had continued to live 
in the cottage with Bramble, without contributing any share to 
the expenses. I had at first proposed it, but Bramble would not 
listen to any such arrangement ; he considered me, he said, as his 
son, and who knowed, he added, but that the cottage would be 
mine after he was gone. The fact was, that Bramble ardently wished 
that Bessy and I should be united. He continually hinted at 
it, joked with Bessy about me ; and I believe that, in consequence, 
Bessy's feelings towards me had taken the same bent. She was 
prepared for the issue ; the regard naturally felt for me from 
her long intimacy, now that the indulgence of it was so openly 
sanctioned by him whom she considered as her father, was not 
checked on her part ; indeed there was no doubt but that it had 
ripened into love. She showed it in every little way that her 
maiden modesty did not interfere with, and old Bramble would at 
times throw out such strong hints of our eventual union, as to 
make me feel very uncomfortable. They neither of them had any 
idea of my heart having been pre-engaged, and the strangeness of 
my manner was ascribed by Bramble to my feelings towards 
Bessy. Bessy, however, was not so easily deceived ; my conduct 
towards her appeared, to say the best of it, very inconsistent. So 
often had I had opportunities, especially when I was at home and 
Bramble was away, of speaking on the subject ; and so often had 
these opportunities been neglected, that it filled her mind with 
doubt and anxiety. After having accepted my addresses at first, 
Janet had once or twice written to me ; latterly, however, she had 
not written herself — all her messages were through Virginia's letters, 
or, perhaps, she would add a little postscript. Had letters arrived 



POOR JACK. 265 

for me in any other hand-writing than that of Virginia, Bessy, after 
her suspicions were roused, might have easily guessed the truth ; 
but it was the absence of any clue to guide her as to the state of my 
feelings which so much puzzled her. She was fully convinced that 
my heart was not hers, but she had no reason to suppose that it 
was in the possession of another. Thus did my passion for Janet 
Wilson in every way prove to me a source of anxiety. I knew that 
it was my duty to undeceive Bramble and Bessy, yet the task was 
too painful, and I could not make up my mind to make them on- 
happy. I felt that I had no right to remain under Bramble's roof 
and live at his expense, and, at the same time, I could not find an 
opportunity of telling him what my feelings and wishes were, the 
verv mention of which would at once explain to him, that the desire 
of his old age would never be accomplished. I often accused myself 
of ingratitude, and felt as if it were my duty to make every sacri- 
fice to one who had been so kind a protector ; but I was bound 
by vows to Janet Wilson, and how was it possible that I could 
retract ? 

Virginia's letters were not satisfactory : at first she told me how 
much she had been annoyed by the attentions of the young noble- 
man, and how very indelicate my mother had been in her conduct ; 
eventually she informed me that she had been insulted by him, and 
that, upon complaining to my mother, the latter had, much to her 
surprise and indignation, not only laughed at his extreme forwardness, 
but pointed out to Virginia a line of conduct by which he might be 
entrapped into marriage ; that her refusal to accede to such un- 
worthy devices had created a serious breach between her mother 
and herself. She stated the young man to be extremely silly and 
weak, and that my mother had gained great influence over him ; 
and were it not that the presence of the tutor, who seldom 
quitted the house, had proved a check, that there was little doubt 
but, as far as the young man was concerned, the disproportion- 
ate match would be readily acceded to ; that the only person 
she had ventured to consult Mas her dear friend Mrs. St. Felix, 
who had promised her, if the persecution did not cease, that 
she would make Mr. Sommerville the tutor aware of what was going 



266 POOR JACK. 

on. Virginia described the latter as an amiable modest young 
man, who did all in his power to instruct his pupil, but who was 
treated with any thing but deference in return. 

Relative to Janet she said little, except that she generally called 
there every day to make inquiries after me : once or twice she did 
say that it was a pity that I was not able to come oftener to 
Greenwich, as Janet was not very steady ; indeed, considering how 
young she was, without a mother, and so little controlled by her 
father, it was not to be wondered at. 

Such was the state of affairs when I made up my mind that I 
would speak to Bramble about my paying my share of the ex- 
penses, which I thought would open his eyes to the real state of my 
feeling towards Bessy : I did so ; I pointed out to him that I was 
now earning money fast, and that I considered it but fair that I 
should support myself, and not put him to further expense ; that, 
perhaps, it would be better that I should take a house for myself, 
as I must give a great deal of trouble to Bessy and Mrs. Madclox. 

" Well, Tom,'' said Bramble, " you've been at me about this be- 
fore, and I believe it's a proper feeling, after all. It certainly does 
seem to me to be a matter of little consequence, as things stand ; 
however, I ca'n't consent to your leaving us. You have been with 
me ever since you were a lad, and I should feel like a fish out of 
water if I were to be without you or Bessy ; so pay just what you 
please — I'll take it since you wish it ; — and there's an end of the 
matter." 

This was not the end to which I was driving; but Bramble's 
eyes would not be opened, and I could not help it. He had never 
directly spoken to me about an union with Bessy, and therefore 
it was impossible for me to say any more. Bramble, however, 
did not fail to communicate what I had said to her ; and one even- 
ing when we were standing on the shingle beach, she said to me : 
" So Emerson has been convicted for smuggling, and sentenced 
beyond the seas." 

" I am sorry for it," replied I. 

" His house is to be let now, Tom; would it not suit you? for 
my father told me that you wished to leave us." 



POOR JACK. 267 

" Why should I live upon you, when I am able to support my- 
self?" 

" Certainly not. If it were not that I could not bear to see father 
miserable, I think it would be better if you did take Emerson's 
house ; but it Mould vex him, poor good man." 

" But not you, Bessy ; is it that you mean ? " 

" Perhaps it is. Tell me yourself, Tom ; would it not be 
better?" 

I made no reply. 

" Well," replied Bessy, " think of me as you please ; I will speak 
now, Tom. I am not considering you, Tom, nor am I thinking of 
myself ; I am only induced so to do on account of my father. We 
have been brought up together as children, Tom, and, as children, 
we were great friends, and, I believe, sincerely attached to each 
other. I believe it to be very true that those who are brought up 
together as brothers and sisters do not change that affection for 
any other more serious in after life. It is therefore not our faults 
if we cannot feel as, you must know, Tom, my father wishes we 
should. Am I not right ? " 

" You are, I believe, Bessy," replied I. 

" My father, therefore, is deceiving himself with the hopes of 
what never can take place ; but I know him even better than you 
do, Tom; it is the object of his daily thoughts — his only wish 
before he sinks into his grave. I cannot bear to undeceive him ; 
no more can you, if I have truly judged your feelings." 

"You have judged right, Bessy." 

u The very circumstance of our knowing his wishes, the hints 
which he throws out, his joking on the subject, have been a source 
of annoyance to both of us ; and not only a source of annoyance, 
Tom ; it has estranged us — we no longer feel that affection which 
we should feel for each other, that kindness as between brother and 
sister, which might exist ; — on the contrary, not being exactly aware 
of each other's feelings, we avoid each other, and fearful that the 
least kindness might be misconstrued, we do not really treat each 
as we otherwise would ; in fact, it has destroyed our mutual con- 
fidence. Is it not so ?" 



2 58 POOR JACK. 

" It is, I acknowledge, but too true, Bessy, and I thank you for 
having entered into this explanation " 

" Which, as I said before," continued Bessy, "I should not have 
done except for the sake of my father ; but now that I have done so 
(and here Bessy's voice became tremulous), let us consult at once 
how we shall act so as to secure his happiness, and that in future 
we may return to the former confidence and regard which should 
exist between us as brother and sister." 

" Point out how this is to be done, Bessy, and I will cheerfully 
enter into your wishes." 

"We must laugh when he laughs, Tom, even if not inclined; 
we must gain time — that is very easy — I may refuse as long as 
he lives — you may put it off; and then, Tom, circumstances may 
help us — who knows what even a day may bring forth ? ' 

" Very true," replied I, " there's only one thing " 

" What is that ? " 

" Suppose I was to marry ? " 

" Then," replied Bessy, in a voice half choked, as she turned 
away, " my father would be very unhappy." 

I looked round to reply, but she had gone into the cottage. This 
conversation gave me great satisfaction. I felt convinced that if I 
had at one time formed the idea that Bessy was attached to me, 
I had been mistaken, and I was as indifferent to her as she was 
to me. I was just as anxious as she was not to vex Bramble, 
and equally glad that confidence was restored between us. Alas ! 
I must have been very blind not to have perceived what was the 
true state of her feelings ; but I did not, and after some reflection 
I determined that I would make her a confident of my passion 
for Janet Wilson ; and then I walked to the post-office to see 
if there were any letters from Virginia. There was a letter for 
me — a double one : as soon as I had paid the money, I opened 
it; it was very closely written, and evidently Virginia had much 
to communicate to me. I forgot for the moment Bessy and 
Bramble, thought only of Janet, and put the letter to my lips 
as I walked away that I might go home and read it. I hurried 
past Bessy, who was in the parlour, and went up the stair* 



POOR JACK. 269 

into my bed-room, where I took my letter out of my pocket and 
commenced it. 

<• My dear Tom, 15th April. 

" I shall begin a letter to you now, and fill it up as a sort 
of a diary ; as it is the best plan, I think, to narrate circumstances 
as they actually take place. It is unpleasant to say any thing 
against my mother, the more so as I believe that she thinks she 
has been doing right, and has my interest sincerely at heart : she 
appears to consider that an alliance with people of rank cannot 
be purchased too dear, and that every attempt is justifiable to 
secure for me such an advantage. Little does she know me ; if 
she forgets, I never shall, that I am the daughter of a Greenwich 
pensioner, and never would ally myself with those whose relations 
would look upon me as a disgrace to their family — no, Tom ; 
even if I were so heedless as to allow my affections to be en- 
thralled, I would at any sacrifice refuse to enter into a family much 
beyond my condition. I have thought of this often, and I con- 
fess that I am sometimes unhappy. I have been brought up and 
educated above my situation in life, and I do not think I ever 
could marry a person who was not more refined and educated 
than those who are really and truly my equals. But as, at 
the same time, I never will enter into a family who might look 
down upon my parentage, I presume your little Virginia must 
remain unmarried. If so, I am content — I have no wish to alter 
my present condition. I am happy and respected ; and with tbe 
exception of the trifling annoyances which we all must expect and 
must submit to, I have no reason to be dissatisfied ; on the con- 
trary, I have to be grateful for many blessings, and I trust that I 
am so. My poor mother is the cause of all my present vexations. 
She tells me that my beauty, as she is partially pleased to call 
it, is sufficient for my aspiring to the hand of a duke, and that it 
will be my own fault if I do not make a high connection. Everv 
night she has been overwhelming me with alternate reproaches 
and entreaties to permit the attentions of the gay gentleman who is 
now lodging at our house, stating that it was on my account only 



270 



POOR JACK. 



that he took the apartments, and that, if I play my cards well, he 
will be caught in his own trap, which, I presume, is as much as to 
say, that he came here with different intentions, and finding that 
he cannot succeed, will secure his intended prize or victim by mar- 
riage rather than not obtain her at all. Very flattering, truly ! and 
this is the man to whom my mother would induce me to confide 
my future happiness — a man who, independent of his want of 
probity, is a fool into the bargain. But the persecution on his part 
and on that of my mother now becomes so annoying, that I have 
requested Mrs. St. Felix to speak to Mr. Sommerville the tutor, 
who, if he does his duty — and I have every reason to believe that 
he will do so — will take some measures to remove his pupil from 
our house. 

" 17th. Mrs. St. Felix and Mr. Sommerville have had a meeting. 
He generally walks out every afternoon in the park; and Mrs. 
St. Felix and he have already been introduced : she therefore went 
out and met him, and after exchanging a few words, she intro- 
duced the subject, stating that she did so at my request. Mr. 
Sommerville, although he had not been blind, had had no idea 
that things had proceeded so far ; and he promised Mrs. St. 
Felix that he would soon put an end to the persecution, or remove 
him from our house. Janet has been here to-day, and I told her 
what had passed ; she very much approved of the steps which 
I had taken. I must, however, say, that latterly she has not ap- 
peared to take that interest about you that she used to do, and 
I fear that your continual absence is injurious to your prospects. 
She is very young and very giddy, Tom : I wish she had been 
older, as, even when she is your wife, she will require much look- 
ing after, and a firm hand to settle her down into what a married 
woman in my opinion ought to be. Mr. Sommerville has re- 
quested me to favour him with a few minutes' conversation ; and 
as I cannot do it in our house, for my mother never leaves me a 
minute to myself, I told him that I should be at Mrs. St. Felix's 
this afternoon, and he could speak to me then. He knows that I 
have no secrets from Mrs. St. Felix ; and although it is not pleasant 
to resort to such means, still there can be no impropriety in my 
hearing what he has to tell me in her presence. 



POOR JACK. 27 I 

i( I have seen Mr. Sommerville — he thanked me very much for 
having communicated, through Mrs. St. Felix, my mother's plot 
against his protege, and paid me many compliments upon my 
behaviour, which were quite unnecessary. He told me that he 
had spoken to his pupil, who had most positively denied his 
having any such intention, and stated that he was merely amusing 
himself; and he had pledged himself not to take the least notice of 
me for the future. ' I am well aware,' said he, ' that what he has 
stated is not correct ; he has not deceived me by his assertions ; 
and were it not that I feel confidence in you. Miss Virginia,' con- 
tinued he, ' I would write to his father that he might be imme- 
diately removed. I hardly need say, that should any thing of this 
kind take place, I should be most severely blamed : it is not the 
first time that I have been compelled to interfere, for my pupil is 
of a very susceptible disposition, and has fancied himself in love 
with at least five young people since he has been under un- 
charge. In this instance,' continued he, making me a bow, ' he has 
some extenuation to offer. Will you oblige me by informing me if 
he adheres to his promise ? or do you wish that I should speak 
to your mother?' 

" Mrs. St. Felix replied, that it would be unnecessary ; in- 
deed, that if Lord — — left the house I should only be subject 
to fresh persecution. Mr. Sommerville, at her request, stayed to 
drink tea. and is certainly a very pleasant, well-informed, amiable 
young man. 

" 23d. I have received no molestation since the explanation 
with Mr. Sommerville, except from my mother, who accuses me of 

having affronted Lord ■ ; and although I deny it, she asserts 

that he never could have so changed his conduct towards both of 
us if I had not so done. I have not seen Janet this week — I 
cannot imagine what has become of her. 

" 30th. You may imagine my joy, my dear Tom : Mr. Sommer- 
ville has received a letter, stating that his Lordship is to go down 
to his father's seat in the country, as he will be of age in a month, 
and he is to make acquaintance with the tenants; — there are to be 
great rejoicings there upon his coming of age. I am sure no one 



272 POOR JACK. 

can rejoice more than I shall when he leaves, which is to be next 
Saturday. I am also very glad to say that the Marquess has pre- 
sented Mr. Sommerville with a valuable living, now that he gives up 
his tutorship. I really think he will do justice to his profession, 
for I have seen more of him lately, and esteem him very much. 

" 27th. They are gone, much to my mother's mortification, and 
to my delight ; and now, as I have written so much about myself, 
I shall leave this letter open till I see Janet, that I may tell you 
something about her, otherwise I know my letter will not be 
interesting to you. 

" 31st. My dear Tom, you must prepare yourself for painful 
intelligence : — 

" Janet has disappeared — She left her father's house last night 
after the family had retired, but no one knows where : she left a 
few lines on her table, stating that they would hear from her soon. 
Poor Mr. Wilson Mas here to day — he is half distracted — and the 
whole town is full of the scandal. Mrs. St. Felix told me this 
morning that she has discovered that within the last week she has 

been seen walking on the London Road with Lord . Is it 

possible ? 

" 2d May. It is all true — Mrs. St. Felix has a letter from Mr. 
Sommerville, stating that Janet was brought up to town and mar- 
ried to Lord two days ago. It appears, that from the time 

that I repulsed his attentions, he fixed them upon Janet; that she 
encouraged him, and used to meet him every night, as Mrs. St. 
Felix was informed. Mr. Sommerville has seen his father, and fully 
exculpated himself; but the Marquess declares, as his son is a 
minor, that the marriage shall not be binding. How it will end, 
Heaven only knows ; but she is much to be pitied. This will ac- 
count for her not coming to me as usual. Now, Tom, I do not 
suppose you will pay attention to me at present, but from what I 
knew of Janet, and which her conduct has fully proved, she was 
not worthy to be your wife, and could not have contributed to 
your happiness. I pity you from my heart, as I know what you 
will feel; but still I congratulate you, and eventually you will 
congratulate yourself at your fortunate escape. 



POOR JACK. 273 

(i I will say no more at present, except that I am, and ever 

will be, 

" Your truly attached Sister, 

" Virginia." 

I had courage to finish the letter, and then it dropped from 
my hands — I was bewildered, stupified, maddened. As my sister 
said, I did indeed feel. Was it possible ? — Janet, who had — Mercy 
on me ! I threw myself on the bed, and there I remained till the 
next morning in a state most pitiable. 

It is only those who have been deceived in their first attachment 
who can appreciate my agony of feeling. For the first few hours 
I hated the whole world, and had then the means been at hand, 
should in all probability have hastened into another ; but gradu- 
ally my excitement abated : — I found relief in tears of sorrow and 
indignation. I arose at daylight the next morning, worn out with 
contending feelings, heavy and prostrated in mind. I went out — 
stood on the beach, the keen breeze cooled my fevered cheek. 
For hours I leant motionless upon an anchor — all hope- of 
future happiness abandoned for ever. 



CHAP. XXXVIII. 



WHICH IS ALL ABOUT LOVE BRAMBLE CONFIDES TO ME ALL HIS 
ACQUAINTANCE WITH THE TENDER PASSION. 

To conceal from Bramble or Bessy the state of mind to which 
I was reduced was impossible : I was in a condition of pros- 
tration against which I could not rally ; and I believe that there 
never was a person who had been disappointed in his first love, 
who did not feel as I did — that is, if he really loved with a 
sincere, pure, and holy feeling ; for I do not refer to the fancied 
attachments of youth, which may be said to be like the mere flaws 
of wind which precede the steady gale. I could not, for several 
days, trust myself to speak — I sat silent and brooding over the 

T 



274 



POOR JACK. 



words, the looks, the smiles, the scenes which had promised me a 
store of future happiness ; such as would probably have been the 
case, as far as we can be happy in this world, had I fixed my 
affections upon a true and honest, instead of a fickle and vain, 
woman — had I built my house upon a rock, instead of one upon 
the sand — which, as pointed out by the Scriptures, had been washed 
away, and had disappeared for ever! Bramble and Bessy in vain at- 
tempted to gain from me the cause of my dejection ; I believe that 
they had many conversations upon it when I was absent, but what- 
ever may have been their surmises, they treated me with every 
kindness and consideration. About a week after I had received the 
letter, Bramble said to me, " Come, Tom, we have had an easterly 
wind for ten days now ; they are going off in a galley to-morrow 
— suppose we go too — it's no use staying here moping, and doing 
nothing. You've been out of sorts lately, and it will do you good." 
I thought so too, and consented ; but the other pilots were not 
ready, and our departure was deferred till the day after. Bramble 
had acquainted me in the morning with this delay : I was annoyed 
at it, for I was restless, and wished for change. My bundle had 
been prepared ; I had passed the best part of the night in writing 
to Virginia, and was, as people very often are when under such op- 
pressed feelings, in any thing but a good humour at being obliged to 
remain another day at Deal. I had walked out to the beach after we 
had breakfasted, and had remained there some time. Bramble had 
gone out in the direction of the post-office, and I asked him to in- 
quire if there was a letter for me, for I thought it very likely that 
Virginia might have written to me again. I had remained for 
an hour on the beach, when I recollected that my knife required 
to be sharpened, and I walked round the cottage to the back- 
yard, where there was a small grindstone. I had not put my knife 
to it, when I heard Bramble come in and say to Bessy, — 

« Well, girl, I've found it all out, for you see I thought old 
Anderson might know something about it ; or, if he did not, he 
could inquire : and I've got the whole story. Here's Anderson's 
letter. I thought there must be something of that sort." 

Here there was a pause, as if Bessy was reading the letter. 



toor jack. 275 

" Only to think — she's run away with a young lord," said 
Bramble. 

" So it seems/' replied Bessy ; (( I'm sorry for poor Tom, for he 
feels it severely." 

" I'm not sorry," rejoined Bramble ; " she wasn't deserving of 
him : and. Bessy, I'm glad for your sake." 

" Don't say that, father ; Tom will never think of me, nor do I 
care about him." 

** I don't exactly believe that, Bessy, for all you say so. It's my 
wish, and you know it, Bessy, to see you and Tom spliced before 
I die ; and I thank Heaven that this false girl is out of the way ; 
— I've more hopes now." 

" Marriages are made in heaven, father," replied Bessy ; " so, 
pray don't say any thing more about it. It will be time enough 
for me to think of Tom when Tom appears to think of me. I shall 
always love him as a brother." 

" Well, God's will be done ! We must now try and console 
him, poor fellow ; and I'm very glad that we're off to-morrow. 
Salt water cures love, they say, sooner than any thing else." 

■* It may, perhaps," replied Bessy ; " but I feel that if I were 
once really in love, the whole ocean itself could not wash my love 
out. However, women are not men." 

" That's true. You hug your love as you do your babies, all 
day long, and never tire. Now, you see, a man gets tired of nurs- 
ing in no time ; — I never was in love but once." 

" Oh ! father, I've heard that story so often." 

" Well, then, you sha'n't hear it again. Now, I'll go out, and see 
where Tom may be. I suppose he's looking at the wind, and think- 
ing how it changes like a woman. But I'll light my pipe first." 

" Do, father; and while Tom looks at the wind, and thinks of 
women, do you just watch the smoke out of your pipe, and think 
of men, and their constancy." 

" Well, I will, if it pleases you. Put the letter by, Bessy, for I 
shouldn't like Tom to see it. What have you got for dinner ? " 

" I left that to Mrs. Maddox; so I can't tell. But there's cold 
pudding in the larder; I'll put it out for Tom." 

t 2 



276 POOR JACK. 

" Nay, Bessy, you must not jest with him." 

" Am I likely, think you, father ? " replied Bessy ; " can't I feel 
for him? " 

" Come, come, dearest, I didn't mean to make you cry." 

" I'm not crying, but I'm very sorry for Tom, and that's the 
truth. Now go away with your pipe, and leave me alone." 

It was impossible for me to have returned without being per- 
ceived, and I therefore remained during the whole of this convers- 
ation. I was annoyed to discover that they knew my secret ; and 
still more vexed at the remainder of this colloquy, by which I dis- 
covered that Bramble had so completely set his heart upon an 
union between me and Bessy, which I considered as impossible. 
I felt, as all do at the time, as if I never could love again. I walked 
away, and did not return home till dinner-time. Bramble and 
Bessy were very kind, although they did not talk much; and 
when I went away the next day I was moved with the affectionate 
farewell of the latter. 

It was a beautiful night, and we were running before the east 
wind, the Portland light upon our starboard beam ; the other men 
in the boat had laid down in their gregos and pilot jackets, and 
were fast asleep, while Bramble was at the helm steering ; and I, 
who was too restless in my mind to feel any inclination to repose, 
was sitting on the stern sheets beside him. 

" Do you see the line of the Race ? " said Bramble ; " it seems 
strong to-night." 

Bramble referred to what is called by the mariners the Race of 
Portland ; where the uneven ground over which the water runs 
creates a very heavy sea even in a calm. Small smuggling ves- 
sels and boats, forced into it in bad weather, have often foundered. 
The tide, however, runs so rapidly over it, that you are generally 
swept through it in a few minutes, and then find yourself again in 
comparatively smooth water. 

" Yes," replied I ; "it is very strong to-night, from the long 
continuance of the easterly wind." 

" Exactly so, Tom," continued Bramble : " I've often thought 
that getting into that Race is just like falling in love." 



POOR JACK. 277 

" Why so ? " replied I, rather pettishly ; for I was not pleased at 
his referring to the subject. 

" I'll tell you why, Tom," said Bramble ; " because, you see, 
when we get into the Race, it's all boiling and bubbling and tossing 
about — rudder and sails are of no use ; and you are carried along 
by a fierce tide, which there's no resisting, with no small damage to 
the upper works, until you are fairly out again, and find breath to 
thank God for it. Now, ar'n't that like love? " 

" I suppose it is, as you say so ; you know best." 

" Well, I think I do know best ; because, you see, I have long 
been clear of it. I never was in love but once, Tom ; did I ever 
tell you about it ? " 

" Never," replied I. 

" Well, then, as 'twill pass time away, I'll just give you the 
long and the short of it, as the saying is. When I was just about 
twenty, and a smart lad in my own opinion, I was on board of a 
transport ; and we had gone round to Portsmouth with a load of 
timber for the dock-yard. It was not my first trip there, for you 
see the transport was employed wholly on that service ; and during 
my cruizing on shore I had taken up my quarters at the Chequer 
Board, a house a little way from the common Hard, in the street 
facing the dock-yard wall ; for, you see, Tom, it was handy to us, as 
our ship laid at the wharf, off the mast pond, it being just outside the 
dock-yard gates. The old fellow who kept the house was as round 
as a ball, for he never started out by any chance from one year's 
end to another : his wife was dead ; and he had an only daughter, 
who served at the bar, in a white cap with blue streamers; and 
when her hair was out of papers, and she put on clean shoes and 
stockings, which she did every day after dinner, she was a very 
smart neat built little heifer ; and, being an only daughter, she 
was considered as a great catch to any one who could get hold of 
her. She had quite the upper hand of her father, who dared not 
say a word ; and with others she would give herself no few airs. 
At one time she would be as sweet as sugar, and the next, without 
any cause, she'd < wonder at your imperance.' It was difficult to 
know how to take her : it's a bad thing for a girl to have a great 

x 3 



278 POOR JACK. 

fortune ; they get so much flattery that it turns their heads. Well, 
Tom, I wasn't looking after the money, as you'll believe when 
I tell you so ; but as she was very chatty with me, and allowed 
me to come inside the bar, which was considered as a great 
favour, to help rinse the glasses, and so on, and as the other 
men used to joke with me, and tell me that I should carry 
off the prize, I began to think that she was fond of me, and so 
very naturally I became fond of her — and we met and we parted 
(and she would allow me to kiss her when we parted), until I was 
quite gone altogether, and did nothing but think of her all day, 
and dream of her all night. Well, the last time that I was in the 
transport to Portsmouth, I had made up my mind to clench the bu- 
siness, and as .soon as the sails were furled, I dressed myself in 
my best toggery, and made all sail for the old house. When I came 
in, I found Peggy in the bar, and a very fancy sort of young 
chap alongside of her. I did not think so much of that, and I 
was going inside the bar to shake hands as usual, when, says she, 
' Well, I should not wonder,' pulling to the half door, as if she 
were surprised at my attempting to come in. 

" ' Oh, ho! ' says I, ' are you on that tack ? what next ? ' and then 
I looked more at the chap, and he was a very nice young man, as 
the saying is. As I afterwards found out, he was in the smuggling 
line between Cherbourg and our coast, and he had frenchified 
manners, and he talked little bits of French, and he had French 
gloves for presents, and had ear-rings in his ears, and lots of rings 
on his fingers. So I took my seat at the wooden benches near the 
fire, just as sulky as a bear with a sore head, watching their ma- 
noeuvres : at last he walked out, kissing his hand as she smiles. As 
the coast was clear, I went up to the bar. 

" ' Well,' says I, ' Peggy, so the wind's shifted, is it ? ' 

" ' What do you mean ?' says she. ' I suppose 1 may be civil to 
another person as well as to you.' 

" ' Yes, I see no objection,' says 1 : ' but why was he to be in- 
side the bar, and I put out ? ' 

" ; Oh/ replied she, ' one at a time, you know, Mr. Philip. I 
haven't made any promises to you that I know of.' 



POOR JACK. '279 

" < That's very true,' replied I, ' but ' 

" ' Oli, you mustn't fret here,' interrupted she : ' I'm my own 
mistress, I suppose. However, I'll tell you this much, that I don't 
care a bit about him, and that's the truth of it — but I did not 
like your coming inside the bar so quietly, as if you had a right 
there — for I don't want people to make remarks.' 

" Well, the end of it was, that she pacified me, and we were as 
great friends almost as ever : I say almost, for I had my eyes upon 
her and that chap, and did not much like it. A week after my 
arrival, there was to be a fair over at Ryde, in the Isle of Wight, 
and I asked Peggy whether she would go with me ; but she refused, 
saying that she was obliged to go to her aunt's out at Limberhook, 
who was very old, and had sent for her, so I thought nothing more 
about the matter. Well, the day before the fair, as we were busy 
in the forenoon getting the timber out of the vessel, one of my 
shipmates, who went to the same house, says to me, ' I say, Tom, 
when I was at the Chequers last night, I overheard Peggy pro- 
mise to go to the Ryde Fair with that frenchified smuggling 
chap.' 

iC < Did you ? ' said I. 

" ' Yes,' replied he, ' and they agreed to start at twelve o'clock, 
just after the Dockyard Bell rang : I thought at the time it was just 
to give you the slip before you left the ship, and that she is turning 
you over.' 

" Well, when I heard this, did not my blood boil? for the hussy 
had told me a lie, in saying that she was going to her aunt's ; and 
it was evident that she had done so, that she might go with this 
other fellow to the fair. I thought the matter over and over again, 
for, to tell you the truth, all I wanted then was revenge. I felt 
nothing but scorn for a woman who could act in so base a manner ; 
at the same time I wished to punish both her and him by spoiling 
their day's sport ; so at last I determined that I would start right 
away for the fair myself, and not only put her to shame, but give 
her fancy man a good drubbing, which I was well able to do. So 
I walks down to Point, and gets into a wherry, keeping a sharp 
look-out for their coming down from the Hard. At last I spied 

t 4 



280 



POOR JACK. 



them, and then I made the waterman pull away, so as to keep 
about three cables' length ahead of them, and thus I continued 
watching their billing and cooing, and grinding my teeth with 
rage, until we had come over to the other side. Now, you see, 
Tom, at that time there was no wooden pier at Ryde as there is 
now, and when the tide was out, there was such a long flat of 
mud that there was no landing ; so the way it was managed was, 
the wherries came in as far as they could, and were met by a horse 
and cart, which took out the passengers, and carried them through 
the mud and water to the hard ground. Well, when I pulled in, 
the man was there with his horse and cart, and I paid my 
fare, and stepped out of the wherry, expecting the man to drive 
off, and put me on shore ; but he seeing that there was another 
wherry close at hand, says he must wait for her passengers, and 
make one trip of it. I did not care how soon we met, and waited 
very patiently until they pulled up to us. They were not a little 
surprised to see me, and not a little annoyed either. As for Peggy 
she coloured to her elbows, and then tried to put up an impu- 
dent face on the matter. He looked both foolish and angry. They 
were both very smart. She had on a white gown with a yellow 
handkerchief on her shoulders, a green silk bonnet, and blue 
feathers, and he was figged out as fine as fivepence, with white 
jean trousers, and rings and chains, and Lord knows what. 

" < Well,' says Peggy, as bold as brass, < who'd have thought 
to have seen you here ?' 

" < I did not say that I was going to see my aunt,' replied I ; 
( but as you did, who would have expected to see you here?' 

" < Don't talk to me, young man,' said she, as red as fire, and 
turning away to her beau. 

" Just as she said this, the cart drove off, the horse floundering 
through the mud, which was about three feet deep, with a matter 
of six inches of water above it. As she turned away aft, I turned 
forward, thinking what I should do next, and then I cast my eyes 
down, and observed that it was a tilting cart as they use for car- 
rying out manure, and that if I took the two pegs out it would 
fall right back. I thought this a capital trick. The carman was 



POOR JACK. 



281 



sitting on his horse, and it couldn't matter to him, so I stepped out 
on the front of the cart, and standing on the shafts, I first pulled 
out one peg and then another, while they were busy talking to 
each other, with their heads so close, that his face was under her 
bonnet. As soon as the second peg was out, I helped up the 
front of the cart a little, and back it went, shooting them out 
right head foremost in the mud, You never saw such a scramble, 
for they had caught hold of each other in their fright, and they 
rolled and floundered, and were half smothered before they could 
recover their feet ; and then a pretty pickle they were in, wet to 
the skin, and covered with mud from one end to the other ; they 
could not see out of their eyes. Peggy did nothing but scream 
and flounder — she was frightened out of her wits — while the 
carman and I laughed ready to split. I gave him a half crown to 
drive on shore without them, which he did, and we left them to 
make their way out how they could ; and a pretty pickle they did 
come out at last. Thus was their day's pleasure as well as their 
clothes all spoilt ; and instead of dancing at the fair, and seeing 
all the sights, they were shivering in their wet clothes, and the 
laughing-stocks to all that saw them. 

" Depend upon it, I did not leave them after they had crawled out 
to the beach. The fellow was, as you may suppose, as savage as 
a bull, and very saucy, so I took off my jacket that I might not dirty 
myself, and gave him a couple of black eyes and a bloody nose for 
his trouble ; and as for Peggy, I pretended to be so sorry for her, 
and condoled her so much, that at last she flew at me like a tigress ; 
and as I knew that there was no honour, and plenty of mud, to be 
gained by the conflict, I took to my heels and ran off to the fair, 
where I met some of my friends and told them what had happened, 
and then we had a very merry day of it, and I felt quite cured 
of my love ; for, you see, Peggy looked so ugly and miserable when 
she was in the state I left her, that I had only to think of her as 
when I last saw her, and all my love was gone." 
" Did you ever meet her again ? " 

" I met her that very night ; for, you see, she had gone to a 
cottage and taken off her clothes, having insisted upon her fancy 



282 POOR JACK. 

man going back to Portsmouth to fetch her others to go home in. 
He dared not refuse, so off he went in the pickle that he was ; but 
he didn't come back again, for, you see, there was a warrant out 
against him for an affray at Bear Haven, in which a king's officer was 
killed; and after he had changed his own clothes, and was proceeding 
to get some for her from the Chequers, he was met by the con- 
stable who had the warrant, and carried off hand- cuffed to gaol, 
and afterwards he was transported; so she never saw him again. 
Well, Peggy, poor creature, had been waiting for him for hours, 
expecting his return ; and it was past ten o'clock when I was 
coming down with some others, and saw her at the door of the 
cottage weeping. — ' Good night, Peggy, says I.' 

" c O, Philip, do be kind, do come to me ; I'm frightened out of 
my life. I shall have to stay here all night.' 

" So, you see, I did feel some little pity for her, and I went up to 
her, and she told me how she had sent him, and he had never come 
back again. 'The fact is,' says I, 'Peggy, you ar'n't smart enough 
for such a frenchified chap as he is. He don't like to be seen in 
your company. Come, get up, and I will see you home at all 
events ; so I took charge of her, and saw her safe to her father's 
door. 

" ' Won't you come in ? ' said she. 

" ' No, thank you/ says I. 

" ' Won't you forgive me, Philip ? ' said she. 

" ' Yes,' says I, ' I'll forgive you, for old acquaintance-sake, and 
for one more reason.' 

" ' What's that ? ' says Peggy. 

" « Why,' says I, « for the lesson which you've learnt me. I've 
been made a fool of once, and it's your fault ; but if ever a woman 
makes a fool of me again, why then it's mine ; and so, Peggy, 
good-by for ever.' 

" So I turned away on my heel ; and as I left the transport the 
next trip, I never saw her again." 

" Well, Bramble," replied I, "I agree with you — and if ever a 
woman makes a fool of me again, it will be my fault. You know 
what's happened, so I don't mind saying so." 



POOR JACK. 



283 



"Why, Tom, in your present humour, you think so; but all do 
not keep to the same way of thinking as I did. till it was too late 
to think about marrying ; but still I do not think that I should have 
been happy as a single man, if it had not been for my falling in 
with Bessy. I should have been very lonely I expect, for I began 
to feel so. When you come to your own door, Tom, home looks 
cheerless if there is no bright eye to welcome you, and the older a 
man gets, the more he feels that he was not intended to live 
single. My yearning after something to love, and to love me, 
which is in our nature, was satisfied, first by having Bessy, and 
then by having you — and I'm thankful." 

" You might have married, and have been very unhappy." 

" I might, and I might have been very happy, had I chosen a 
wife as a man should do." 

" And how is that, pray, Bramble ? " 

" Why, Tom, I've often thought upon it. In the first place, look 
out for good temper : if you find that, you may be happy, even if 
your wife is a silly woman ; assure yourself first of her temper, and 
then you must judge her by the way in which she does those 
duties which have fallen to her lot ; for if a girl is a dutiful and 
affectionate daughter, there is little fear but that she will prove a 
loving and obedient wife. But I think we have had our spell here, 
Tom, and it's rather cold : rouse up one of those chaps, and tell 
him to come to the helm. I'll coil myself up and have a snoose 
till the morning, and do you do the same." 



CHAP. XXXIX. 

IN WHICH I RECEIVE A VERY SEVERE BLOW FROM A PARTY OR 
PARTIES UNKNOWN. 

The day after this conversation we fell in witli several vessels 
windbound at the entrance of the Channel. I took charge of 



284< POOR JACK. 

one, and the wind shifting to the S. W., and blowing strong, I car- 
ried her up to the Pool. As soon as I could leave her, I took a 
boat to go down to Greenwich, as I was most anxious to have a 
long conversation with Virginia. It was a dark squally night, with 
rain at intervals between the gusts of wind, and I was wet through 
long before I landed at the stairs, which was not until past eleven 
o'clock. I paid the waterman, and hastened up to my mother's 
house ; being aware that they w r ould either be all in bed, or about 
to retire. It so happened that I did not go the usual way, but 
passed by the house of Old Nanny ; and as I walked by with a quick 
step, and was thinking of her and her misfortunes, I fell over some- 
thing which, in the dark, I did not perceive, and which proved to 
be some iron railings, which the workmen who were fixing them 
up had carelessly left on the ground, previous to their returning to 
their work on the ensuing morning. Fortunately the spikes at the 
ends of them were from me, and I received no injury, except a 
severe blow on the shin ; and, as I stopped a moment to rub it, I 
thought that I heard a cry from the direction of Old Nanny's house ; 
but the wind was very high, and I was not certain. I stopped and 
listened, and it was repeated. I gained the door ; it was so dark 
that I groped for the latch. The door was open, and when I went 
in I heard a gurgling kind of noise and a rustling in her chamber. 
" Who's there ? — What's this ? " eried I ; for I had a foreboding 
that something was wrong. I tumbled over some old iron, knocked 
down the range of keys, and made a terrible din, when, of a sud- 
den, just as I had recovered my legs, I was throw n down again by 
somebody who rushed by me and darted out of the door. As the 
person rushed by me, I attempted to seize his arm, but I received 
a severe blow on the mouth, which cut my lip through, and at first 
I thought I had lost all my front teeth. 

I rose up ; I heard a heavy groaning ; so, instead of pursuing 
the robber, I felt my way into Nanny's chamber. " Nanny," said 
I, " mother, what's the matter ? " but there was no reply, except 
another groan. I knew where she kept her tinder-box and 
matches ; I found them, and struck a light ; and by the light of the 
match I perceived the candle and candlestick lying on the floor. 



POOR JACK. 



285 



I picked it up, lighted it, and then turned to the bed ; the flock 
mattress was above all, and the groans proceeded from beneath. I 
threw it off, and found Old Nanny still breathing, but in a state of 
great exhaustion, and quite insensible. By throwing water on her 
face, after some little while I brought her to her senses. The 
flaring of the candle reminded me that the shop door was open ; I 
went and made it fast, and then spoke to her. It was a long while 
before I could obtain any rational answer. She continued to groan 
and cry at intervals, "Don't leave me, Jack, don't leave me." At 
last she fell into a sort of slumber from exhaustion, and in this state 
she remained for more than an hour. One thing was evident to 
me, which was, that the party, whoever it might be, had attempted 
to smother the poor old woman, and that in a few seconds more he 
would have perpetrated the deed. 

At last Old Nanny roused up, and turning to me, said, " It's 
Jack, is it not ? I thought so. Oh, my poor head ! — What has 
happened ? " 

" That's what I want to know from you, mother," replied I ; 
" but first I will tell you what I know of the business;" which I 
did to give her time to collect her thoughts. 

" Yes," said she, " so it was. I was just in bed, and my candle 
was not out, when I heard a noise at the door, as if they were 
turning a key in it ; and then a man entered ; but he had some- 
thing over his face, I thought, or he had blacked it. ' What do 
you want? ' cried I ; < I come for a light, old woman,' said he. I 
cried, ' Thieves ! murder ! ' as loud as I could, and he ran up to 
me just as I was getting out of bed, and tried to smother me. I 
don't recollect any thing more till I heard your voice. Thank 
you, Jack, and God bless you ; if you hadn't come to the assist- 
ance of a poor old wretch like me, I should have been dead by 
this time." 

I felt that what she said was true, and I then asked her many 
questions, so as to lead to the discovery of the party. u How was 
he dressed?" inquired I. 

" I can't exactly say ; but do you know, Jack, I fancied that 
he had a pensioner's coat on ; indeed, I'm almost sure of it. I 



286 POOR JACK. 

think I tore off one of his buttons, — I recollect its giving way ; 
— I may be wrong, — my head wanders." 

But I thought that, most likely, Nanny was right ; so I looked 
down on the floor with the candle, and there I picked up a 
pensioner's button. " You're right, Nanny ; here is the button." 

" Well, now, Jack, I can't talk any more ; you wo'n't leave me 
to-night, I'm sure." 

" No, no, mother, that I will not ; — try to go to sleep." 

Hardly had Nanny laid her head down again, when it came 
across my mind like a flash of lightning that it must have been 
Spicer who had attempted the deed ; and my reason for so think- 
ing was, that the blow I had received on the mouth was not like 
that from the hand of a man, but from the wooden socket fixed to 
the stump of his right arm. The more I reflected upon it, the 
more I was convinced. He was a clever armourer, and had picked 
the lock; and I now recalled to mind what had never struck me 
before, that he had often asked me questions about Old Nanny, 
and whether I thought the report that she had money was cor- 
rect. 

It was daylight before Old Nanny woke up, and then she ap- 
peared to be quite recovered. I told her my suspicions, and my 
intentions to ascertain the truth of them as far as I possibly could. 

" Well, and what then ? " said Old Nanny. 

iC Why, then, if we bring it home to him, he will be hanged, as 
he deserves." 

" Now, Jack, hear me," said Old Nanny ; " you wo'n't do any- 
thing I don't wish, I'm sure ; and now I'll tell you, — that I never 
would give evidence against him or any other man to have him 
hanged. So, if you find out that it is him, do not say a word 
about it. Promise me, Jack." 

" Why, mother, I can't exactly say that I will ; but I will talk 
to Peter Anderson about it." 

" It's no use talking to him ; and, if you do, it must be under 
promise of secrecy, or I will not consent to it. Jack, Jack, recollect 
that my poor boy was hanged from my fault. Do you think I will 
hang another? Oh, no. Perhaps this very man had a foolish 



POOR JACK. 287 

wicked mother, like me, and has, like my boy, been led into guilt. 
Jack, you must do as I wish — you shall. Jack." 

•• Well, mother, I have no animosity against the man himself; 
and, if you forgive him, I do not see why I should do any thing.*' 

M I don't forgive him, Jack ; but I think of my own poor 
boy." 

" Well, mother, since you wish it, it shall be so ; and if I do 
prove that the man I suspect is the party, I will say nothing, and 
make Anderson promise the same, as I think he will. But how is 
it that people come to rob a poor old woman like you ? How is 
it, mother, that there is a report going about that you have 
money ? " 

" Is there such a report, Jack ? " 

(i Yes, mother, every one says so ; why, I do not know ; and as 
long as it is supposed, you will always be subject to attacks like 
this ; unless, indeed, if you have money, you were to put it away 
safely, and let everybody know that you have done so. Tell me 
truly, mother, have you any money ?" 

u Jack, what a boy you are to ask questions. Well, perhaps I 
have a little, — a very little ; but no one will ever find out where 
I have hidden it." 

" But they will try, mother, as this man has done; and you will 
always be in peril of your life. Why not place it into the hands 
of some safe person ? " 

" Safe person ! Who's safe now-a-days ? " 

" Why, for instance, there's Mr. Wilson." 

" Wilson ! what do you know about him, Jack, except that he 
has a smooth face and a bald head ? You're young, Jack, and 
don't know the world. The money's safe where it is, and no one 
will ever find it." 

" If so, who is to find it after " I stopped, for I did not 

like to say, after she was dead. 

" I know what you would have said, Jack ; who's to find it after 
mv death ? That's very true. I never thought of that, and I 
must will it away. I never thought of that, Jack ; it's very true ; 
and I'm glad that you have mentioned it. But who dare I tell ? 



288 POOR JACK. 

who can I trust ? — Can I trust you, Jack ? — can I ? — I ought ; 
for it's all for you, Jack, when I die." 

" Mother, whoever it may be for, you may, I hope, trust me." 

" Well, I think I can. I'll tell you where it is, Jack, and that 
will prove that it is for you, for nobody else will know where to 
find it. But, Jack, dear, dear Jack, don't you rob me, as my son did ; 
don't rob me, and leave me pennyless, as he did ; promise me?" 

" I never will, mother; you need not be afraid." 

" Yes ; so you say, and so he said ; — he swore and he cried 
too, Jack, — and then he took it all, and left his mother without 
a farthing." 

" Well, mother, then don't tell me ; I'd rather not know ; you 
will only be uncomfortable, and so let the money go." 

" No, Jack, that wo'n't do either ; 1 will tell you, for I can trust 
you. But first, Jack, go out and look behind the house, that there 
is no one listening at the window ; for if any one should hear — 
go, look round carefully, and then come back." 

I did as she wished, and then Nanny bid me hold my head 
closer to her, while she whispered, " You must take the back out 
of the fire-place, and then pull out. three bricks, and then put your 
hand into the hole, and you will find a small box ; and there you 
will find a little money, — a very little, Jack, hardly worth having ; 
but still it may be of some use ; and it's all yours when I die, Jack ; 
I give it to you." 

u Mother, I'm thankful for your kindness ; but I cannot touch 
it, if you do die, without you leave it to me by your will." 

" Ah ! that's true, Jack. Well, tell Anderson to come here, 
and I'll tell him I'll leave the money to you ; but I wo'n't tell him 
where it is ; I'll only say that I leave you every thing I have. 
They'll suppose that it's the shop and all the pretty things." Here 
she chuckled for some time. 

It was now broad daylight, and Nanny told me that she would 
like to get up, and see about a padlock being put to her door be- 
fore night ; so I wished her good-by, and left her. 



POOR' JACK. 289 

CHAP. .XL. 

SHOWING THE GREAT ADVANTAGES TO BE DERIVED FROM PATRONAGE. 

I left Old Nanny, and arrived at my mother's house in time for 
breakfast. I did not, however, find her in a very- good humour ; 
something had evidently ruffled her. Virginia, also, who welcomed 
me most cordially, was taciturn and grave. My mother made but 
one observation during our repast. 

" Well, Tom," said she, u you've found out what it is to wish to 
marry for love ; I only wish it may be a lesson to others." 

To this evident attack upon Virginia, at the expence of my feel- 
ings, I made no reply ; and soon afterwards my mother went to 
superintend her establishment, leaving me and my sister alone. 

" Tom," said she, " I hope by this time you are no longer suffering 
from your late cruel disappointment. I have felt for you, I assure 
you, and assuring you of that, will not again revert to the sub- 
ject. Let her be blotted from your memory as soon as possible." 

" Be it so, my dear Virginia ; but you are grave, and my mother 
is evidently out of humour. You must explain this." 

" That is easily done ; I have made a sad mistake. I was so 
much annoyed at my mother's system towards me that I ventured, 
without her knowledge, to write to Lady Hercules, requesting her 
protection and influence to procure me some situation as a com- 
panion to a lady, amanuensis, or reader. It appears that her ladyship 
was not very sincere in her professions when we had an interview 
with her ; at all events, her reply was any thing but satisfactory, 
and, unfortunately, it was addressed to my mother, and not to me. 
You can have no idea of my mother's indignation upon the receipt 
of it ; and she has not been sparing in her reproaches to me for 
having written without her knowledge, and having, by so doing, 
subjected her to such a mortification. I certainly am sorry to 
have done so. As for her ladyship's answer, it would have been 
to me more a subject of mirth than any other feeling. It has, 

u 



290 POOR JACK. 

however, proved the cause of much annoyance from my mother's 
continually harping upon it." 

" Have you the letter of Lady Hercules?" 

" I have a copy of it, which I took, intending to have sent it to 
you the next time that I wrote. I will bring it clown, if you will 
wait a minute." 

When Virginia returned, she put the following epistle into my 
hand : — 

" Mrs. Saunders, 

I have received a letter from your daughter, which, I presume, 
was forwarded as a specimen of her penmanship ; otherwise it was 
your duty to have addressed me yourself. I said to you, when I 
met you at Greenwich, that you were educating your daughter 
above her condition in life, and I now repeat it. My patronage is 
extended only to those who are not above their situations, which, 
I am sorry to observe, most people are now. Nevertheless, as I did 
say that I would exert my influence in your daughter's behalf, in 
consequence of your having been a decent well-behaved menial to 
me, I have made inquiry among my acquaintances, and find that I 
may be, possibly, able to place her with my friend, Lady Towser, as 
a ' boudoir assistant.' I have said possibly, as I am by no means 
sure that she will be equal to the situation, and the number of ap- 
plicants are very numerous. The enclosed paper from Lady 
Towser will give you an idea of what will be requisite : 

" Morning, up at 6, and nicely dressed ; come in in list shoes, 
and wait at bedside, in case Lady Towser should be troubled with 
her morning cough, to hand the emulsion, &e. At 9, to call and 
assist to dress Lady Towser's head tire-woman ; follow her to Lady 
T.'s chamber, and obey orders. Breakfast in housekeeper's room. 
After breakfast assist housemaid to dust ornaments, and on Satur- 
days and Wednesdays wash, comb, and examine dogs ; other days, 
comb and examine them only ; clean and feed macaw, cockatoo, 
and parrot, also canary and other birds ; bring up dogs' dinners, 
and prevent them fighting at meals. After dogs' dinners read to 
Lady T., if required ; if not, get up collars and flounces, laces, &c. 



POOR JACK. i'91 

for Lady T. and Lady T.'s tire-woman. After your own dinner, 
assist housekeeper as required in the still-room ; fine needle- 
work; repair clothes before they go to wash ; dress and brush 
Lady T.'s perukes ; walk out with dogs if weather is fine, and be 
careful to prevent their making any acquaintances whatever. 

" Evening. — Read to Lady T., write notes, look over bills, and 
keep general accounts ; if not wanted, to make herself useful in 
housekeeper's room, and obey all orders received from her or head 
tire-woman. At night see that the hot water is ready for Lady 
T.'s feet, and wait for her retiring to bed ; wash Lady T.'s feet, 
and cut corns, as required ; read Lady T. to sleep, or, if not re- 
quired to read, wait till she is certain that Lady T. is so. 

'• Now the only points In which I think your daughter may fail 
is in properly washing, combing, and examining the dogs, and 
cutting her ladyship's corns ; but surely she can practise a little of 
both, as she will not be wanted for a month. There can be no dif- 
ficulty about the first ; and, as for the latter, as all people in your 
rank of life have corns, she may practise upon yours or her father's. 
At ail events there can be no want of corns in Greenwich Hos- 
pital among the pensioners. I am desired to say that Lady T. 
gives no wages the first year ; and you will be expected to send 
your daughter neatly fitted out, that she may be able to remain in 
the room when there is company. If this offer will not suit, I can 
do nothing more ; the difficulty of patronage increases every day. 
You will send an answer. 

<• Virginia Hawkixgtrefylyax. 

" I was just closing my letter when Lady Scrimmage came in ; 
she tells me that Lady Towser is suited, and that you have no 
hopes of this situation. I have done my best. Lady Scrimmage 
has, however, informed me that she thinks she can, upon my re- 
commendation, do something for you in Greenwich, as she deals 
largely with a highly respectable and fashionable milliner of the 
same name as your own, and with whom it would be of the great- 
est advantage to your daughter to be placed as an apprentice, or 
something of that sort. This is an opportunity not to be lost, and 

u 2 



292 



POOR JACK. 



I therefore have requested Lady S. to write immediately ; and I 
trust, by my patronage, she will gain a most enviable situation." 

" That postscript is admirable," observed I, " and ought to have 
put my mother in a good humour. Is she not called by Lady Her- 
cules ' highly respectable and fashionable ? ' " 

" Very true," replied Virginia ; < ; but my mother cannot get 
over the first part of the letter, in which she is mentioned as « a 
decent and well-behaved menial.' She has since received a note 
from Lady Scrimmage, requesting her to take me in some capacity 
or another ; adding, by way of postscript, < You know you need 
not keep her if you do not like ; it is very easy to send her away 
for idleness or impertinence ; but I wish to oblige Lady Hercules, 
and so, pray, at all events, write and say that you will try her.' " 
" And what has my mother said in reply ? " 
" She did not show me the answer; but, from what I have col- 
lected from her conversation, she has written a most haughty, and, 
I presume it will be said, a most impertinent, letter to both the 
ladies; the one to Lady Scrimmage, accompanied with her bill, 
which has not been paid these three years. I am sorry that my 
mother has been annoyed. My father, to whom I related what 
had taken place, told me that my mother was very ill-treated by 
Lady Hercules; and that she had smothered her resentment with the 
hopes of benefiting her children by her patronage ; but that was at 
a time when she little expected to be so prosperous as she is now." 
" It is all true, my dear girl; I recollect my father telling me the 
whole story. However, I presume my mother, now that she can 
venture upon defiance, has not failed to resort to it." 

" That I am convinced of. I only hope that she will carry her 
indignation against great people so far, as not to court them as she 
has done, and abandon all her ridiculous ideas of making a match 
for me. After all, she has my welfare sincerely at heart, and, al- 
though mistaken in the means of securing it, I cannot but feel that 
she is actuated solely by her love for me." 

We then changed the conversation to Janet, about whom I 
could now speak calmly ; after which I narrated to her what had 



POOR JACK. 293 

occurred during the night, and my intention to consult with my 
father and Anderson upon the subject. 

Virginia then left me that she might assist her mother, and I 
hastened to my father's ward, where I found him, and, after our 
first greeting, requested that he would accompany me to Ander- 
son's office, as I had something to communicate to them both. 
As I walked along with my father, I perceived Spicer at a corner, 
with his foot on a stone step, and his hand to his knee, as if 
in pain. At last he turned round and saw us. I walked up to him, 
and he appeared a little confused, as he said, " Ah ! Tom, is that 
you ? I did not know you were at Greenwich." 

"I came here last night," replied I ; " and I must be off again 
soon. Are you lame ? " 

" Lame ! No ; what should make me lame ? " replied he, walking 
by the side of us as if he were not so. 

I looked at his coat, and perceived that the third button on the 
right side was missing. 

" You've lost a button, Spicer," observed I. 

" So I have," replied he ; and, as we had now arrived at An- 
derson's door, my father and I turned from him to walk in, and 
wished him good-by. 

Anderson was in his office ; and, as soon as the door was closed, 
I communicated to them what had occurred during the night, ex- 
pressing my conviction that Spicer was the party who had at- 
tempted the murder. In corroboration I reminded my father of the 
loss of the button from Spicer's coat, and produced the one which 
Nanny had torn off. 

" This is something more than suspicion," observed Anderson ; 
« but if, as you say, Old Nanny will not give evidence against him, 
I know not what can be done. Did you say that the old woman 
wanted to speak with me ? " 

i( Yes, and I really wish that you would call there oftener." 

« Well," replied Anderson, " I'll go, Tom j but, to be plain with 
you, I do not think that I can be of much use there. I have been 
several times : she will gossip as long as you please ; but, if you 
would talk seriously, she turns a deaf ear. You see, Tom, there's 



u 



294- POOR JACK. 

little to be gained when you have to contend with such a besetting 
sin as avarice. It is so powerful, especially in old age, that it ab- 
sorbs all other feelings. Still it is my duty, and it is also my sin- 
cere wish, to call her to a proper sense of her condition. The 
poor old creature is, like myself, not very far from the grave ; 
and, when once in it, it will be too late. I will go, Tom ; and 
most thankful shall I be, if, with God's help, I may prove of service 
to her." 

We then left old Anderson to his duties, and my father went 
home with me. We had a long conversation relative to my sister, 
as well as about my own affairs. I had intended to have remained 
some days at Greenwich, but this was the first time that I had 
been there since Janet's desertion, and the sight of every thing so 
reminded me of her, and made every thing so hateful to me, that I 
became very melancholy. My mother was, moreover, very cross, 
and my sister any thing but comfortable ; and, on the third day, 
having received a letter from Bramble, stating that he had arrived 
at Deal, and that the easterly winds having again set in, they talked 
of setting out again in the galley, I made this an excuse for leav- 
ing; and, for the first time, did I quit Greenwich without regret. 



CHAP. XLI. 

IN WHICH IT IS PROVED THAT SAILORS HAVE VERY CORRECT IDEAS AS 

TO METEMPSYCHOSIS. 

The clay after my return to Deal I again embarked with Bramble 
and three others, to follow up our vocation. The second day we 
were abreast of the Ram Head, when the men in another pilot 
boat, which had come out of Plymouth and was close to us, 
waved their hats and kept away to speak to us. We hove-to for 
thenio 



POO 11 JACK. 



295 



u Have you heard the news ? " cried one of the men. 

" No." 

" Lord Nelson has beat the French and Spanish Fleet.*' 

; - Glad to hear it — huzza ! " 

" Lord Nelson's killed." 

" Lord Nelson's killed !'" the intelligence was repeated from 
mouth to mouth, and then every voice was hushed ; the other 
boat hauled her wind without further communication, nor did we 
at the time think of asking for any more. The shock which was 
given to the whole country was equally felt by those who were 
seeking their bread in a small boat, and for some little while we 
steered our course in silence. 

"What d'ye say, my lads?'' said Bramble, who first broke 
silence; " shall we haul up for Cawsand, and get a paper? I 
sha'n't be content till I know the whole history." 

This was consented to unanimously ; no one thought of piloting 
vessels for the moment, and earning food for their families. 
When the country awarded a public funeral to our naval hero, 
it did not pay him a more sincere tribute than was done in this 
instance by five pilots in a galley. At Cawsand we obtained the 
newspaper, and after a few pots of beer, we again made sail for 
the mouth of the Channel. It hardly need be observed, that the 
account of this winding-up, as it proved, of our naval triumphs, 
with the death of Nelson, was the subject of conversation for more 
than one day. On the third, we were all separated, having fallen 
in with many wind-bound vessels who required our services. 
The one I took charge of was a West Indiaman, deeply laden 
with rum and sugar, one of a convoy which were beating about 
in the chops of the Channel. As we were standing out from the 
English coast, the captain and one of the passengers were at the 
taffrail close to me. 

M What do you think of the weather, pilot ? " said the captain. 
« I think we shall have a change of wind, and dirty weather 
before twelve hours are over our heads," replied I. 

'•Well,'" said he, "that's my opinion; there is a cloud rising in 

u -i 



296 



POOR. JACK. 



the south west ; and,, look, there are some Mother Carey's chickens 
dipping in the water astern." 

"Where?" said the passenger, a curly-headed Creole, aboiat 
twenty years old. 

'•'Those small birds," replied the captain, walking forward. 

The passenger went down below, and soon returned with his 
double-barrelled fowling-piece. 

"I have long wished to shoot one of those birds," said he ; "and 
now they are so near, I think I may get a shot." 

He raised his piece several times without firing, when the 
captain came aft, and perceiving his intention, caught his arm as 
he was about to level again. 

" I beg your pardon, Mr. Higgins, but I really must request 
that you will not fire at those birds." 

"Why not?" 

"Because I cannot permit it." 

"But what's to hinder me?" replied the young man, colouring 
up ; " they are not in your manifest, I presume." 

" No, sir, they are not ; but I tell you frankly, that I would not 
kill one for a hundred pounds. Nay, I would as soon murder one 
of mv fellow-creatures." 



"Well, that may be your feeling, but it's not 



mine. 



" Nevertheless, sir. as it is, to say the least of it, very unlucky, 
you will oblige me by yielding to my request." 

" Nonsense ! — just to humour your superstitious feeling." 

" We are not in port yet, Mr. Higgins ; and I must insist upon 
it you do not fire. You have taken my gunpowder, and I cannot 
allow it to be used in that way." 

During this altercation I observed that many of the sailors had 
come aft, and, although they said nothing, were evidently of the 
same opinion as the captain. I was aware that there was a super- 
stitious feeling among the seamen relative to these birds, but I 
had never seen it so strongly exemplified before. 

The mate gave a wink to the captain, behind the passenger's 
back, and made a motion to him to go forward, which the captain 



POOR JACK. -97 

did. The passenger again raised his gun, when it was seized by 
two of the seamen. 

- You must not fire at these birds, sir !" said one of them. 

"Why, you scoundrel? -I'll give you the contents of both 
barrels if vou don't leave my gun alone." 

-No, vou wont -you're not among niggers now, master," 
replied the seaman ; « and as you have threatened to shoot me, 
1 must take the gun from you." 

A scuffle ensued, during which both barrels were discharged in 
the air. and the gun taken from Mr. Higgins, who was boiling 
with rage : the gun was handed forward, and I saw it no more. 
Mr. Higgins, in a state of great excitement, went down into the 

cabin. 

The captain then came aft to me, when I observed that I had 
no idea that seamen were so very particular on that point; and 
I thought that thev had gone too far. 

-You mav think so, pilot," replied he; "but when I tell you 
that I fully believe that these birds are as good as ourselves, you 
will not be surprised—" 

* How do vou mean, as good as ourselves ? 
« I believe that thev were every one sailors like ourselves in 
former times : thev are now the sailors' friends, come to warn us 
of the approaching storm, and I can tell you a circumstance 
which occurred in the West Indies, which fully proves to me that 
thev are not wantonly killed without a judgment upon those who 
do so. I never believed it myself till then ; but old Mason, who is 
now on board, was one of the seamen of the vessel in which the 
circumstance happened." 

« Indeed !" replied I, " I should like to hear it." 
-I cant tell vou now," said he ; " I must go down and satisfy 
that puppy Creole, whose sugars are on board; he will otherwise 
make *uch a row between me and the owners, that I may lose the 
command of the vessel. And yet, would you imagine it ? although 
he will not credit what I tell him about Mother Carey's chickens, 
the foolish young man firmly believes in the Obi." 

I did not think one superstition more ridiculous than the other, 



298 POOR JACK. 

but still, as I always found that it was useless to argue such 
points, I said nothing, and the captain went down into the cabin to 
pacify Mr. Higgins. 

It was late in the first watch, and when the passengers had 
retired to bed, that the captain came on deck. "Well," said he, 
" I told Mr. Higgins my story, and as there was a bit of Obi non- 
sense in it, he believed it, and he has not only made friends, but 
thanked me for not having allowed him to shoot the birds ; and 
now I'll tell you the real story : — 

" A schooner was coming down from the Virgin Isles with 
sugar and passengers to Antigua, where I was lying with my ship. 
She had a fine young fellow of the name of Shedden on board ; 
and, besides other passengers, there was an old black woman, who, 
where she resided, had always been considered as an Obi woman. 
I saw her afterwards ; and you never beheld such a complication 
of wrinkles as she was, from her forehead to her feet, and her 
woolly head was as white as snow. They were becalmed as 
soon as they were clear of the islands ; and, as it happened, some 
Mother Carey's chickens were flying about the stern. Shedden 
must needs get at his gun to shoot them. The old black woman 
sat near the tafFrail ; she saw him with his gun,, but she said 
nothing. At last he fired, and killed three of them. 

" ' There are three down ! ' cried out some of the other passengers. 

" ' How many ?' said the old woman, raising her head ; ' three ! 
Then count the sharks which are coming up.' 

" ' Count the sharks, mother ! why count them ? There's 
plenty of them,' replied Shedden, laughing. 

" « I tell you that there will be but three sent,' replied the old 
woman, who then sunk down her head and said no more. 

" Well, the negroes who were passengers on board, most of 
them Mr. Shedden's slaves, looked very blank, for they knew that 
old Etau never spoke without reason. In about ten minutes 
afterwards, three large sharks swam up to the vessel, with their 
fins above water. 

" 'There's the three sharks, sure enough !' said the passengers. 

M 'Are they come?' said Etau, raising her head. 



toor jack. 299 

"'Yes, moder, dere dey be — very large shark,' replied one 
of the negroes. 

" ' Then three are doomed,' said the old woman ; ' and here we 
stay, and the waves shall not run, nor the wind blow, till the three 
sharks have their food. I say — three are doomed !' 

" The passengers were more or less alarmed with this prophecy 
of old Etau's, according as they put faith in her ; however, they 
all went to bed quite well, and the next morning they got up the 
same. Still there was not a breath of wind ; the whole sea was as 
smooth as glass, and the vessel laid where she was the night 
before, in about six fathoms water, about a mile from the reef, 
and you could see the coral rocks beneath her bottom as plain as 
if they were high and dry ; and what alarmed them the next 
morning was, that the three large sharks were still slowly swimming 
round and round the schooner. All that day it remained a dead 
calm, and the heat was dreadful, although the awnings were 
spread. Night came on, and the people,, becoming more frightened, 
questioned old Etau ; but all the answer she gave was, ' Three are 
doomed !' 

" The passengers and crew were now terrified out of their 
wits, and they all went to bed with very melancholy forebodings, 
for the elements appeared as if they were arrested till the penalty 
was paid. For, you observe, pilot, there is always a light 
breeze as regular as the sun rises and goes down ; but now the 
breezes only appeared to skirt the land, and when they came 
from the offing, invariably stopped two or three miles from the 
schooner. It was about midnight that there was a stir in the 
cabin, and it appeared that Mr. Shedden had the yellow fever, 
and shortly afterwards another white man, a sailor belonging 
to the schooner, then one of Mr. Shedden's slaves. WeH, 
there the fever stopped, — no one else was taken ill, — the 
usual remedies were applied, but before morning they were all 
three delirious. At sunrise it was still calm, and continued so till 
sunset ; and all the day the passengers were annoyed by the back 
fins of the three sharks, which continued to swim about. Again 
they went to bed; and just before one o'clock in the morning 



300 roou jack. 

Mr. Shedden, in his delirium, got out of his bed, and, rushing on 
the deck, jumped overboard before any one could prevent him; 
and old Etau, who never left where she sat, was heard to say, 
' One!' and the bell was struck one by the seaman forward, who did 
not know what had happened. Morning came on again, and there 
were but two sharks to be seen. About noon the other white man 
died, and he was thrown overboard ; and as one shark seized his 
body and swam away, old Etau cried out, ' Two ! ' An hour after- 
wards the negro died, and was thrown overboard and carried 
away by the third shark, and old Etau cried out, ' Three ! the 
price is paid ! ' 

" Well, every one crowded round the old woman to hear what 
she would say, and they asked her if all was over, and whether 
they should have any wind? and her reply was, — 'When the 
three birds come from the sea to replace those which were killed.' 
For you see, pilot, if one of these birds are killed, it is certain 
that some one of the crew must die and be thrown overboard to 
become a Mother Carey chicken, and replace the one that has 
been destroyed. Well, after a time, although we never saw 
them rise, three Mother Carey's chickens were seen dipping and 
flying about astern of the schooner ; and they told old Etau, who 
said, ' You'll have wind and plenty — and plenty of waves to make 
up for the calm ;' and so they had, sure enough, for it came on 
almost a hurricane, and the schooner scudded before it under 
bare poles until she arrived at Antigua, with her bulwarks washed 
away, and a complete wreck. I was there at the time, and old 
Mason, who was on board, told me the story, and asked me to 
take him, as he would not remain on board of the schooner. 
And now I leave you to judge, after knowing this to be a fact, 
whether I was not right in preventing Mr. Higgins from shooting 
the Mother Carey chickens ?V 

•'Why, yes," replied I; "with such a fact before my eyes, I 
should have done the same." 

Mr. Higgins not venturing to kill any of these receptacles for 
the souls of departed seamen, we arrived safely at the Downs, 
where I gave up charge to a river pilot, for the other vessels which 



roou jack. 301 

Bramble and our companions had taken charge of, were all bound 
to the Downs, and arrived at nearly the same time that I did, and 
we had agreed to embark again in the galley, and run out in 
quest of the remainder of the convoy. This we did on the follow- 
ing day, much to the vexation of Bessy, who declared we only 
came on shore to be off again. I ought to observe that Bessy and 
I had become much more intimate since the explanation which 
had taken place ; and although it never entered my head that I 
should ever feel towards her more than as a brother to a sister, I 
was pleased and soothed with the touching proofs of kindness and 
commiseration which she took every opportunity of showing 
towards me. 



CHAP. XLII. 

A HEAVY GALE, A WRECK AND A RESCUE. 

We had run out in our galley as far as the Start, when the appeal - 
ance of the weather became very threatening. It was just about 
the time of the equinoctial gales ; and there was a consultation 
among us whether we should run into Torquay or return to Deal. 
Bramble observed, that as the gale coming on would, in all 
probability, blow for three days, he thought it was no use re- 
maining all that time at Torquay, where we should be put to 
extra expense, and that we should be better on shore at our own 
homes. This remark decided the point; and about dusk we put 
the boat's head along shore for up Channel. The wind was at that 
time about S.S.W., but occasionally shifting a point or two. The 
sky had become covered over with one black mass of clouds, 
which hung down so low that they appeared almost to rest on the 
water ; and there was that peculiar fitful moaning which is ever 
the precursor of a violent gale of wind. At night-fall we reefed 



302 POOH JACK. 

our lug sails; and, while one sat at the helm, the rest of us 
lounged against the gunnel, buttoned up in our pilot-jackets ; some 
shutting their eyes, as if to invite sleep, others watching the waves, 
which now rose fast, and danced and lopped at the weather broad- 
side as if they would fain have entered into the boat. But of that 
we had little fear; our galley was one of the finest boats that 
ever swam, and we felt as secure as if we were on board of a three- 
decked ship. As the night advanced, so did the wind increase 
and the sea rise ; lightning darted through the dense clouds, and 
for a moment we could scan the horizon. Every thing was 
threatening ; yet our boat, with the wind about two points free, 
rushed gallantly along, rising on the waves like a sea-bird, and 
sinking into the hollow of the waters as if she had no fear of any 
attempt on their part to overwhelm her. Thus did we continue 
to run on during the night, every hour the gale increasing ; the 
billows mounting up until they broke in awful and majestic crests, 
and often so near to us that we presented our backs in a close 
file against the weather bulwarks to prevent any body of water 
from pouring in. 

" We shall have light soon," observed one of the men. 

et And we shall want it to beach the boat in such weather as 
this/' replied another. " We shall have it harder yet before day." 

" Depend upon it this will be a mischievous gale/' observed 
Bramble, "and our coast will be strewed with wrecks. Any 
ships under canvass now, between the Channel shores, will stand but 
a poor chance against this heavy sea, which bears down with such 
force. I'd rather be in this boat now than in any vessel in mid 
Channel." 

" And I had rather be on shore than in either," rejoined I. 

" Well, Tom/' said one of the pilots, " I do really believe you 
this time." 

When it was broad daylight, the coast to leeward presented a 
wild and terrific scene, lashed as it was by the furious surf 
which dashed its spray half way up the towering white cliff's, 
for it was within two hours of high water. The waves were now 
really mountains high, and their broad surfaces were pitted into 



POOR JACK. 303 

little waves by the force of the wind, which covered the whole 
expanse of waters with one continued foam. On our weather- 
bow a vessel with her foremast gone was pitching heavily, and at 
times nearly buried beneath the wild tumult. Her fate was sealed ; 
to leeward were the cliffs of the South Foreland, and on our lee- 
bow lay the shelving beach of Deal. 

"This will be awkward landing, shipmates," said Bramble; 
"and yet we must try it. I'll fill my pipe — hope it won't be the 
last." 

Although not said in a serious manner, there were few of us 
whose hearts did not flutter responsively to this surmise, for the 
danger became every minute more imminent, and we knew what 
a terrific surf there must be then running on the shingle beach. 
But we now rapidly approached the shore; we were near to the 
floating light, and in the roadstead not a vessel remained ; 
all had weighed and preferred being under what canvass they 
could bear. At last we were within two cables length of the beach, 
and even at this distance from it, we were surrounded with the 
breakers ; the surf broke many feet high, and roared as it rushed 
up with a velocity that was appalling, dashing the foam right to 
the door of Bramble's cottage, which was forty or fifty yards 
higher than it generally gained to, even in very bad weather : we 
now lowered our sails, stowed them in the boat, and got our oars 
to pass, backing against the surf to prevent it from forcing us on 
the beach until the proper time. 

It may not, perhaps, be known to many of my readers, that there 
is a sort of regularity even in the wild waves ; that is, occasionally 
a master wave, as it is termed, from being of larger dimensions than 
its predecessors, pours its whole volume on the beach ; after 
which, by watching your time, you will find that two waves m ill 
run into one another, and, as it were, neutralize each other, so 
that, for a few seconds, you have what they call a smooth ; the 
safest plan of landing then is to watch these two chances, either 
to run in on the master wave, or to wait till the arrival of the 
smooth. 

The latter is generally preferred, and with good reason, as unless 



304- POOR JACK'. 

a boat can be forced in as fast as the master wave runs in, you 
are worse off than if you had landed at any other time. 

The helm had been resigned to Bramble, who ordered me to go 
forward with the boat's painter, a long coil of rope, and stand 
ready either to leap out with it, or throw it to those on shore, as 
might be most advisable ; the other men were sitting on the 
thwarts, their long oars in the rollocks, backing out as desired, 
and all ready to strain every nerve, when the order was given by 
Bramble to pull in. 

The danger which we were about to incur was fully evident to 
the crowds which were assembled on the beach ; not only the pilots, 
who stood there ready to assist us — some with ropes with iron 
hooks at the end of them — others all ready to dart into the surf 
to hold on the boat, or, if required, to link their arms together, 
so as to form a living chain which the undertow could not drag 
away with it ; higher up, women and children, their clothes 
driven by the furious gale, with one hand holding on their caps, 
and with the other supporting themselves by the gunnels of the 
boats hauled up, the capsterns, or perhaps an anchor with its fluke 
buried in the shingle, were looking on with dismay and with beating 
hearts, awaiting the result of the venturous attempt, and I soon dis- 
covered the form of Bessy, who was in advance of all the others. 

After a careful watching for perhaps two minutes on the part 
of Bramble, he gave the word, and on dashed the galley towards 
the strand, keeping pace with the wild surges, and although buried 
in the foam, not shipping one drop of water. 

" Now, my men, give way, — for your lives give way," cried 
Bramble, as a cresting wave came towering on, as if in angry pur- 
suit of us. The men obeyed, but, in their exertions, the stroke 
oar snapped in two, the man fell back, and prevented the one 
behind him from pulling ; our fate was sealed ; the surge poured 
over, and throwing us broadside to the beach, we were rolled over 
and over in the boiling surf. A cry was heard — a cry of terror 
and despair — on the part of the women. I heard it as I was swept 
away by the undertow, and the next wave poured over me ; but 
all was activity and energy on the part of the men who were on 



: 



- 






Mr ' 
; ■%■■■■- . 




■ 



POOR JACK. 305 

the beach ; the next wave that run in, they recovered me and two 
more by linking their arms and allowing the surf to break over 
them. We were so much bruised that we could not stand ; they 
dragged us up, and left us to the women. Bramble and four others 
were still struggling for life; again two were saved — but the men 
on the beach were exhausted by their strenuous exertions. 

I had just recovered myself so as to sit up, when I perceived 
that they were not acting in concert as before ; indeed, in the last 
attempt, several of them had narrowly escaped with their own lives. 
Bessy was now down among them wildly gesticulating : Bramble 
still floated on the boiling surf; but no chain was again formed; 
the wave poured in bearing him on its crest ; it broke, and he was 
swept away again by the undertow, which dragged him back with a 
confused heap of shingles, clattering one over the other as they de- 
scended. I saw him again, just as another wave several feet in 
height was breaking over him — I felt that he was lost ; when Bessy, 
with a hook rope in her hand, darted towards him right under the 
wave as it turned over, and as she clasped his body, they both disap- 
peared under the mountain surge. Another shriek was raised by the 
women, while the men stood as if paralysed. In my excitement I 
had gained my legs, and I hastened to seize the part of the rope 
which remained on the beach. Others then came and helped j 
we hauled upon it ; and found that there was weight at the end. 
Another sea poured in ; we hastily gathered in the slack of the 
rope, and when the water retreated, we found both Bramble and 
Be=sy clinging to the rope. In a moment the men rushed down and 
hauled up the bodies. Bramble had hold of the rope by both hands 
— it was the clutch of death ; Bessy had her arms round her 
father's neck ; both were senseless. The boatmen carried them 
up to the cottage, and the usual methods of recovery were resorted 
to with success. Still we had to lament the death of two of our best 
pilots, whose loss their wives and children were loudly wailing, 
and whose bodies were not found for many days afterwards. 
Alas ! they were not the only ones who were lamented. Upwards 
of three hundred vessels were lost during that dreadful gale, and 
hardly a sea-port or fishing town, but bewailed its many dead. 

x 



306 POOR JACK. 

Whether it was that the women who attended Bessy were more 
active than the men, or that she was younger, and her circulation 
of blood was more rapid, or because she was a female, certain it 
is that Bessy first recovered her speech, and her first question 
was " Where was her father ? " Bramble did not speak, but fell 
into a sleep immediately after he was brought to life. I had 
changed my clothes, and was watching by him for an hour or more 
when he woke up. 

" Ah ! Tom, is that you ? Where's Bessy ?" 

" She is in bed, but quite recovered." 

"Quite recovered — I recollect. I say, Tom, ain't she a fine 
creature ? God bless her. Well, she owes me nothing now at all 
events. I think I should like to get up, Tom. I wonder whether 
I smashed my old pipe on the shingle ? just look into my wet jacket. 
I say, Tom, were they all saved ? " 

" No," I replied ; " Fisher and Harrison Mere both drowned." 

" Poor fellow.. ! I wish they had been spared. Fisher has 
seven children, — and Harrison, he has a wife, I think." 

" Yes, and two children, father." 

" Poor woman ! God's will be done ! He giveth and he 
taketh away ! Tom, I must get up and see Bessy." 

I assisted Bramble to dress, and as soon as he had put on his 
clothes he went to Bessy's room. I staid at the door. " You may 
come in, Tom ; she's muffled up in her blankets, and fast asleep." 

" Quite fast," said Mrs. Maddox ; " she has slept more than an 
hour. Dear heart, it will do her good." 

Bramble kissed Bessy's pale forehead, but it did not waken her. 
" Look, Tom," said Bramble, "look at that smooth, clear skin — 
those pretty features. Look at the delicate creature ! and would 
you have thought that she would have dared what no man dared 
to do — that she would have defied those elements raging in their 
might, and have snatched their prey from their very grasp ? Did 
I ever imagine, when I brought her as a helpless baby on shore, 
that she would ever have repaid the debt with such interest, or 
that such a weak instrument should have been chosen by the 
Lord to save one who otherwise must have perished ? But His 



POOR JACK. 



307 



ways are not our ways, and He works as He thinks fit. Bless you, 
bless you, my Bessy, — and may your fond heart never be again 
put to such trial ! Is she not beautiful, Tom ? just like a piece of 
cold marble. Thank Heaven, she is not dead, but sleepeth!" 

T certainly never did look upon Bessy with so much interest ; 
there was something so beautifully calm in her countenance as 
she lay there like an effigy on a tomb, hardly appearing to 
breathe ; and when I thought of the courage and devotion shown 
but a few hours before by the present almost inanimate form, I 
bent over her with admiration, and felt as if I could kneel before 
the beautiful shrine which contained such an energetic and noble 
spirit. While this was passing through my mind, Bramble had 
knelt by the bed-side and was evidently in prayer : when he rose up 
he said, * Come away, Tom ; she is a maiden, and may feel ashamed 
if she awaken and find us men standing by her bed-side. Let me 
know when she wakes up, Mrs. Maddox, and tell her I have been 
in to see her; and now, Tom, let's go down; — I never felt the want 
of a pipe so much as I do now." 




308 



POOR JACK. 



CHAP. XLIII. 

A SCENE IN THE HOSPITAL, AND A STRANGE DISCOVERY. 

In a very few days Bramble and Bessy were sufficiently reco- 
vered to resume their usual avocations ; but the former expressed 
no willingness to embark again, and Bessy's persuasions assisted 
to retain him at the cottage. With me it was different; I was 
still restless and anxious for change ; my feelings toward Bessy 
were those of admiration and esteem, but not yet of love ; yet I 
could not help recalling to mind the words of Bramble, " Observe 
how she performs those duties which fall to her lot ; if she is a good 
daughter she will make a good wife." I felt that she would make 
a good wife ; and I wished that I could have torn from my bosom 
the remembrance of Janet, and have substituted the form of Bessj 
in her place. We had been at the cottage nearly a week, when ] 
received a letter from Anderson ; he informed me that he had 
visited Old Nanny, who had made her will in due form, and con- 
fided it to him ; and that he thought that she was more inclined to 
listen to him than she had before been ; that my father, and 
mother, and sister were well ; and that Spicer had been obliged to 
go into the hospital, with an abscess in his knee, occasioned by 
running something into it ; and that it was reported that he was 
very ill, and, in all probability, amputation must take place. 
I felt convinced that Spicer must have, in his hasty retreat, fallen 
over the iron railings which lay on the ground, and which had, as 
I mentioned, tripped me up ; but with this difference, that, as the 
spikes of the railing were from me, and consequently I met 
with little injury, they must have been towards him, and had 
penetrated his knee : and thus it was that he had received the 
injury. Anderson also stated that they were very busy at the 
Hospital, receiving the men who had been maimed in the glo- 
rious battle of Trafalgar. Altogether, I made up my mind that I 



POOR JACK. 309 

would take the first ship that was offered for pilotage up the 
river, that I might know more of what was going on ; and, as 
we sat down to supper, I mentioned my intentions to Bramble. 

" All's right, Tom, you're young, and ought to be moving ; 
but, just now, I intend to take a spell on shore. I have pro- 
mised Bessy, and how can I refuse her anything, dear girl ! I 
don't mean to say that I shall never pilot a vessel again ; but I 
do feel that I am not so young as I was. and this last affair has 
shaken me not a little, that's the truth of it. There's a time for 
all things ; and when a man has enough he ought to be con- 
tent, and not venture more. Besides, I can't bear to make Bessy 
unhappy ; so, you see, I've half promised — only half, Bessy, you 
know.'" 

" I think you would have done right if you had promised al- 
together," replied I ; " you have plenty to live upon, and are now 
getting a little in years. Why should you not stay on shore, and 
leave them to work who want the money ? " 

" Bessy's eyes beamed gratefully towards me, as I thus assisted 
her wishes. " You hear, father," said she, fondling him, " Tom 
agrees with me." 

" Ah ! " replied Bramble, with a sigh, " if ; but we cannot 

have all we wish in this world." 

Bessy and I both felt what he would have referred to, and we 
were silent. She cast down her eyes, and appeared busy with her 
fork, although she was eating nothing. I no longer felt the re- 
pugnance that I had a short time before ; and I was in deep re- 
verie, watching the changes of her beautiful countenance, when 
she looked up. Our eyes met ; she must have read my thoughts in 
mine, f©r from that moment each hour increased our intimacv and 
confidence. We were no longer afraid of each other. 

A day or two after this conversation an opportunity was given 
to me of going up the river, which I did not neglect ; and having 
delivered up charge of the ship, I hastened down to Greenwich. 
I found every thing in statu quo at my mother's house, and Vir- 
ginia much pleased at there being no lodgers. Anderson I met 

x 3 



310 POOR JACK. 

walking with Ben the Whaler and ray father. He told me that 
Spicer had refused to have his leg amputated, when the surgeon 
had pointed out the necessity of the operation ; and that it was 
now said that it was too late to have the operation performed ; and 
that there was little or no chance of his recovery. They asked me 
many questions relative to the narrow escape of Bramble, and the 
behaviour of Bessy. 

As soon as I could get away, I set off to the Hospital to see 
Spicer ; for, as the reader must be aware, I had many reasons for 
having communication with him ; — not that I expected that at 
first he would acknowledge any thing ; I knew that his heart was 
hardened, and that he had no idea of his danger ; but I had his 
secrets, — he was indeed in my power ; and I hoped, by terrifying 
him, to obtain the information which I wished. 

I found him in bed, in the corner of the Hospital ward, to the 
left. He was looking very pale, and apparently was in great 
pain. 

" Spicer," said I, n I have come to see you ; I am sorry to hear 
of your accident. How is your leg ? is it better ?" 

" No, not much," replied he, writhing, " I am in great pain ; 
another man would scream out with the agony ; but I'm like the 
wolf, — I'll die without complaint." 

c< But you don't think that you're going to die, Spicer?" 

" No, Jack, I don't think that, I never have thought that, 
when I have been worse than now. I'll never believe that I'm 
dead until I find myself so. It must come some time or another, 
but I'm hale and hearty in constitution as yet, and my time is not 
yet come." 

" It was the iron railings which you fell over, was it not ? I 
fell over them myself the same night when I landed, on the Mon- 
day, going up to Old Nanny's." 

Ci Who told you it was those cursed spikes ? Well, well, so it 
was ; but not on the Monday, Jack, it was on the Wednesday." 

" Nay, that cannot be ; for, on the Tuesday, as I went down to 
the beach, I saw them all fixed up in the stonework, and soldered 
in. It must have been on the Monday — the night on which Old 



POOR JACK, 311 

Nanny was nearly smothered by some one who went in to rob her. 
I came there just in time to save her life ; — indeed, if you re- 
collect, you were lame the next day, when I met you in the Hos- 
pital." 

M Well, Jack, you may think what you please ; but I tell you 
it was on the Wednesday." 

" Then you must have fallen over something else." 

" Perhaps I did." 

" Well, it's of no consequence. I'm glad to find that you're so 

much better ; for I was told that the doctor had said " 

" What did the doctor say?" interrupted Spicer. 
<* Why, it's better to tell the truth ; he said it was impossible 
for you to get over it — that the inflammation was too great to 
allow of amputation now, and that it must end in mortification." 

" He said that ! " said Spicer, wildly, raising himself on his 
elbow. 

" Yes, he did ; and it's known all over the Hospital." 
« Well," replied Spicer, " he may have said so ; but I think J 
ought to know best how I feel. He'll be here in half an hour or 
so, and then I'll put the question to him. I'm a little tired, Jack, 
so don't speak to me any more just now." 
" Shall I go away, Spicer?" 

" No, no, stay here. There's a book or two ; read them till I 
feel a little stronger." 

That my communication had had an effect upon Spicer was 
evident. He was startled at the idea of the near approach of death 
which he had not contemplated. Alas ! who is not ? He shut his 
eyes, and I watched him ; the perspiration trickled down his fore- 
head. I took up the book he had pointed out to me ; it was the 
History of the Buccaneers, with plates ; and I thought then that it 
was a parallel of Spicer's own career. I looked at the plates, for 
I was not much inclined to read. In a few minutes Spicer opened 
his eyes. " I am better now, Jack, the faintness has passed away. 
What book is that ? — oh, the Buccaneers. That and Dampier's 
Voyages were the only two books of my father's library that I 
ever thought worth reading. Have you ever read it ? " 

x 4 



312 



POOR JACK. 



" No," replied I, " I never have. Will you lend it to me ?" 
" Yes ; I'll give it to you, Jack, if you like." 
" Thank you. Was your father a sailor, Spicer, as well as 
you ? " 

" Yes, Jack, a sailor every inch of him." 

" Did you ever sail with him ? " 

" No, he died about the time that I was born." 

Here the doctor, who Mas going round the wards, came up to 
Spicer, and asked him how he felt. « Pretty well, Doctor," said 
he. 

" Come, we must look at your leg, my man ; it will require 
dressing. Ts it very painful ? " 

" Why, yes, sir : it has been very painful, indeed, all night." 

The Hospital mates unbandaged Spicer's leg, and took off the 
poultices ; and I was horrified when I saw the state which his leg 
was in — one mass of ulceration from the middle of the thigh 
down to half way below his knee, and his ankle and foot swelled 
twice their size ; a similar inflammation extending up to his hip. 
The doctor compressed his lips, and looked very grave. He re- 
moved some pieces of flesh, it was then cleaned, and fresh poul- 
tices put on. 

w Doctor," said Spicer, who had watched his countenance, 
" they say in the Hospital that you have stated that I cannot live. 
Now, I should wish to know your opinion myself on this subject, 
as I believe I am the most interested party." 

" Why, my man," said the doctor, " you certainly are in great 
danger; and if you have any affairs to settle, perhaps it will be 
prudent so to do." 

" That's a quiet way of saying there is no hope for me ; is it 
not, doctor ? " replied Spicer. 

" I fear, my good man, there is very little." 

" Tell me plainly, sir, if you please," replied Spicer; 'Ms there 
any?" 

" I am afraid that there is not, my good man ; it's unpleasant to 
say so ; but perhaps it is kindness to tell the truth." 



POOR JACK. 313 

" Well, sir, that is honest. May I ask you how long I may ex- 
pect to live ? " 

" That will depend upon when the mortification takes place — 
about three days ; after that, my poor fellow, you will probably be 
no more. Would you like the chaplain to come and see you ? " 

" Thank you, sir ; when I do I'll send for him." 

The doctor and the attendants went away to the other patients. 
I was silent. At last Spicer spoke. 

" Well, Jack, you were right ; so it is all over with me. Some- 
how or another, although I bore up against it, I had an inkling of 
it myself, the pain has been so dreadful. Well, we can die but 
once, and I shall die game." 

" Spicer," said I, " that you will die without fear I know very 
well ; but, still, you know that you should not die without feeling 
sorry for the sins you have committed, and praying for pardon. 
We have all of us, the very best of us, to make our peace with 
Heaven ; so, had I not better tell the chaplain to come and talk 
with you ? " 

' ; No, Jack, no ; I want no parsons praying by my side. What's 
done is done, and can't be undone. Go now, Jack, I wish to get 
a little sleep." 

u Shall I come and see you to-morrow, Spicer?" 
" Yes, come when you will ; I like to have some one to talk to ; 
it keeps me from thinking." 

I wished him good day, and went away with the book in my 
hand. Before I went home I sought out old Anderson, and told 
him what had passed. " He will not see the chaplain, Anderson, 
but, perhaps, he will see you ; and, by degrees, you can bring 
him to the subject. It is dreadful that a man should die in that 
way." 

M Alas for the pride of us wretched worms," ejaculated Ander- 
son ; '•' he talks of dying game, — that is to say, he defies his 
Maker. Yes, Jack, I will go and see him ; and happy I am that 
he has a few davs to live. I will see him to-night; but will not 
say much to him, or he might refuse my coming again." 



314- POOR JACK. 

I went home. I was not in a very gay humour, for the sight of 
Spicer's leg, and the announcement of his situation, had made a 
deep impression upon me. I sat down to read the book which 
Spicer had made me a present of. I was interrupted by my mother 
requesting me to go a message for her, and during my absence 
Virginia had taken up the book. 

" Who lent you this book, Tom ?" said she, when I returned. 

" Spicer — the man whom they call Black Sam, who is now 
dying in the Hospital." 

" Well, that's not the name on the title-page — it is Walter 
James, Tynemouth. 

" Walter James, did you say, dear ? Let me look ! Even 
so." 

" Why, what's the matter, Tom ? " said my sister ; " you look as 
if you were puzzled." 

And indeed I do not doubt but I did ; for it at once recalled to 
my mind that Old Nanny's married name was James y and that 
Spicer had said that his father was a sailor, and that he had died 
at the time that he was born, which agreed with the narrative of 
Old Nanny. The conclusions which I came to in a moment made 
me shudder. 

" Well, my dear, I was surprised, if not frightened ; but you 
don't know why, nor can I tell you ; for it's not my secret. Let 
me look at the book again ? " 

Here my father came in, and the conversation took a different 
turn, which I was not sorry for. I wished, however, to be left to 
my own reflections ; so I soon afterwards took up my candle, and 
retired to my room. 

I turned the subject over in my mind in a hundred ways, but 
could not come to any conclusion as to the best method of proceed- 
ing. At last I thought I would see Peter Anderson the next day, 
and take his advice. I was out immediately after breakfast ; but 
I could not find Anderson, so I walked to the Hospital to see 
Spicer. I found Anderson sitting by his bed-side, but they were 
not then conversing. After a short time Anderson rose, and giving 



POOR JACK. 315 

a slight shake of the head, as if to inform me that he had had no 
success, he walked away. 

" He has been trying to convert me," said Spi cer, with a grim 
smile. 

" He has been trying, Spicer, to bring you to a sense of your 
condition ; and is he not kind ? he can have no interest but your 
own good. Do you think that no one knows the sins you have 
committed except yourself? — there is one eye which sees all." 

" Come, Jack, no preaching." 

" Spicer, you are here under a false name, and you think no 
one knows any thing about you ; but every thing has been disco- 
vered by me ; and I cannot help thinking that it has been made 
known providentially, and for your good." 

" Ah ! " replied Spicer, " and pray what do you know ? Per- 
haps you can tell me all the sins I have committed." 

" No, Spicer, but perhaps I can tell you of sins which you 
yourself are not aware of; but first answer me — you know that 
you cannot live long, Spicer ; will you acknowledge that what I 
state is correct, should it really be so ? " 

" I give you my word, that if you tell me anything about me 
which is true, that I will acknowledge it ; so now, Mr. Fortuneteller, 
here's my hand — it may be useful, you know, in helping your dis- 
covery." 

" I do not want your hand, Spicer ; — now hear me. Is not your 
name James? — and were you not born at Tynemouth?" 

Spicer started. " How did you find that out ? Well, Tom, it 
is sOj and what then ? " 

w As you told me yourself, although I knew it before, your 
father was lost at sea, about the time that you were born. Spicer, 
I know how you left your mother, and how you returned from you 
knoiv ivhere — how you robbed her of every farthing, and left her 
again destitute and in misery. Is there nothing to repent of in 
that, Spicer?" 

" Who the devil " 

" Nay, Spicer, the devil has had nothing to do with the discovery." 



316 POOR JACK. 

" Strange, strange indeed," muttered Spicer ; " but still, it is 
true." 

" Spicer, you know best how your life was passed from that 
time until you came into the Hospital ; but it was to be hoped, that 
when laid up to rest in this haven, after such a stormy life, that 
you would have amended your life ; but what have you done ? " 

" And what have I done ? " 

" What would have brought you to the gallows, if I had not 
held my tongue. You attempted to murder the old woman to ob- 
tain her money, and in escaping, you received the wound which 
soon will bring you to your grave." 

" What proofs ? " 

" Every proof, your stump struck me in the face when you 
rushed out — the button was off your coat the next morning when 1 
met you — I had every proof, and had I chosen, would have sworn 
on the Bible, to your having been the party." 

" Well, I'll not deny it — why should I, when I cannot be taken 
out of this bed to be tried, even if you wished ? Have you more to 
say ? " 

" Yes, more." 

" I doubt it." 

" Then- hear me : — the poor woman whom you would have mur- 
dered, whom I found at her last gasp, and with difficulty restored to 
consciousness, that poor woman, Spicer, is your own mother ! " 

" God of Heaven ! " exclaimed he, covering his face. 

" Yes, Spicer, your fond indulgent mother, who thinks that you 
suffered the penalty of the law many years ago ; and whose 
energies have been crushed by the supposed unhappy fate of her 
still loved and lamented son. Spicer, this is all true, and have 
you now nothing to repent of? " 

" I thought her dead, long dead. God, I thank thee that I did 
not the deed ; and, Jack, I am really grateful to you for having pre- 
vented it. Poor old woman! — yes, she did love me, and how 
cruelly I treated her ! — And she is then still alive, and thinks that 
I was hanged — yes, I recollect now, she must think so. Oh ! my 
brain, my brain ! *' 



POOR JACK. 317 

" Spicer, I must leave you now." 

" Don't leave me, Jack — yes do, come to-morrow morning." 

et Spicer, will you do me a favour ? " 

« Yes." 

" Will you see Anderson, and talk with him ?" 

" Yes, if you wish it ; but not now : this evening I will, if he'll 
come." 

I left Spicer, well satisfied with what had passed, and hastened 
to Anderson, to communicate it to him. 

" A strange and providential discovery, Tom, indeed," said he, 
" and good use it appears to me you have made of it : his heart is 
softened, that is evident ; I will certainly go to him this evening." 



CHAP. XLIV. 

SPICER DISCLOSES STRANGE MATTERS. 

The next day, when I called to see Spicer, I found him in 
great pain. Anderson had been with him, but he had been 
in such agony that he found it almost impossible to converse 
with him. Spicer did not like that I should leave him, although 
he could not talk, and I therefore remained by his bedside, 
occasionally assisting him to move from one position to another, 
or to take the drink that was by his bedside. Towards the 
evening he became more easy, and went to sleep : I left him, 
therefore, till the next day. As I supposed, the mortification had 
commenced, for the doctor told him so the next morning, when 
he visited him, and the chaplain pointed out to him that all hopes 
of living were now over. Spicer heard the communication un- 
moved. He asked the doctor how long he might live, and his 



318 POOR JACK. 

reply was, it was possible four or five days, and that he would feel 
no more pain. He was now able to listen to Anderson, and he did 
so. I shall not trouble the reader with repeating what Anderson 
imparted to me, as I can give him an idea of Spicer's feelings by 
what passed between us. 

" Tom," said he, " I have led a very wicked life, so wicked, 
that I hate to think of it, and I hate myself. I believe all that 
Anderson and the chaplain tell me, and I find that I may hope and 
do hope for mercy ; but I can't cry or wail or tear my hair. The 
fact is, Tom, I can't feel afraid : if I am pardoned, and I do 
scarcely expect it, I shall be all gratitude, as well I may. Should I 
be condemned, I shall acknowledge my punishment just, and not 
complain, for I have deserved all ; but I cannot feel fear : I believe 
I ought ; but it is not in my nature, I suppose. " 

" But you do not feel anything like defiance, Spicer?" 

" No, God forbid ! no, nothing like that, but my spirit cannot 
quail." 

He fras very anxious for the chaplain, the two last days of his 
life, and I really believe was sincere in his repentance ; but before 
I wind up his history, I will narrate to the reader those portions of 
his life which are unknown, and which are necessary to the ex- 
planation of other matters. 

He told me that when he first went to sea, he had joined a 
vessel employed in the slave trade, that he had left it at Gambia, 
and shipped on board of a vessel which was about to cruise on the 
Spanish main. He wa^ some time in her, and had been appointed 
second officer, when he resolved to fit out a vessel and cruise for 
himself. He had therefore quitted the vessel at Surinam, and 
worked his passage home in a sugar ship. 

It was on his return home this time, that, as Old Nanny had told 
me, he had taken to gaming, and eventually had robbed his mother. 
With the 2000/. in his pocket, he had repaired to Liverpool, where 
he fell in with Fitzgerald, a young man who had served as first 
mate in the vessel in which they had cruised on the Spanish main, 
and to him he had proposed to join him as first officer, in the vessel 



POOR JACK. 319 

which he was about to fit out. It appeared that this young man 
had but a few days returned from Ireland, where he had married a 
young woman, to whom he had been some time attached, and that 
his disinclination to leave his young wife made him at first refuse 
the offer made by Spicer. Spicer, however, who was aware of his 
value, would not lose sight of him, and contrived, when Fitzgerald 
had taken too much wine, to win of him by unfair means about 
1500/. Spicer then offered Fitzgerald a release from the debt 
provided he would sail with him ; and he exacted as a farther 
condition that he should not return, and take a farewell of his 
wife. To these harsh terms, Fitzgerald being without means 
of liquidating the debt, consented, and they sailed accordingly. 
w And now, Jack, I will tell you why I was so curious about 
that spy-glass. I knew the moment that I saw it in your hands 
that it was one that belonged to Fitzgerald, when we were on our 
first cruise together. It was the best glass I ever met with. When 
we left Liverpool this time, I asked him for the spy-glass, and he 
told me that expecting to return to his wife before he sailed, he 
had left it at home. How it came into the lady's hands I can't tell." 
" I never said that Lady Hercules gave it to me, replied I, although 
I did not undeceive you when you thought so. The fact is, it was 
given me by a very pretty young Irish widow." " Then, Jack, I 
should not wonder if she was not the wife of Fitzgerald, whom 
I have been talking about; but that I leave to you. Let me 
finish my story. When we arrived on the Spanish coast I 
had as fine a crew with me as ever were on board of a vessel ; 
but I had long made up my mind that I would hoist the black 
flag. Yes, Jack, it is but too true. But when I proposed it, 
Fitzgerald declared that the first act of piracy that was committed 
he would leave the vessel. I tried all I could to persuade him, but 
in vain. However, we did take an English vessel, and plundered 
her. Upon this Fitzgerald protested, and half the crew, at least, 
joined him. I threatened the men to shoot them through the head ; 
but they were resolute ; and, being rather the stronger party, I 
dared not make any attempt. They insisted upon leaving the 



320 POOR JACK. 

vessel ; and I, not being able to help it, landed them all in the 
Bay of Honduras, where I thought it very possible they would be 
taken by the Spaniards, and imprisoned, if not hanged. They 
were imprisoned ; but, after some time, they were released. The 
desertion of Fitzgerald and the other men left me with my vessel 
half manned ; and I vowed vengeance against him if ever I had 
an opportunity. I now cruised as a pirate, and was very success- 
ful, and my name was a terror to those seas. A high reward was 
offered for me, dead or alive, which pleased me much, and I be- 
came more murderous than ever. Jack, all this rises up in judg- 
ment against me now ; and I recollect every single life taken away 
by me, or by my orders, as well as if I had noted them down in a 
book. May God forgive me !" continued Spicer, covering his eyes 
up for a time. 

After a pause he continued, " I had ordered a vessel with a 
valuable cargo to be taken on a rendezvous we had in the Caicos ; 
but it was recaptured and taken into Port Royal, Jamaica. As the 
proofs of the piracy were well established, the men on board were 
thrown into prison to take their trial. I heard of this, for I was 
often on shore in disguise in one island or another, and a scheme 
entered my head which I thought would benefit myself and wreak 
my vengeance upon Fitzgerald. But I must leave off now. Here 
comes the chaplain ; he promised to talk with me this evening, 
and you see that I have changed my opinion on that point, 
praised be God for it. Good night, Jack, come to-morrow." 



POOR JACK. 321 



CHAP. XLV. 



SPICER S DEATH, 



When I saw Spicer again he continued his narrative : — 

" I told you that I was anxious to wreak my vengeance upon 
Fitzgerald, and the plan which I hit upon was as follows : I con- 
trived to get to Port Royal, and to speak to the two men whom 
I had been on the best terms with. I told them that the only 
chance of escape would be for them to give their names as those 
of James, which was mine, and of Fitzgerald, the first officer ; and 
I explained to them why ; — because Fitzgerald and I had saved 
the life of the daughter of one of the chief planters, who, in gra- 
titude, had promised that he would assist us, if we were ever in dif- 
ficulty. I told them that they must adhere to what they said, as 
they would be condemned with the others ; but that a reprieve 
would be given when they were on the scaffold." 

" But why should you have done this ? " inquired I. 

" First, because I wished people to believe that I was dead, that 
there might not be so great a hue and cry after me, and the tempt- 
ation of so high a reward ; next, because I knew that Fitzgerald was 
still in prison : and that his wife would read the account of his 
execution in the newspapers, which I hoped would break her heart 
and so make him miserable.'' 

" Oh, Spicer, that was too cruel." 

" It was, but my plan succeeded. The men gave our names, 
went to the scaffold, expecting a reprieve, and were hanged." 

" And thus it is that your poor mother thinks even now that 
you were hanged," said I. 

" Even so, Jack, even so. Well, after a time, I quitted my 
vessel, and returned to England ; for I was actually tired of blood- 
shed, and I had collected a great deal of money. On my arrival 
I inquired after Fitzgerald. It appeared that his wife had heard 

Y 



322 POOR JACK. 

the account of his execution ; and, as her bonnet was found by 
the side of the mill dam, it was supposed that she had destroyed 
herself. Fitzgerald returned home, and was distracted at the in- 
telligence. I have always thought that she was dead ; but, by 
what you say, Jack, I now doubt it." 

Cl And Fitzgerald, Spicer, what became of him ? " 
" I really cannot tell. I heard that he had entered on board of 
a king's ship, but not under his own name : how far that was true 
or not, I cannot say ; but I have every reason to believe that such 
was the case." 

(i And how came you on board of a man-of-war?" 
ie Why, that's soon told. I spent my money, or lost it all in 
gambling, went out again, obtained command of a vessel, and 
did well for some time ; but I was more tyrannical and absolute 
than ever. I had shot five or six of my own men when the crew 
mutinied, and put me and two others who had always supported 
me in an open boat, and left us to our fate. We were picked up 
by a frigate going to the East Indies when we were in the last ex- 
tremity. And now, Jack, I believe you have my whole history. 
I am tired now, and must go to sleep ; but, Jack, I wish you to 
come to-morrow morning, for I have something to say to you of 
great importance. Good-bye, Jack ; don't forget." 

I promised Spicer that I would not fail, and quitted the Hos- 
pital. When I called again upon him, I found him very low and 
A veak — he could not raise himself from his pillow. " I feel 
that I am going now, Jack," said he — " going very fast — I have 
not many hours to live, but, I thank Heaven, I am not in any 
pain. A man who dies in agony cannot examine himself — cannot 
survey the past with calmness, or feel convinced of the greatness 
of his offences. I thank God for that ; but, Jack, although I have 
committed many a foul and execrable murder, for which 1 am full 
of remorse — although I feel how detestable has been my life — I 
tell you candidly, that, although those crimes may appear to others 
more heavy than the simple one of theft, to me the one that lies 
most heavy on my soul is the robbing of my poor mother, and 
my whole treatment of her. Jack, will you do one favour to a 



POOR JACK. 323 

dying man — and it must be done soon, or it will be too late. Will 
you go to my poor mother, acquaint her with my being here, 
still alive, and that my hours are numbered, and beg for me for- 
giveness? — Obtain that for me, Jack — bring that to me, and so 
may you receive forgiveness yourself!" 

u I will, Spicer," replied I ; " I will go directly ; and I have 
little fear but that I shall succeed." 

u Go, then, Jack — don't tarry, for my time is nearly come." 

I left the Hospital immediately, and hastened to Old Nanny's. I 
found her very busy, sorting a lot of old bottles, which she had 
just purchased. 

"Well, Jack," said she, " you are just come in time to help me. 
I was just a saying if Jack was to call now, he'd be of some use, 
for I can't well reach so high as the shelf where I put the 
bottles on, and when I get on a stool my old head swims." 

" Mother," said I, " suppose you put down the bottles for a 
little while, as I have that to say to you which must not be 
delayed." 

"Why, what's the matter, boy ? — and how pale you look — 
what has happened? You don't want money, do you?" 

" No, mother, I want no money — I only want you to listen to 
matters important, which I must disclose to you." 

« Well — well — what is it? — about the fellow who tried to rob 
me, I suppose. I told you before, Jack, I won't hurt him, for 
my poor boy's sake." 

" It is about your poor boy I would speak, mother," replied I, 
hardly knowing how to begin. " Now, mother, did you not tell 
me that he Mas hanged at Port Royal ? " 

u Yes — yes — but why come and talk about it again ? " 

" Because, mother, you seem to feel the disgrace of his being 
hanged so much." 

" Well, to be sure I do — then why do you remind me of it, you 
bad boy— it's cruel of you, Jack — I thought you kinder." 

" Mother, it is because you do feel it so much that I have 
come to tell you that y$u have been deceived. Your son was not 
hanged." 

y 2 



32i POOR JACK. 

" Not hanged ! Why, Jack, are you sure ? " 
" Yes, mother, quite sure." 

u Xot hanged — quite sure " 

Here Old Xanny burst out into a wild laugh, which ended in 
sobbing and tears. I was obliged to wait some minutes before she 
was composed enough to listen to me : at last I said, " Mother, 
I have more to say, and there is no time to be lost." 

" Why no time to be lost, my dear boy?" said she. " Oh ! now 
that yon have told me this, I could dwell for hours — ay, days — 
more — I shall dwell my whole life upon this kind news.*' 

li But listen to me, mother, for I must tell you how I discovered 
this.'" 

" Yes, yes, Jack — do, that's a good boy. I am quite calm 
now," said Xanny, wiping her eyes with her apron. 

I then acquainted her with what Spicer had told me, relative to 
his inducing the man to take his name ; and continued the history 
of Spicer's life, until I left him on board of a man-of-war. 
'■'But where is he now? And who told you all this?" 
" He told me so himself," replied I. " He has been in the Hos- 
pital some time; and living here close to you, without either of 
yon being aware of it. But, mother, he is now ill — very ill in the 
Hospital: he would not have confessed all this, if he had not felt 
how ill he was." 

" Deary, deary me," replied Old Xanny, wringing her hands ; 
' ; I must go see him." 

•• Nay, mother, I fear you cannot; the fact is. that he is dying, 
and he has sent me to ask your forgiveness for his conduct to 
you." 

" Dearv, dearv me," continued old Xanny, seemingly half out of 
her wits; "in the Hospital — so near to his poor mother — and 
dying — dear Jemmy ! " 

Then the old woman covered up her face with her apron,, and 
was silent. I waited a minute or two, and then I again spoke to 
her. 

' ; Will vou not answer my question, mother? Your son has but 
an hour, perhaps, to live, and he dies penitent not only for his 



POOR JACK. 325 

conduct to you, but for his lawless and wicked life; but he 
feels his treatment of you to be worse than all his other crimes ; 
and he has sent me to beg that you will forgive him before he dies. 
Answer me, mother." 

" Jack," said Nanny, removing the apron from her face, " I feel 
as if it was I who ought to ask his pardon, and not he who should 
ask mine. Who made him bad ? — his foolish mother. Who made 
him unable to control his passions? — his foolish mother. Who was 
the cause of his plunging into vice — of his intemperance, of his 
gaming, of his wild and desperate career — which might have 
ended, as I supposed it had done, on the gallows — but a foolish, 
weak, selfish mother, who did not do her duty to him in his child- 
hood. It is I who was his great enemy — I who assisted the 
devil to lead him to destruction — I who, had he been hanged, had 
been, and have felt for years, that I was his executioner. Can I 
forgive him ! Can he forgive me .?" 

" Mother, his time is short — I will come to you again, and tell 
you much more. But if you knew how earnest he is to have your 
forgiveness before he dies, you would at once send me away to 
him." 

" Then go, my child — go, and may you often be sent on such 
kind missions ! Go, and tell my poor James that his mother for- 
gives him — begs to be forgiven — still dotes upon him — and 
God knows with how much pleasure would die for him ! Go quick, 
child — the sands of the glass run fast— quick, child — the dying 
cannot wait — quick — quick ! " 

Nanny had risen from her stool and taken me by the arm : when 
we were clear of the threshold she loosed me, and sunk down to the 
earth, whether overcome by her feelings, or in a state of insen- 
sibility, I did not wait to ascertain — I fled to execute my mission 
before it was too late. 

In a few minutes I was at the Hospital — breathless, it was true. 
I went in, and found Spicer still alive, for his eyes turned to 
me. I went up to him ; the nurse, who was standing by him, told 
me he was speechless, and would soon be gone. I told her I would 
remain with him, and she went to the other patients. I gave him 

Y 3 



326 POOR JACK. 

his mother's message, and he was satisfied: he squeezed my 
hand, and a smile, which appeared to illumine, like a rainbow, his 
usual dark and moody countenance, intimated hope and joy ; in a 
few seconds he was no more, but the smile continued on his features 
after death. 

I then returned to Old Nanny, who, I found, had been put 
into bed by some neighbours, and at her bedside was Mrs. St. 
Felix, who had been passing by, and had observed her situation. 
She was now recovered, and quiet. As soon as they had left her, 
I entered into a more full detail of how I became acquainted with 
the circumstances which led to the discovery. I did not conceal 
from her that it was her own son who had attempted the robbery ; 
and I wound up, by stating that he had died, I really believed, not 
only penitent, but happy from having received her forgiveness. 

"Jack — Jack — you have been as good as an angel to me, 
indeed you have. It was you, also, who prevented my poor James 
from killing his mother — it is you that have been the means of his 
making his peace with Heaven. Bless you, Jack ; bless you." 



CHAP. XL VI. 



IN WHICH MRS. ST. FELIX REFUSES A SPLENDID OFFER, WHICH I AM 
DULY EMPOWERED TO MAKE TO HER. 

I left Old Nanny as soon as she was more composed, for I was so 
anxious to have some conversation with Old Anderson. I did not 
call on my father, as it was not a case on which he was likely to 
offer any opinion, and I thought it better that the secret which I 
possessed should be known but to one other person. I refer to 
the knowledge which I had obtained relative to the husband of 
Mrs. St. Felix, who, it appeared, was not hanged, as supposed by 
her. The information received from Spicer accounted for Mrs. St. 
Felix's conduct when any reference was made to her husband ; and 
I was now aware how much pain she must have suffered when his 



POOR JACK. 327 

name was mentioned. I found Anderson alone in his office, and I 
immediately made him acquainted with what I had learnt, and 
asked him his opinion as to the propriety of communicating it to 
Mrs. St. Felix. Anderson rested his head upon his hand for some 
time in silence : at last he looked up at me. ie Why, Tom, that 
she suffers much from the supposed ignominious fate of her hus- 
band is certain, but it is only occasionally ; her spirits are good, 
and she is cheerful, except when reminded of it by any casual 
observation. That it would prove a great consolation to her to 
know that her husband did not forfeit his life on the scaffold, is 
true; but what then — he is said to have entered the king's service 
under another name, and, of course, there is every probability of 
his being alive and well at this moment. Now she is compara- 
tively tranquil .and composed, but consider what anxiety, what 
suspense, what doubts, must ever fill her mind, must oppress her 
waking hours, must haunt her in her dreams, after she is made 
acquainted with his possible existence. Hope deferred maketh the 
heart sick ; and her existence would be one of continued tumult, 
of constant anticipation, and I may say of misery. — He may be 
dead, and then will her new-born hopes be crushed when she has 
ascertained the fact; he may never appear again, and she may 
linger out a life of continual fretting. I think, Tom, that were she 
my daughter, and I in possession of similar facts, I would not 
tell her — at least, not at present. We may be able to make in- 
quiries without her knowledge. We know his name : an advertise- 
ment might come to his eyes or ears ; and, moreover, you have 
the telescope, which may be of use if it is constantly seen in your 
hands. Let us at present do all we can without her knowledge, 
and leave the result in the hands of Providence, who, if it thinks 
fit, will work by its own means. Are you of my opinion, Tom ?" 
" When I came to ask your advice, Anderson, it was with the 
intention of being guided by it, even if it had not coincided with 
my own opinion, which, now that I have heard your reasons, it 
certainly does. By the bye, I have not yet called upon Mrs. St. 
Felix, and I will go now. You will see Old Nanny again?" 

y 4 



328 POOR JACK. 

" I will, my boy, this evening. Good-bye ! I'm very busy now, 
for the officers will inspect to-morrow morning." 

I quitted the Hospital, and had arrived in Church Street, when, 
passing the doctor's house on my way to Mrs. St. Felix, Mr. Thomas 
Cobb, who had become a great dandy, and, in his own opinion at 
least, a great doctor, called to me : " Saunders, my dear fellow, 
just come in — I wish to speak with you particularly." I complied 
with his wishes. Mr. Cobb was remarkable in his dress. Having 
sprung up to the height of at least six feet in his stockings, he had 
become remarkably thin and spare; and the first idea that struck you 
when you saw him was, that he was all pantaloons — for he wore blue 
cotton net tight pantaloons ; and his Hessian boots were so low, 
and his waistcoat so short, that there was at least four feet, out of 
the sum total of six, composed of blue cotton net, which fitted very 
close to a very spare figure. He wore no cravat, but a turn-down 
collar with a black ribbon ; his hair very long, with a very puny 
pair of mustachios on his upper lip, and something like a tuft on 
his chin. Altogether, he was a strange-looking being, especially 
when he had substituted for his long coat a short nankeen jacket, 
which was the case at the time I am speaking of. 

"Well, Mr. Cobb, what may be your pleasure with me? You 
must not detain me long, as I was about to call on Mrs. St. Felix." 

" So I presumed, my dear Sir," replied he, " and for that very 
reason I requested you to walk in. Take a chair. Friendship, 
Tom, is a great blessing — it is one of the charms of life. We 
have known each other long, — and it is to tax your friendship that 
I have requested you to come in." 

"Well, be as quick as you can — that's all," replied I. 

" Festina lente, as Dr. Tadpole often says, adding that it is 
Latin for hat and boots. I am surprised at his ignorance of the 
classics ; any school-boy ought to know that caput is the Latin 
for hat, and Bootes for boots. But lately I have abandoned the 
classics, and have given up my soul to poetry." 

"Indeed !" 

" Yes, — 'Friendship and Love' is my toast, whenever I am 
called upon at the club. What does Campbell say ? " 



POOR JACK. 329 

" I'm sure I don't know." 
" I'll tell you, Tom."— 

"Without the smile from heav'nly beauty won, 
Oh, what were man ? A world without a sun. 

a Well, I dare say it's all true," replied I ; " for if a woman does 
not smile upon a man, he's not very likely to marry her, and 
therefore has no chance of having a son." 
" Tom, you have no soul of poetry." 
" Perhaps not — I have been too busy to read any." 
" But you should — youth is the age of poetry." 
"Well, I thought it was the time to work : moreover, I don't 
understand how youth can be age. But, pray tell me, what is it 
you want of me, for I want to see Mrs. St. Felix before dinner- 
time." 

"Well then, Tom, I am in love — deeply, desperately, irrevo- 
cably, and everlastingly in love." 

" I wish you well out of it," replied I with some bitterness. 
" And pray with whom may you be so dreadfully in love — Anny 
Whistle ? " 

" Anny Whistle ! — to the winds have I whistled her long ago. 
No, that was a juvenile fancy. Hear me — I am in love with the 
charming widow." 

" What, Mrs. St. Felix ? " 

" Yes. Felix means happy in Latin — and my happiness de- 
pends upon her. I must either succeed, or — Tom, do you see 
that bottle?" 
" Yes." 

" Well, it's laudanum — that's all." 

" But, Tom, you forget ; you certainly would not supplant your 
patron, your master, I may say, your benefactor — the doctor? " 

" Why not ? he has tried, and failed. He has been trying to 
make an impression upon her these ten years, but it's no go. 
Ain't I a doctor, as good as he — ay, better, — for I'm a young 
doctor, and he is an old one ! All the ladies are for me now. 
I'm a very rising young man." 



330 POOR JACK. 

" Well, don't rise much higher, or your head will reach up to 
the shop ceiling. Have you anything more to say to me ? " 

" Why, I have hardly begun. — You see, Tom, the widow looks 
upon me with a favourable eye ; and more than once I have 
thought of popping the question over the counter ; but I never 
could muster up courage, my love is so intense. As the poet 
says, — 

Silence in love betrays more woe 

Than words, howe'er so witty ; 
The beggar that is dumb, you know, 

Deserves our double pity. 

Now, Tom, I wish to tax your friendship — I wish you to speak 
for me." 

" What, speak to Mrs. St. Felix ? " 

"Yes, be my ambassador. — I have attempted to write some 
verses ; but somehow or another I never could find rhymes — the 
poetic feeling is in me nevertheless. Tell me, Tom, will you do 
what I ask ? 

" But what makes you think that the widow is favourably 
inclined?" 

"What? why, her behaviour, to be sure. I never pass her but 
she laughs or smiles ; and then the doctor is evidently jealous, 

— accuses me of making wrong mixtures — of paying too much 
attention to dress — of reading too much — always finding fault 

— however the time may come I repeat my request. Tom, 

will you oblige me ? You ought to have a fellow feeling." 

This last remark annoyed me. I felt convinced that Mrs. St. 
Felix was really laughing at him — so I replied — 

" I shall not refuse you, but recollect that he who has been so 
unsuccessful himself, is not likely to succeed for others. You 
shall have your answer very soon." 

" Thanks, Tom — thanks ; my toast, as I said before, when 
called upon, is — Friendship and Love." 

I quitted the shop, and went into that of Mrs. St. Felix, who, 
I thought, looked handsomer than ever. 



POOR JACK. 331 

" Come at last, Tom, said the widow, extending her hand ; I 
thought you would have called yesterday. Your sister was here." 

" I have been less pleasantly engaged. You know that Spicer 
is dead." 

"One of the pensioners — I never saw him that I know of; 
but I heard old Ben mention his death this morning — and that 
you were with him : was he a friend of yours ? " 

" No, indeed, I thought you knew something of him, or I 
should not have mentioned his name." I then changed the con- 
versation, telling her what had passed at Deal, and listening to 
her remarks upon Old Nanny, my mother, and our mutual ac- 
quaintances. 

" And the doctor — how is he ? " 

" As busy as ever : I'm sorry, however, that he complains very 
much of Tom Cobb, and says that he must dismiss him. He has 
made some very serious mistakes in mixing the medicines, and 
nearly killed five or six people. 

" Had he killed them outright, their deaths must, have been 
laid at your door," replied I, very seriously. 

" Good Heavens ! what do you mean, Tom?" 

" I mean this — that your bright eyes have fascinated him; and 
that, to use his own expression, he is deeply, desperately, irrevo- 
cably, and everlastingly in love — with you. 

Here Mrs. St. Felix burst out in a laugh, so violent that 1 
thought that it would end in hysterics. As soon as she had 
recovered herself, I continued — 

"It is all true — and independent of the five or six people half 
killed, you will have to answer for a whole death besides, for 
Tom has intimated to me that if he fails in his suit, he will have 
recourse to the big bottle of laudanum. You must further know 
that he has taxed my friendship to make known to you his de- 
plorable condition, being unequal to the task himself." 

" He must be mad," observed Mrs. St. Felix, quietly. 

" He flatters himself that you have given him encouragement : 
I asked him in what way; — he says you always laugh at him." 

"True as the Bible — I can't help laughing at such a droll 



332 POOR JACK. 

figure as he makes of himself. Mercy on me, what are men made 
of! Well, Tom, I'm sure I ought to be flattered — for (let it be a 
secret between us, Tom,) this is the second offer I have received 
within these twenty-four hours. 

" The doctor, I presume: Tom says that he is jealous." 
(i I mention no names. This is all very foolish." 
" But you have not yet rejected both — Tom awaits his answer." 
" Tell him anything that you please — by the bye you may jusl 
as well add that instead of taking the laudanum, he had better resort 
to his old remedy — of liquorice and water. It will look just as 
killing in the phial, and not be quite so fatal in its results." 

" I shall certainly execute your commission in as delicate a way 
as I possibly can." 

" Do, Tom, and pray let me hear no more of this nonsense, 
for, ridiculous as it may appear, it is to me very painful. Leave 
me now — I am nervous and low-spirited. Good-bye. Come 
this evening with your sister, — I shall be better then." 

" Mrs. St. Felix went into the back parlour, and I left the shop. 
I had turned the wrong way, almost forgetting to give Tom his an- 
swer, when I recollected myself, and returned to the doctor's house." 

"Well," said Tom, eagerly. 

"Why," replied I, hardly having made my mind up what to say, 
yet not wishing to hurt his feelings — "the fact is, Tom, that the 
widow has a very good opinion of you." 

"I knew that," interrupted Tom. 

"And if she were ever to marry again — why, you would have 
quite as good a chance as the doctor." 

" I was sure of that," said he. 

"But at present, the widow— for reasons which she cannot 
explain to any body — cannot think of entering into any new en- 
gagement." 

" I see — no regular engagement/' 

" Exactly so — but as soon as she feels herself at liberty " 

" Yes," said Tom, breathless. 

" Why, then she'll send, I presume, and let you know." 

" I see — then I may hope." 



POOR JACK. 333 

"Why, not exactly — but there will be no occasion to take lau- 
danum." 

" Not a drop, my dear fellow, depend upon it." 

" There is no saying what may come to pass, you see, Tom : 
two, or three, or four years may " 

" Four years — that's a very long time." 

" Nothing to a man sincerely in love." 

"No, nothing — that's very true." 

" So all you have to do is to follow up your profession quietly 
and steadily — and wait and see what time may bring forth." 

" So I will — I'll wait twenty years, if that's all." 

" I wished Tom good-bye, thinking that it was probable that he 
would wait a great deal longer ; but at all events, he was pacified 
and contented for the time, and there would be no great harm 
done, even if he did continue to make the widow the object of his 
passion for a year or two longer. It would keep him out of mis- 
chief, and away from Anny Whistle. 

On my return home I met with a severe shock, in conse- 
quence of information which my mother did not seruple to com- 
municate to me. Perhaps it was all for the best, as it broke the 
last link of an unhappy attachment. She informed me very ab- 
ruptly that the shutters of Mr. Wilson's house were closed in 
consequence of his having received intelligence of the death of 

Lady . Poor Janet had expired in her first confinement, and 

the mother and child were to be consigned to the same tomb. 
This intelligence drove me to my chamber, and I may be con- 
sidered weak, but I shed many tears for her untimely end. I did 
not go with my sister to Mrs. St. Felix, but remained alone till 
the next day, when Virginia came, and persuaded me to walk with 
her to the Hospital, as she had a message for my father. 

After we had seen my father, we walked down to the Hospital 
Terrace, by the river-side. We had not been there but a few 
minutes, when we heard Bill Harness strike up with his fiddle : — 



O cruel was my parents as tore my love from me, 
And cruel was the press-crang as took him oft" to sea 



334 POOR JACK. 

And cruel was the little boat as row'd him from the strand, 
But crueller the big ship as sail'd him from the land. m 

Sing tura-la, tura-la, tura-lara ley. 

O cruel was the water as bore my love from Mary, 
And cruel was the fair wind as wouldn't blow contrary ; 
And cruel was the captain, his boatswain, and his men, 
As didn't care a farding if we never meet again. 

Sing tura-la, tura-la, tura-lara ley. 

O cruel was th' engagement in which my true love fought, 
And cruel was the cannon-ball as knock'd his right eye out ; 
He used to ogle me, with peepers full of fun, 
But now he looks askew at me, because he's only one. 

Sing tura-la, See. &c. 

" Eh ! wid your tura-la. You call dat singing ? " cried Oppo- 
sition Bill stumping up, with his fiddle in his hand. " Stpp a 
little. How you do, Mr. Tom — how you do, pretty lady ? Now 
I sing you a song, and show dat fellow how to make music. 
Stop a little, Miss Virginny." 

" Well," said Bill Harness, " I'll just let you sing, that Miss 
Saunders may judge between us." 

Virginia felt half inclined to go away ; but as the pensioners 
always treated her with as much respect as any of the ladies of 
the officers of the hospital, I pressed her arm that she might stay. 
Opposition Bill then struck up as follows, saying, " Now I give 
you a new ' Getting up stairs.' " 

On board of a man of war dey hauled me one day, 
And pitch me up de side, just like one truss of hay. 

Such a getting up stairs I nebber did see, 

Such a getting up stairs. 

Dey show me de mast head, and tell me I must go, 
I tumble on de rattling, and break my lilly toe. 

Such a getting up stairs I nebber did see, &c. 

Dey pipe de hands up anchor, and Massa Boatswain's cane 
Come rattle on our backs, for all de world like rain. 

Such a getting up stairs, &c. 

And den dey man de rigging, the topsails for to reef, 
And up we scull together, just like a flock of sheep. 

Such a getting up stairs, &c. 



POOR JACK. S3o 

Dey send de boats away, a Frenchman for to board, 

We climb the side with one hand, de oder hold de sword. 

Such a getting up stairs, &c. 

Now here I sent to Greenwich because I lost a leg, 
And ab to climb up to de ward upon my wooden peg. 

Such a getting up stairs, &c. 

" Dere now — I ask you, Mister Tom. and de young lady, which 
sing best, cat fellow, or your bumble servant Bill — dat's me." 

M You sing very well, Bill,'* said Virginia, laughing, " but I'm 
not able to decide such a difficult point.*' 

(i Nor more can I ; it is impossible to say which I like best," 
continued I. B We must go home now — so good-bye." 

<: Thanky you, Mister Tom, thanky you, Missy. I see you wish 
to spare him feelings; but I know what you tink in your heart." 

Virginia and I now left the Hospital. There was one subject 
which was often discussed between my sister and me, which was, 
my situation with regard to Bramble and Bessy. I had no secrets 
from her, and she earnestly advised me to try if I could not make 
up my mind to an union with a person of whom I could not 
possibly speak but with the highest encomiums. 

" Depend upon it, my dear Tom," said she, " she will make you 
a good wife ; and with her as a companion, you will soon forget 
the unhappy attachment which has made you so miserable. I am 
not qualified from experience to advise you on this point ; but I 
have a conviction in my own mind that Bessy is really just the 
sort of partner for life who will make you happy. And then 
you owe much to Bramble, and you are aware how happy it would 
make him : and as her partiality for you is already proved, I do 
wish that you would think seriously upon what I now say. I long 
to see and make her acquaintance, but I really long much more to 
embrace her as a sister." 

I could not help acknowledging that Bessy was as perfect as I 
could expect any one to be, where none are perfect. I admitted 
the truth and good sense of my sister's reasoning, and the death 
of Janet contributed not a little to assist her arguments ; but 
she was not the only one who appeared to take an interest in this 



336 POOR JACK, 

point : my father would hint at it jocosely, and Mrs. St. Felix did 
once compliment me omnry good fortune in having the chance of 
success with a person whom every one admired and praised. The 
party, however, who had most weight with me was Old Anderson, 
who spoke to me unreservedly and seriously. " Tom," said he, 
" you must be aware that Bramble and I are great friends, and have 
been so for many years. He has no secrets from me, and I have 
no hesitation in telling you that his regards and affections are so 
equally bestowed between you and his adopted child, that it is 
difficult for himself to say to which he is the most attached ; 
further, as he has told me, his fervent and his dearest wish, — the 
one thing which will make him happy, and the only one without 
which he will not be happy, although he may be resigned, is that 
an union should take place between you and Bessy. I am not one 
of those who would persuade you to marry her out of gratitude 
to Bramble. Gratitude may be carried too far. But she is, by all 
accounts, amiable and beautiful — devoted to excess, and capable of 
any exertion and any sacrifice for those she loves, — and, Tom, she 
loves you. With her I consider that you have every prospect of 
being happy in the most important step in life. You may say that 
you do not love her, although you respect, and admire, and es- 
teem her : — granted ; but on such feelings towards a woman is the 
firmest love based, and must eventually grow. Depend upon it, 
Tom, that that hasty and violent attachment which is usually 
termed love, and which so blinds both parties that they cannot, 
before marriage, perceive each other's faults — those matches 
which are called love-matches, seldom or ever turn out happily. 
I do not mean to say but that they sometimes do ; but, like a 
lottery, there are many blanks for one prize. Believe me, Tom, 
there is no one who has your interest and welfare at heart more 
than I have. I have known you since you were a child, and have 
watched you with as much solicitude as any parent. Do you 
think, then, that I would persuade you to what I thought would 
not contribute to your happiness ? Do, my dear boy, make 
Bramble, Bessy, yourself, and all of us happy, by weaning your- 
self from the memory of one who was undeserving of you, and 



POOR JACK. S3? 

fixing your affections upon her who will be as stedfast and as 
true to you as the other was false and capricious." I promised 
Anderson that I would think seriously of what he said ; and I kept 
my word, using all my endeavours to drive the image of Janet 
from my memory, and substitute that of Bessy ; I often recalled 
the latter to my mind, as she lay beautiful and motionless, after 
her having rescued her father from the waves, and at last dwelt 
upon the image with something more than interest. The great 
point when you wish to bring yourself to do any thing is, to make 
up your mind to it. I did so ; and soon found that Bessy was 
rapidly gaining possession of my heart. 

I remained several days at Greenwich. My mother was still as 
busy as ever, attempting to obtain lodgers in her house who were 
people of family, and this unwearied system was a source of great 
vexation to my sister. " Oh, Tom," she would sometimes say, " I 
almost wish sometimes, selfish as it is, that you were married to 
Bessy ; for then I should be able to live with you, and escape from 
this persecution." 

" Better marry yourself, dear," replied I. 

" There is but little chance of that, Tom," replied Virginia, 
shaking her head. 

On my return to Deal, I found Bramble had remained at the 
cottage ever since my departure. Our greeting was warm, and 
when I went over to Bessy, for the first time since she had returned 
from school, I kissed her. She coloured up, poor girl, burst into 
tears, and hastened to her own room. 

" I hope that was in earnest, Tom," said Bramble, fixing his eye 
upon me inquiringly — (i otherwise it was cruel." 

" It was, indeed, father," replied I, taking him by the hand. 

" Then all's right, and God bless you, my dear good boy. You 
don't know how happy you have made me — yes, and now I will 
say it — poor Bessy also." 



338 POOR JACK. 



CHAP. XLVII. 

IN WHICH A NEW CHARACTER APPEARS UPON THE STAGE, AND I PLAY 
THE PART OF A PILOT ON SHORE. 

" A frigate has anchored in the Downs, Tom, and makes the 
signal for a pilot," said Bramble, coming into the cottage, with my 
telescope in his hand. " There is but you and I here — what do 
you say ? — will you venture to take her up to the Med way ? " 

" To be sure I will, father; I would not refuse a line-of-battle 
ship. Why should I ? the tides are the same, and the sands have 
not shifted. Would you not trust me ? " 

" Ay, that I would, Tom, and perhaps better than myself; for 
my eyes are not so good as they were. Well, then, you had better 
be off." 

I got my bundle ready, and was about to start, when I per- 
ceived my telescope lying down where Bramble had placed it on 
the table. " They are not very fond of letting pilots have their 
glasses on board of a king's ship," said I, " so I will take mine 
this time," 

" You're right, Tom — you can't take the spy-glass out of the 
captain's hand, as you do in a merchant vessel." 

" Well, good-bye, father ; I shall come down again as soon as I 
can — there's another gun, the captain of the frigate is in a hurry." 

" They always are on board of a man-of-war, if no attention is 
paid to their orders or their signals. Come, start away." 

I went down to the beach, the men launched the galley, and I 
was soon on board. As I gained the quarter-deck, I was met by 
the captain and first lieutenant, who were standing there. 

" Well," said the captain, " where's the pilot ? " 

" I am, sir," replied I, taking oft' my hat. 

" Where's your warrant ? " 

" There, sir," replied I, offering him the tin case in which I 
carried it. 

•' Well, all is right, my good fellow ; but you seem but a young 
hind." 




/ 



V 



POOR JACK. 339 

w Not so young as to lose so fine a vessel as this, I trust, sir," 
replied I. 

" I hope not, too ; and I dare say you are as good as many with 
grey hairs. At all events your warrant is sufficient for me, and 
the frigate is now under your charge. Will you weigh directly ? " 

u If you please ; the wind will probably fail as the sun goes 
down, and, if so, we may just as well lie off the Foreland to- 
night " 

The frigate was soon under weigh ; she was evidently well 
manned, and as well commanded. The wind fell, as I expected, 
and after dark we barely stemmed the ebb tide. Of course I was 
up all night, as was my duty, and occasionally entered into con- 
versation with the officer of the watch and midshipmen. From 
them I learnt that the frigate, which was called the Euphrosyne, 
had just returned from the West India station ; that they had 
been out four years, during which they had two single-handed 
encounters, and captured two French frigates, besides assisting at 
manv combined expeditions ; that they were commanded by Sir 
James O'Connor, who had distinguished himself very much, and 
was considered one of the best officers in the service ; that the 
frigate had suffered so from the conflicts in which they had been 
engaged, that she had been sent home to be surveyed ; it was 
found that she must be docked, and undergo a thorough repair, 
and consequently they had been ordered to Sheerness, where 
the ship would be paid off. At daylight there was a leading wind 
up the river, and we made sail, carrying with us three fourths of 
the flood. The discipline and order of the ship's company were so 
great that I felt much more confidence in piloting this vessel, not- 
withstanding her greater draught of water, than I did a merchant 
vessel, in which you had to wait so long before the people could exe- 
cute what you requifed: here, it was but to speak, and it was done, 
well done, and done immediately ; the vessel appeared to obey 
the will of the pilot, as if endued with sense and volition; and the 
men at the lead gave quick and correct soundings; the conse- 
quence was, that I had every confidence, and, while the captain 
and officers sometimes appeared anxious at the decrease of the 

z 2 



340 POOR JACK. 

depth of water, I was indifferent, and I dare say appeared to them 
careless, but such was not the case. 

" Quarter less 5." 

" Quarter less 5, Pilot, do you know what water we draw ? " 

"Yes, Sir James, I do ; we shall have half four directly, and 
after that the water will deepen." 

As it proved exactly as I stated, the captain had after that more 
confidence in me. At all events the frigate was brought safely to 
an anchor in the river Medway, and Sir James O'Connor went 
down to his cabin, leaving the first lieutenant to moor her, for 
such were the port orders. As I had nothing more to do, I thought 
I might as well go on shore, and get a cast down by one of the 
night coaches to Dover. I therefore begged the first lieutenant to 
order my certificate of pilotage to be made out, and to inquire if 
I could take any thing down to Deal for the captain. A few mi- 
nutes afterwards I Mas summoned down to the captain. I found 
him sitting at his table with wine before him. My certificates, 
which the clerk had before made out, were signed, but my name 
was not inserted. 

" I must have your name, pilot, to fill in here." 

" Thomas Saunders, Sir James," replied I. 

" Well, my lad, you're young for a pilot ; but you appear to 
know your business well, and you have brought this ship up in 
good style. Here are your certificates," said he, as he filled, in 
my name. 

I had my spy-glass in my hand, and, to take up the certificates 
and fold them to fit them into my tin case, I laid my glass down 
on the table close to him. Sir James looked at it as if surprised, 
took it up in his hand, turned it round, and appeared quite taken 
aback. He then looked at the brass rim where the name had been 
erased, and perceived where it had been filed away. 

" Mr. Saunders," said he, at last, " if not taking a liberty, may 
I ask where you procured this spy-glass ?" 

" Yes, Sir James, it was given me by a person who has been 
very kind to me ever since I was a boy." 

" Mr. Saunders, I beg your pardon — I do not ask this question 



POOR JACK. 341 

out of mere curiosity — I have seen this glass before ; it once be- 
longed to a very dear friend of mine. Can you give me any further 
information ? You said it was given you by " 

"A very amiable woman, Sir James." 

" Did she ever tell you how it came into her hands ? " 

" She never did, sir." 

" Mr. Saunders, oblige me by sitting down ; and if you can 
give me any information on this point, you will confer on me a 
very great favour. Can you tell me what sort of a person this 
lady is — where she lives — and what countrywoman she is?" 

" Yes, Sir James ; I will first state that she is Irish, and that she 
lives at present at Greenwich." I then described her person. 

" This is strange, very strange," said Sir James, with his hand up 
to his forehead as he leant his elbow on the table. 

After a pause, " Mr. Saunders, will you answer me one question 
candidly? I feel I am not speaking to a mere Thames pilot — I 
do not wish to compliment, and if I did not feel as I state, I should 
not put these questions. Do you not know more about this 
person than you appear willing to divulge ? There is something 
in your manner which tells me so." 

iC That I know more than I have divulged is true, Sir James ; 
but that I know more than I am willing to divulge, is not the case, 
provided I find that the party who asks the question is suffi- 
ciently interested to warrant my so doing." 

" There can be no one more interested than I am," replied Sir 
James, mournfully. "You tell me she is Irish — you describe a 
person such as I expected would be described, and my curiosity is 
naturally excited. May I ask what is her name?" 

" The name that she goes by at present is St. Felix." 

" She had distant relations of that name ; it may be one of them 

— yet how could they have obtained ? Yes, they might, sure 

enough !" 

" That is not her real name, Sir James." 

" Not her real name! Do you then know what is her real 
name?" 

z 3 



342 . POOR JACK. 

" I believe I do, but I obtained it, without her knowledge, from 
another party, who is since dead." 

" Ah ! may I ask that name ? " 

" A man who died in the Hospital, who went by the name of 
Spicer, but whose real name was Walter James ; he saw the glass 
in my hand, recognised it, and on his death-bed revealed all con- 
nected with it ; but he never knew that the party was still alive 
when he did so." 

" If Walter James confessed all to you on his death-bed, Mr. 
Saunders, it is certain that you can answer me one question. Was 
not her real name Fitzgerald ? " 

•• It was, Sir James, as I have understood." 

Sir James O'Connor fell back in his chair, and was silent for 
some time. He then poured out a tumbler of wine, and drank 
it off. 

• Mr. Saunders, do others know of this as well as you?" 

" I have never told any one, except to one old and dearest 
friend, in case of accident to myself. Mrs. St. Felix is ignorant of 
my knowledge, as well as others." 

" Mr. Saunders, that I am most deeply interested in that person 
I pledge you my honour as an officer and a gentleman. Will you 
now do me the favour to detail all you do know on this subject, 
and what were the confessions made you by that man Walter 
James ? " 

" I have already, sir, told you more than I intended. I will be 
candid with you ; so much do I respect and value the person in 
question, that I will do nothing without I have your assurance that 
it will not tend to her unhappiness." 

" Then, on my honour, if it turns out as I expect, it will, I think, 
make her the happiest woman under the sun." 

" You said that the spy-glass belonged to a dear friend ? " 

" I did, Mr. Saunders ; and if I find, from what you can tell me, 
that Mrs. St. Felix is the real Mrs. Fitzgerald, I will produce that 
friend and her husband. Now are you satisfied ?" 

" I am," replied I, " and I will now tell you every thing." I 
then entered into a detail from the time that Mrs. St. Felix gave 



POOR JACK. 34<3 

me the spy-glass, and erased the name, until the death of Spicer. 
" I have now done, sir," replied I, " and you must draw your own 
conclusions." 

" I thank you, sir," replied he ; " allow me now to ask you one 
or two other questions. How does Mrs. St. Felix gain her liveli- 
hood and what character does she bear?" 

I replied to the former, by stating, that she kept a tobacconist's 
shop ; and to the latter, by saying, that she was a person of most 
unimpeachable character, and highly respected. 

Sir James O'Connor filled a tumbler of wine for me, and then his 
own. As soon as he had drunk his own off, he said, " Mr. Saunders, 
you don't know how you have obliged me. I am excessively anxious 
about this matter, and I wish, if you are not obliged to go back to 
Deal immediately, that you would undertake for me a commission 
to Greenwich. Any trouble or expense " 

" I will do any thing for Mrs. St Felix, Sir James ; and I shall 
not consider trouble or expense," replied I. 

"Will you then oblige me by taking a letter to Greenwich 
immediately ? — I cannot leave my ship at present — it is impos- 
sible." 

" Certainly I will, Sir James." 

" And will you bring her down here?" 

" If she will come : the letter I presume will explain every 
thing, and prevent any too sudden shock." 

" You are right, Mr. Saunders — and indeed I am wrong not to 
confide in you more. You have kept her secret so well, that, 
trusting to your honour, you shall now have mine." 

" I pledge my honour, Sir James." 

" Then, Mr. Saunders, I spoke of a dear friend ; but the truth 
is, / am the owner of that spy-glass. ^When I returned to Ireland, 
and found that she had, as I supposed, made away with herself, as 
soon as my grief had a little subsided, I did perceive that, although 
her apparel remained, all her other articles of any value had 
disappeared ; but I concluded that they had been pillaged by her 
relations, or other people. I then entered on board of a man-of-war, 
under the name of O'Connor, • was put on the quarter-deck, and 

z 4 



344 POOR JACK. 

by great good fortune have risen to the station in which I now 
am. That is my secret — not that I care about its being divulged, 
now that I have found my wife. I did nothing to disgrace myself 
before I entered on board of a man-of-war ; but having changed 
my name, I do not wish it to be known that I ever had another, 
until I can change it again on a fitting opportunity. Now, Mr. 
Saunders, will you execute my message?" 

" Most joyfully, Sir James ; and I now can do it with proper 
caution : by to-morrow morning I will be down here with Mrs. 
St. Felix." 

" You must post the whole way, as hard as you can, there and 
back, Mr. Saunders. Here is some money," said he, thrusting a 

bundle of notes in my hand, " you can return me what is left 

Good-bye, and many, many thanks." 

" But where shall I meet you, sir?" 

"Very true; I will be at the King's Arms Hotel, Chatham." 

I lost no time ; as soon as the boat put roe on shore, I hired a 
chaise, and posted to Greenwich, where I arrived about half-past 
nine o'clock. I dismissed the chaise at the upper end of the town, 
and walked down to Mrs. St. Felix's. I found her at home, as I 
expected, and to my great delight the doctor was not there. 

" Why, Mr. Pilot, when did you come back ?" said she. 

" But this minute — I come from Chatham." 

" And have you been home ?" 

" No, not yet ; I thought I would come and spend the evening 
with you." 

" With me ! Why, that's something new ; I don't suppose you 
intend to court me, do you, as the doctor does ? " 

" No, but I wish that you would give me some tea in your little 
back parlour, and let Jane mind the shop in the meantime." 

" Jane's very busy, Mr. Tom, so I'm afraid that I can't oblige 
you." 

" But you must, Mrs. St. Felix. I'm determined I will not leave 
this house till you give me some tea — I want to have a long talk 
with you." 

" Why, what's in the wind now?" 



POOR JACK. 3J-/5 

"I'm not in the wind, at all events, for you see I'm perfectly 
sober; indeed, Mrs. St. Felix, I ask it as a particular favour. You 
have done me many kindnesses, now do oblige me this time : the 
fact is, something has happened to me of the greatest importance, 
and I must have your advice how to act ; and, in this instance, I 
prefer yours to that of any other person." 

" Well, Tom, if it really is serious, and you wish to consult me, 
for such a compliment the least I can do is to give you a cup of 
tea." Mrs. St. Felix ordered Jane to take the tea-things into the 
back parlour, and then to attend in the shop. 

" And pray say that you are not at home, even to the doctor." 
" Well, really the affair looks serious," replied she, " but it -hall 
be so if you wish it." 

We took our tea before I opened the business, for I was think- 
ing how I should commence : at last I put down my cup, and 
said, " Mrs. St. Felix, I must first acquaint you with what is known 
to no one here but myself." I then told her the history of Old 
Nanny ; then I went on to Spicer's recognition of the spy-glass, — 
his attempt to murder his mother, the consequences, and the 
disclosure on his death-bed. 

Mrs. St. Felix was much moved. 

" But why tell me all this ? " said she, at last : " it proves, cer- 
tainly, that my husband was not hanged, which is some consola- 
tion, but now I shall be ever restless until I know what has become 
of him — perhaps he still lives." 

" Mrs. St. Felix, you ask me why do I tell you all this? — I beg 
you to reply to my question — having known this so long, why 
have I not told you before ? " 
" I cannot tell." 

" Then I will tell you : because I did feel that such knowledge 
as I had then would only make you, as you truly say, unhappy and 
restless. Xor would I have told you now, had it not been that I 
have gained farther intelligence on board of a frigate which I this 
afternoon took into the Medway." 

Mrs. St. Felix gasped for breath — " And what is that?" said 
she, faintly. 



•34-6 POOR JACK. 

u The spy-glass was recognised by a person on board, who told 
me that your husband still lives." 

I ran out for a glass of water, for Mrs. St. Felix fell back in her 
chair as pale as death. 

I gave her the water, and threw some in her face : she reco- 
vered, and put her handkerchief up to her eyes. At first she was 
silent, then sobbed bitterly ; after a while she sunk from the chair 
down on her knees, and remained there some time. When she 
rose and resumed her seat, she took my hand and said, " You may 
tell me all now."* 

As she was quite calm and composed, I did so; I repeated all 
that had passed between Sir James O'Connor and me, and ended 
with his wish that I should accompany her at once to Chatham. 

" And now, Mrs. St. Felix, you had better go to bed. I told 
Sir James that I would be down to-morrow morning. I will come 
here at seven o'clock, and then we will go to the upper part of the 
town and hire a chaise. Will you be ready ? " 

Ci Yes," replied she, smiling. M Heaven bless you, Tom ! and 
now good night." 

I did not go to my mother's, but to an inn in the town, where 
I asked for a bed. In the morning I went down. As soon as 
Mrs. St. Felix saw me she came out, and followed me at a little 
distance. We went up to where the chaises were to be obtained, 
and in less than three hours were at the King's Arms, Chatham. 
I asked to be shown into a room, into which I led Mrs. St. Felix, 
trembling like an aspen leaf. I seated her on the sofa, and then 
asked to be shown in to Sir James O'Connor. 

w She is here, sir," said I. 

" Where?" 

" Follow me, Sir James." 

I opened the door of the room, and closed it upon them. 



s^uEaw 




SIR J. O'CONNOR AND MRS. ST. FELIX. 



POOR JACK. 347 



CHAP. XLV1II. 

MY SISTER VIRGINIA IS AT LAST PLACED IN A SITUATION WHICH IS 
SATISFACTORY TO MY MOTHER AS WELL AS 1 HERSELF. 

I remained very quietly in the coffee-room of the hotel, in case I 
should be sent for; which I presumed I should be before the dav 
was over. In the afternoon a waiter came to say that Sir James 
O'Connor wished to speak to me, and I was ushered into his room, 
where I found Mrs. St. Felix on the sofa. 

As soon as the door was closed, Sir James took me by the hand, 
and led me up, saying, " Allow me to introduce your old friend as 
Lady O'Connor." 

"My dear Tom," said she, taking me by the hand, "I am and 
ever shall be Mrs. St. Felix with you. Come now, and sit down. 
You will again have to take charge of me, for I am to return to 
Greenwich, and leave it in a respectable manner. I dare say they 
have already reported that I have run away from my creditors. 
Sir James thinks I must go back as if nothing had happened, give 
out that I had some property left me by a relation, and then settle 
every thing, and sell the goodwill of my shop. It certainly will be 
better than to give grounds for the surmises and reports which 
may take place at my sudden disappearance, — not that I am very 
likely to fall in with my old acquaintances at Greenwich." 

"Don't you think so, Tom? — for Tom I must call you, in 
earnest of our future friendship," said Sir James. 

" I do think it will be the best plan, sir." 

" Well then, you must convey her ladyship to Greenwich again 
this evening, and to-morrow the report must be spread, and the 
next day you will be able to re-escort her here. I hope you feel 
the compliment that I pay you in trusting you with my new-found 
treasure. Now let us sit down to dinner. Pray don't look at your 
dress, Tom ; at all events, it's quite as respectable as her lady- 
ship's." 



348 POOR JACK. 

After dinner a chaise was ordered, and Lady O'Connor and I 

returned, to Greenwich, arriving there after dark. We walked 

down to her house : I then left her, and hastened to my mother's. 

" Well, mother," said I, after the first salutations were over, 

" have you heard the news about Mrs. St. Felix ?" 

" No, what has she done now ? " 

" Oh, she has done nothing, but a relation in Ireland has left her 
a lot of money, and she is going over there immediately. Whether 
she will come back again nobody knows." 

"Well, we can do without her," replied my mother, with pique ; 
" I'm very glad that she's going, for I have always protested at 
Virginia's being so intimate with her: a tobacco shop is not a place 
for a young lady." 

" Mother," replied Virginia, " when we lived in Fisher's Alley 
Mrs. St. Felix was above us in situation." 

" I have desired you very often, Virginia, not to refer to Fisher's 
Alley, you know I do not like it — the very best families have had 
their reverses." 

" I cannot help thinking that such has been the case with Mrs. 
St. Felix," replied Virginia. 

" If you please, Miss Saunders, we'll drop the subject," replied 
my mother, haughtily. 

The news soon spread ; indeed I walked to several places where 
I knew it would be circulated ; and before morning all Greenwich 
knew that Mrs. St. Felix had been left a fortune : some said 
10,000/., others had magnified it to 10,000/. a year. When I called 
upon her the next day, I found that she had made arrangements 
for carrying on her business during her absence, not having stated 
that she quitted for ever, but that she would write and let them 
know as soon as she arrived in Ireland what her decision would 
be, as she was not aware what might be the property left her. The 
doctor, who had undertaken to conduct her affairs during her 
absence, looked very woo-begone indeed, ard I pitied him; he 
had become so used to her company, that he felt miserable at the 
idea of her departure, although all hopes of ever marrying her had 
long been dismissed from his mind. Mrs. St. Felix told me that 



POOR JACK. 349 

she would be ready that evening, and I returned home, and found 
Virginia in tears : her mother had again assailed her on account of 
her feelings towards Mrs. St. Felix ; and Virginia told me that she 
was crying at the idea of Mrs. St. Felix going away, much more 
than at what her mother had said ; and she requested me to walk 
with her to Mrs. St. Felix, that she might wish her farewell. 

When we arrived, Mrs. St. Felix embraced Virginia warmly, and 
took her into the little back parlour. Virginia burst into tears. 
" You are the only friend in the town that I dearly love," said she, 
" and now you are going." 

" My clear girl, I am more sorry to part with you and Tom than 

I can well express — our pain is mutual, but we shall meet again." 

" I see no chance of that," said Virginia, mournfully. 

" But I do ; and what is more, I have thought about it since I 

have had the news. Tom, your sister, of course, only knows the 

common report ? " 

" Of course she knows no more than anybody else." 
" Weil, you do, at all events ; and I give you leave, as I know 
she is to be trusted, to confide my secret to her. And, Virginia, 
dear, when I tell you that I shall want you to come and stay with 
me, and shall arrange accordingly, after you have heard what 
your brother has to tell to you, you will understand that we may 
meet again. Good-bye, and God bless you, dearest ; — go away 
now, for I have much to do." 

When I told to Virginia what the reader is well acquainted with, 
her joy was excessive. "Yes," said she, "I see now ; my mother 
is so anxious that I should be taken into some grand family as a 
companion ; and when Lady O'Connor agrees to receive me, she 
will never have an idea that it is Mrs. St. Felix : if she had, nothing 
would induce her to let me go, that I am sure of; for she has taken 
an aversion to her, for reasons known only to herself." 

I returned to Mrs. St. Felix's house, as soon as I had escorted 
Virginia home, leaving her very happy. The doctor was there, 
mute and melancholy ; and I was thinking that we should have 
some difficulty in getting rid of him, when Tom made his appear- 
ance. 



350 POOK JACK. 

" If you please, sir," said he, " Mrs. Fallover wants you imme- 
diately : she's taken very bad." 

" I can't help it." 

" Indeed, but you must help it, doctor," said Mrs. St. Felix ; 
" the poor woman is, as you know, in her first confinement, and 
you must not neglect her, so let's say good-bye at once, and a 
happy return. I asked Tom to come down, that I might call upon 
his sister and one or two other people, before I go ; so you see, 
doctor, as you can't go with me, you may just as well go and 
attend to the poor woman ; so, good-bye, Doctor Tadpole, I will 
write to you as soon as I know what I'm to do." 

The doctor took her hand, and after a pause said, " Mrs. St. 
Felix, Eheu, me infelix ! " and hastened out of the shop. 

" Poor fellow! " said she, "he'll miss me, and that's the truth. 
Good bye, Jane ; mind you look after every thing till I come back, 
and take care of the dog and cat. Come, Tom, we'll go now." 

I threw her trunk on my shoulders, and followed her till we 
came to the post-house : the chaise was ordered out, and we set 
off. 

" Tom," said Lady O'Connor, as I again call her, now that she 
is clear of Greenwich, " there is one portion of my history which 
you do not know — a very trifling part indeed. When I saw in the 
newspapers that my husband had, as I supposed, been executed, I 
am ashamed to say that I first thought of suicide ; but my better 
feelings prevailed, and I then resolved to change my name, and to 
let people suppose that I was dead. It was for that reason that I 
left my bonnet by the river-side, and all my apparel in the house, 
only taking away a few trinkets and valuables, to dispose of for 
my future subsistence. I obtained a passage in a transport bound 
to Woolwich, on the plea of my husband having arrived from 
abroad ; and, by mere accident, I found the goodwill of the to- 
bacconist's shop to be sold ; it suited me — and there is the whole 
of my history which you do not know. 

" And now, as to Virginia — I intend to have her with me very 
soon. Your mother is anxious that she should get into a high 



POOR JACK. 351 

family, trusting that her beauty will captivate some of the mem- 
bers — a bad kind of speculation. I will advertise for a companion, 
and so arrange that your mother shall not see me ; and when 
your sister does come to me, it shall not be as a companion, but as 
a child of my own. I owe you much, Tom, — indeed almost every 
thing ; and it is the only way in which I can repay you. I have 
already spoken to Sir James on the subject : he is equally ready 
to pay the debt of gratitude, and therefore in future Virginia is our 
adopted child." 

" You are more than repaying me, Lady O'Connor," replied I, 
" and you are obliging me in the quarter where I feel the obliga- 
tion the greatest." 

" That I believe, Tom ; so now say no more about it." 
I may as well here inform the reader that I remained a week 
at Chatham, and that during that time Lady O'Connor put an 
advertisement in the county paper, such as we knew would be a 
bait to my mother. This paper I forwarded to Virginia, marking 
the advertisement. My mother immediately replied to it, and Sir 
James O'Connor went up to Greenwich, and had an interview 
with my mother and Virginia, at apartments he had taken at the 
hotel — appeared pleased with my sister, and said that as soon as 
Lady O'Connor was sufficiently recovered she would send for her 
to Chatham. This took place in two days afterwards ; my mother 
escorted Virginia there. Sir James stated that her Ladvship was 
too unwell to see anybody, but that she would speak a few words 
to Virginia, and leave Sir James to settle the rest with my mother. 
Virginia came down to her mother, declared that Lady O'Connor 
was a very ladylike elegant person, and that she should wish to 
take the situation. The terms were handsome, and my mother, 
although she regretted not seeing her Ladyship, was satisfied, and 
Virginia was to come in two days afterwards, which she did. 
Thus was my sister comfortably settled, and, after remaining two 
days, I took my leave of Sir James and Lady O'Connor, intending 
to return to Deal, when I received a letter from Peter Anderson, 
informing me that Old Nanny had been suddenly taken very ill, 



352 



TOOR JACK 



and that Doctor Tadpole did not think it possible that she would 
survive more than twenty-four hours — that she was very anxious 
to see me, and that he hoped I would come up immediately. 

I showed the letter to Lady O'Connor, who said, i( You will go, 
of course, Tom." 

" Immediately," replied I, " and the more so as this letter is 
dated three days back ; how it has been delayed I do not know. 
Farewell, Lady O'Connor; and farewell, dearest Virginia. Old 
Nanny, as you both know, has many claims upon my gratitude." 



# 




POOR JACK. 353 



CHAP. XLIX. 

MY FATHER. MUCH TO HIS SURPRISE, HAS A BIT OF LAND TO PUT HIS 
FOOT UPON, AND SAY, iC THIS IS 3IY OWN." 

(C You're too late, Tom/' said Ben the Whaler, as I jumped clown 
from off the basket of the coach ; u the old woman died last 
night.*' 

"I'm sorry for it, Ben/' replied I, w as she wished so much to 
see me ; but I did not receive Anderson's letter till this morning, 
and I could not get here sooner." 

This intelligence induced me to direct my course to the Hos- 
pital, where I had no doubt that I should find old Anderson, and 
obtain every information. I met him as he was walking towards the 
bench on the terrace facing the river, where he usually was seated 
when the weather was fine. " Well, Tom," said he, " I expected you, 
and did hope that you would have been here sooner. Come, sit down 
here, and I will give you the information which I know you have 
most at your heart. The old woman made a very happv end. I was 
with her till she died. She left many kind wishes for you, and I 
think her only regret was that she did not see you before she was 
called away." 

" Poor Old Nanny ! she had suffered much." 

iC Yes, and there are great excuses to be made for her ; and as we 
feel so here., surely there will be indulgence from above, where the 
secrets of all hearts are known. She was not insane, Tom ; but 
from the time that she supposed that her son had been gibbeted, 
there was something like insanity about her : the blow had op- 
pressed her brain, — it had stupefied her, and blunted her moral 
sense of right and wrong. She told me, after you had commu- 
nicated to her that her son was in the Hospital, and, had died 

A A 



$54: POOR JACK. 

penitent, that she felt as if a heavy weight had been taken off 
her mind ; that she had been rid of an oppression which had 
ever borne down her faculties, — a sort of giddiness and con- 
fusion in the brain, which had made her indifferent, if not reck- 
less, to every thing ; and I do believe it, from the change which 
took place in her during the short time which has since elapsed." 

"What change was that? for you know that I have been too 
busy during the short intervals I have been here to call upon her." 

< ; A change in her appearance and manners : she appeared to 
recover in part her former position in life ; she was always clean 
in her person, as far as she could be in such a shop as hers, — and 
if she had nothing else, she always had a clean cap and apron." 

"Indeed? " 

" Yes ; and on Sundays she dressed very neat and tidy. She did 
not go to church, but she purchased a large Bible and a pair of 
spectacles, and was often to be seen reading it at the door ; and 
when I talked to her, she was glad to enter upon serious things. 
I spoke to her about her fondness for money, and pointed out that 
it was a sin. She replied, that she did feel very fond of money for 
a long while, for she always thought that some one was nigh her 
snatching at it, and had done so ever since her son had robbed her ; 
but that since she knew what had become of him, she did not feel 
fond of it, — that is, not so fond of it as before ; and I believe that 
such, was the case. Her love of money arose from her peculiar 
state of mind. She had many comforts about her house when she 
died, which were not in it when I called to see her at the time when 
she was first ill : but her purchasing the large Bible on account of 
the print was to me a satisfactory proof that she had no longer 
such avaricious feelings." 

(i I am very glad to hear all this, Anderson, I assure you, for she 
was one of my earliest friends, and I loved her." 

" Not more than she loved you, Tom. Her last words almost 
were calling down blessings on your head ; and, thanks be to God ! 
she died as a Christian should die, and, I trust, is now happy." 

'•' Amen ! " said I ; for I was much moved at Anderson's dis- 
course. 



poor jack:. 355 

After a pause, Anderson said, " You know, Tom, that she has 
left you all that she had. She told me before, that such was her 
intention, although I said nothing to you about it ; but I thought it 
as well that Mr. Wilson should make out a paper for her to put her 
name to, which she did : Ben and I witnessed it ; but as for what 
she has left you, I cannot imagine it can be much, for we ex- 
amined, and found no money except about 7/. in two small boxes ; 
and then in her will she has left your sister Virginia 10/. ; now 
when that comes to be paid, I'm sure I don't know whether the 
things in the shop will fetch so much money as will pay your 
sister's legacy, and the expenses of her funeral." 

" It's of no consequence," replied I, smiling ; " but we shall see. 
At all events, all her debts shall be paid, and her funeral shall be 
decent and respectable. Good-bye now, Anderson, I must go up 
and see my mother and sister.'' 

Old Nanny's remains were consigned to the tomb on the follow- 
ing Monday. Her funeral was, as I had desired it to be, very 
respectable, and she was followed to the grave by Anderson, my 
father, Ben, and me. As soon as it was over, I requested Ander- 
son to walk with me to Mr. Wilson's. 

" I'm afraid, Tom," said Mr. Wilson, " you'll find, like a great 
many other residuary legatees, that you've not gained much by 
the compliment." 

"Nevertheless, will you oblige me by walking down with Ander- 
son and me to her house ? " 

" And take off the seals, I presume, in your presence : but the 
fact is, Tom, that not thinking the property quite safe there, even 
under seal, I have kept it all in my own pocket/' 

" Nevertheless, oblige me by coming down." 

" Oh, with all my heart, since you do not like to take possession 
unless in due form." 

As soon as we arrived at the hovel, I went into the bed-room, 
and threw open the window. I then, to their great astonishment, 
went to the fire-grate, — threw out some rubbish which was put 
into it, — pulled up the iron back, and removed the bricks. In a 

a a 2 



356 toor jack. 

short time I produced two small boxes, one of them very heavy. 
There was nothing else in the hole. 

" Here," said I, " Mr. Wilson, is a portion of the property which 
you have overlooked." 

" No wonder," replied he : " pray let us see what it is." 

I opened the boxes, and, to their surprise, made up in a 
variety of packages, I counted out gold coin to the amount of 
420/. 

" Not a bad legacy," said Mr. Wilson. " Then you knew of 
this." 

" Of course; I have known it some time — ever since the at- 
tempt to rob her." 

" But what are those papers ? " 

On one was written "Arsenic — Poison ; " — on the other, " Re- 
ceipt for Toothache" 

« Nothing of any value," said I, " by the outside." I opened 
them, and found, to my surprise, bank notes to the exact amount 
of 200/. 

" Well, I declare/' said I, smiling, " I had nearly thrown all this 
money away." 

" And now you see what induced the old woman to write those 
labels on the outside of it ; — in case she should be robbed, that the 
robbers might have thrown the papers away — as you nearly did, — 
and as very probably they might have done." 

" Well, Mr. Wilson, I have no further search to make. Will 
you oblige me by taking care of this money for me ? " 

« Yes — that is, if you'll carry the gold, which is rather heavy, 
up to my house, and then I will give you a receipt for the whole." 

Anderson then left us, and I followed Mr. Wilson home. As 
soon as the money was all re-counted, and a note made of it. Mr. 
Wilson asked me what I wished that he should do with it. I re- 
plied, what was the truth — that I really did not know what to do 
with it, but still I should like to lay it out in something tangible. 

" You want to buy a farm, T' suppose, and be a landed pro- 
prietor, like Bramble; but I'm afraid there is not enough. But 
I tell you what, Tom — we lawyers know many things which do 



POOR JACK. 357 

not come to every body's ears ; and I know that the proprietor of 
the house in which your mother lives, wishes to sell it ; and I think, 
as he is much pinched for money, that this sum will about buy it. 
Now your mother pays fifty-five guineas a year for it, and if it sells 
for 600/., that will give you more than nine per cent, for your 
money. What do you think ? " 

" Well, sir, I think it's the very best thing I can do ; if more 
should be necessary, I have saved a little besides, which Bramble 
takes care of. Well, then, I'll see about it." 

A few days afterwards Mr. Wilson told me that the house was 
to be had for 560/., and that he had closed the bargain. 

" I thank you, sir," replied I. " Since I have been with you I 
have been thinking about it, and I wish now you would make it 
over to my father for his life. You see, sir, my father does put 
my mother to some expense, and I should like him to be more 
independent of her. If the house belongs to him, the rent will 
more than meet any demands he may make upon her purse — and 
it will be pleasant for both parties — and my mother will pay more 
respect to my father." 

" I shall do it with pleasure, Tom. You deserve money, for 
you make a good use of it — I must say that. Come to me to- 
morrow." 

The next day I went to my father, and gave him the deed by 
which he was owner of my mother's house. " Well, now, Tom," 
said he, after I had explained why I did so, " this is the kindest 
thing that ever was doEc, and God bless you, boy, and a thousand 
thanks. I shan't mind now calling for two extra pots of porter 
when I have friends — and I say, Tom, is the garden mine too ? " 

" Yes, and summer-house, father, all your own property." 

" Well, then," replied he, chuckling, " I have a bit of land of 
my own to stick my timber toe on after all. Well, I never did 
expect that. I must go up there, and stand upon it, and feel how 
I feel." 

I communicated to my mother that my father was in fu(ure her 
landlord, at which she expressed much surprise, until I told her 

a a 3 



358 POOR JACK. 

how I became possessed of the money- When my father came in, 
which he did shortly after, she said rather sharply, — 

" Well, Mr. Saunders, I suppose I must pay you my rent now 
every quarter ? " 

" Pay me ! " exclaimed my father ; " come, not so bad as that, 
neither. Hav'n't you found me in beer, without a grumble, for these 
many years, and do you think I've forgotten it ? No, no ! You've 
been a kind woman to me after all, although things did go a little 
cross at first, and so here's the paper for you to keep for me ; and 
there's an end of the matter, only " 

" Only what?" inquired my mother, looking very kindly at my 
father. 

" Only let's have a pot of beer now, to drink Tom's health — 
that's all." 

Having thus satisfactorily settled this point, I returned to 
Chatham. I had promised to take a farewell of my sister and the 
O'Connors, as I expected they would leave previous to my again 
coming up the river. 



CHAP. L. 

AN ADVENTURE WHICH AT FIRST PROMISED TO BE THE MOST UNFOR- 
TUNATE, AND EVENTUALLY PROVED THE MOST FORTUNATE IN MY 
LIFE. 

As Sir James O'Connor would have to remain at least a fort- 
night longer at Chatham, until his ship was paid off, I made Lady 
O'Connor promise to write to me, and then started for Deal. I 
found Bramble and Bessy as usual, delighted to see me, and Mrs. 
Maddox was as talkative as ever. I received a hitter from Lady 
O'Connor, and also one from Dr. Tadpole, written at the request 
of my father, informing me that by a letter from Mrs. St. Felix, 
there was little prospect of her return to Greenwich. I had not 



POOR JACK. 359 

been a week at Deal, when a large ship dropped her anchor in the 
Downs, and made the signal for a pilot. 

'•' Well, Tom," said Bramble, "I think I shall take a turn now, 
for I want to go up and see old Anderson."' 

" I will take her through, if you please, father ; and you may 
go as a passenger. You don't want money, and I do." 

u All's right, Tom ; — well, then, I'll go as a passenger, and you 
shall be pilot." 

" Why must you go at all, father ? Why not go to Greenwich 
by the stage ? " exclaimed Bessy. " When will you leave off', my 
dear father ? Surely you've enough now, and might let Tom go 
without you." 

" Quite enough money, but not quite enough of the salt water 
yet, Bessy," replied Bramble; "and when I do travel. I won't go 
by land, when I can sail under canvas." 

" Well, you may go this time, father, but this is the last : if you 
won't leave off, I will not stay here, that's positive ; so when you 
come on shore some fine day, you may expect to find me absent 
without leave." 

u Very well ; then I'll send Tom to look after you : he'll soon 
bring you back again." 

" Tom ! he wouldn't take the trouble to look after me." 

'• Very true," replied I, " every woman who requires looking 
after is not worth the trouble ; but I've no fear but we shall find 
you when we come back." 

" Tom, I hate you," replied Bessy. "Why do you not join me 
in persuading father to stay on shore?" 

" Well, if you hate me, Bessy, it proves, at all events, that I'm 
not indifferent to you," said I, laughing; "but really and truly, 
Bessy, I do not consider there is any very great risk in your 
father going up the river with me, as he will be in smooth water 
before dark." 

" Well, but, allowing that, why should father go at all ? " 

" I want to see old Anderson, my love," replied Bramble, taking 
his pipe out of his mouth. 

"Yes, and if you once begin again, you'll not leave off — I 

A A 4 



360 POOR JACK. 

know it well : you will never come home except to get clean 
linen, and be off again ; and I shall be in a constant state of alarm 
and misery. How selfish of you. father ! You had better by far 
have left me to drown on the Goodwin Sands — it would have 
been more kind," replied Bessy, weeping. 

" Bessy," said Bramble, " it's my opinion that you are in love." 

"In love !" cried Bessy, colouring to her throat. 

"Yes, in love, my dear; or you would not talk such non- 
sense." 

H If loving you as my father is being in love, I am, unfor- 
tunately." 

" That's only half of the story ; now give us the other," said 
Bramble, smiling. 

" 'What do you mean ? " inquired Bessy, turning to him. 

" Why, how do you love Tom ? *' 

" Not half so much as I love her/' said I. 

"Well, if that'.- the case/' replied Bramble, "we may as well 
publish the banns ; for Bessy's in love right over the ankles." 

" Fathei\ this may be very pleasant mockery ; but I think it 
is not kind to breed ill-will between those who live under the same 
roof. Xow. you may go away ; and if the knowledge that you 
have made me unhappy will add to the pleasure of your journev, 
I can assure you that you have succeeded." Bessy having said 
this, immediately left the room and went up stairs. 

"Well," said Bramble, after a pause, "I'm glad that I nevet 
was in love; for people so situated do make themselves verv 
silly, that's a fact. Tom. if you're going, it's time to be off." 

« Why — " replied I, hesitatingly. 

"I know — but I tell you. Torn, no such thing. She'll have 
a good cry, and then she'll come down as well as ever. Leave 
her alone, till we come back." 

Bramble and I then left the cottage, jumped into the galley, and 
were soon on board of the ship. 

On our arrival on board we found that the vessel was a Dutch 
Indiaman, which had been captured by one of our cruizers on her 



POOR JACK. 



361 



voyage home from Java. She was laden very deeply with cin- 
namon, nutmegs, cloves, and other spices, besides pepper, and 
was valued at 400,000/. sterling. She had come home from the 
island of St. Helena, with convoy, and was now proceeding up the 
river, to be given in charge of the prize agents in London. Not 
only her hold, but even her main deck, as far aft as the mainmast, 
was filled up with her cargo ; in short, she was a very valuable 
prize, and although when I came on board the pepper made me 
sneeze for ten minutes, the officer in charge told me very truly 
that she was a prize " not to be sneezed at." She was manned by 
a lieutenant and eighteen men, belonging to the frigate which 
had captured her — hardly sufficient for so large a vessel, but no 
more could be spared. 

' ; We'll up anchor as soon as you please, pilot," said the lieu- 
tenant, '•' for I shall not be sorry to get rid of my charge, I assure 
you." 

" I don't doubt you, sir," replied Bramble — il Well, you've 
not much farther to go." 

We weighed with the young flood ; the weather was fine, but, 
as usual at that time of the year, thick fogs prevailed. We had, 
however, a leading wind, and had well rounded the North Fore- 
land, and entered the Queen's Channel, when it came on very 
thick. 

" Tom, have you the bearings ? " said Bramble ; " if not, take 
them at once, for the fog will soon be over the land." 

;i I have them," replied I, (i and we may as well put them 
down on the log-board : — North Foreland Light N.N.W. J W. 
Why, we should see the Tongue buoy. Now we'll drop the 
anchor and furl the sails, if you please, sir — we can do 
nothing at present." We did so : the fog came on thicker 
than before, and with it a drizzling rain and wind from the 
S. At dusk there was no change, or prospect of it. The men 
went down to supper, and the watch Mas set. Bramble and 
I did not turn in : we laid down on the lockers of the cabin, and 
everv now and then went on deck to see how the weather was. 



562 POOR JACK. 

About eleven o'clock we were awakened by a noise : we both 
started up, and went on deck. To our surprise it was full of men 
— we had been boarded by a French privateer, and they had 
gained possession of the deck without any alarm being given, for 
the men who had the watch had sheltered themselves from the 
rain down the hatchway. 

As soon as we came up, we were collared and seized. 

" Pilot," said Bramble. 

" Pilot," said I. 

They then asked us in English, how many men were on board. 

As it was no use concealing the fact, we replied : a portion of 
the privateer's men then went clown, and surprised them all in their 
beds. In about five minutes they came up again, leading the 
lieutenant and his men, in their shirts. By the directions of the 
French captain they were immediately passed over the side into 
the privateer, and Bramble and I were the only two Englishmen 
left on board of the ship. 

The French captain then asked us if we knew where we were ; 
and whether there was any clanger. We replied that we were 
among the sands, and that it would be difficult to get her out of 
them with that wind, and impossible until the tide turned. 

" When will the tide turn?" said the captain. 

" In an hour or less ? " replied Bramble, appealing to me. 

I replied in the affirmative. 

" Well, then, you will take this vessel clear of the shoals, 
my men ; and if you do not, your lives are worth nothing : — hold 
pistols to their heads," continued he to the officer, '-'and the 
moment that the ship touches, blow their brains out." 

Here Bramble, to my astonishment, went on his knees. " Spare 
our lives," said he, " and we will take the vessel safe to the 
French coast ;" at the same time he gave me a pinch. 

" If vou do not you shall not live a minute," said the captain 
(another pinch from Bramble). I now understood him, and I 
also went clown on my knees, and pretended to cry. " We can't 
take her out if this weather lasts," said I, whimpering. "It's 
impossible." 



POOR JACK. 



S63 



" No, no ! not if this weather lasts," said Bramble, " but as 
soon as it changes we will do it." 

" Very well, so long as you do it when you can, that is all I 
ask. Now," said he to the officer he had before addressed, "you'll 
have twenty men — keep a sharp look out — and don't lose a 
moment in getting under weigh as soon as you can." 

The captain then returned to the privateer with the rest of the 
men, leaving the ship in charge of the prize-master. The pri- 
vateer was boomed off; but whether she dropped her anchor near 
to us, or remained under weigh, I could not tell. The men who 
had held the pistols to our heads now went away with the others, 
to plunder, according to the manners and customs of all pri- 
vateer's-men, of whatever nation they may happen to be. Bramble 
and I walked aft. 

et Pinned once more, by all that's blue ! well, it can't be helped 
— but we're not in a French prison yet." 

" Why did you go down on your knees to those fellows ? " said 
I, rather sulkily. 

" Why, because I wished them to think we were chicken- 
hearted, and that we should not be watched — and might have a 
chance — who knows ? M 

" Two against twenty are heavy odds," replied I. 
" That depends upon whether you trust to your head or your 
arms. It must be head work this time. You see, Tom, we have 
so far a chance, that we cannot weigh till it clears up — they know 
that as well as we do. I'm pretty sure it will be thick all to- 
morrow, and perhaps longer ; so you see something may turn up 
by that time. We are well in, and right in the Channel, for 
vessels up or down — I say again we are not in a French prison 
yet. They can't take her out of this — we must do it ; and we may 
run on shore if we like : and I tell you what, Tom, if it wasn't for 
Bessy, I'd just as soon that my brains should be blown out as that 
these French fellows should take such a rich prize. Xow let's go 
below — we mustn't be seen talking together too much ; but look 
out sharp, Tom, and watch my motions." 

The officer who had charge of the vessel now came on deck, 



364 POOR JACK. 

and looked round him : he could speak English sufficient to carry 
on a conversation. The weather was very thick, and the rain 
drove down with the wind : he saw that it was impossible that the 
ship could be moved. He told us that we should have a hundred 
guineas each and our liberty if we took the ship safe either to 
Ostend or any French port. We replied that we should be very 
glad to do so, as it would be ten times as much as we should have 
received for piloting her up the Thames ; and then we went down 
below. In the meantime the men were sent for on deck, divided 
into watches, and when the watch was set the others went down 
below again. After taking a glass or two of wine, for the French- 
men had soon rummaged out what there was to be drank in the 
cabin, Bramble and I returned on deck. We found the Frenchmen 
in charge of the watch diligent : one was looking out forward — 
another at the taffrail ; the remaining three were walking the deck. 
Bramble went to the gangway, and I followed him. 

" Tom, I see the hatchway grating is on deck — I only wish we 
once had them all beneath it." 

" I only wish we had all but the watch — I'd have a try for it 
then," replied I. 

" No, no, Tom, that wouldn't do ; but we must trust to Provi- 
dence and a sharp look out. See where you can put your hand 
upon a crowbar or handspike, in case you want it ; but don't touch 
it. Come, there's nothing to be done in any way just now, so 
let's go down and take a snooze for an hour or two ; and, Tom, if 
they ask us to drink, drink with them, and pretend to be half 
fuddled." 

We went down again, and found the privateer's-men getting 
very jolly; but they did not offer us anything to drink, so we laid 
on some spare sails outside the cabin, and tried to go to sleep, but I 
could not, for I was very unhappy. I could see no chance of our 
escape, as nothing but a man-of-war would be likely to interfere, 
and re-capture us. I thought of Virginia and Lady O'Connor, 
and then I thought of poor Bessy, and having left her in such an 
unfriendly way, perhaps to remain in a French prison for years. 
Bramble and I were fully aware that the promises of the prize-master 



POOR JACK. 365 

were only to cajole us, and that once in a French port, had we 
claimed the fulfilment of them, a kick would have been all which 
we should, in ail probability, receive for our pains. 

About one o'clock in the morning I rose and went on deck. The 
watch had been relieved ; the weather also looked brighter, as if 
it were going to clear up ; and I became still more depressed. 
Bramble soon followed me. 

" It's clearing up," said I, " but I don't think it will last." 

" Never a bit," replied Bramble ; " in half an hour it will be 
thicker than ever, so now I'll go and call the officer, and tell him 
he had better get under weigh — that will make him have less 
suspicion of us." 

Bramble did so ; the officer came on deck, the men were turned 
out, and the windlass was manned, for, although so large a vessel, 
she had no capstern. The men hove in the cable in silence, and 
were short stay apeak, when, as we had foreseen, it came on 
thicker than ever. Bramble pointed it out to the officer, who was 
perfectly satisfied that nothing could be done : the cable was 
veered out again, and the men sent below. 

" We hope you'll think of your promise to us, sir," said Bramble 
to the officer, as he was going down. 

" Yes, I will, I swear," replied he, slapping Bramble on the 
back. 

The morning broke, and the weather continued the same : it was 
not possible to see ten yards clear of the ship, and, of course, in such 
weather it was not likely that any other vessels would be attempting 
to pass through the Channel. At noon it cleared up a little, and 
the windlass was again manned ; but, in a short time, the fog became 
thicker than ever. The Frenchmen now became very impatient, 
but there was no help for it ; they walked about the deck swear- 
ing and stamping, and throwing out invectives against the fog and 
rain as they looked up at it. The night closed in ; the men were 
kept on deck until 11 o'clock, when the flood tide made, and then 
they were sent down again, as nothing could be done until the ebb 
At 12 o'clock the weather became worse, the wind freshened con- 
siderably, and veered more to the southward, the rain poured down 



366 POOR JACK. 

in torrents, and the men of the watch sheltered themselves down 
the hatchway. The officer came up on the deck, and called 
Bramble, who had been down below. Bramble told him what was 
very true, that the wind would probably shift, and the weather 
clear up in a few hours, and that we should be able to weigh with the 
coming down of the ebb. He asked Bramble whether he thought 
it would blow hard. Bramble could not say, but it would be better 
that the men should not turn in, as they might be wanted, and that 
if the fore-topmast staysail Mas hoisted, she would lie better 
at her anchor ; and in case of parting, he would be able to manage 
her till sail was set. This advice was followed, and all the men 
sat up in the cabin drinking — those who had the watch occa- 
sionally coming down to refresh themselves. 

They gave us a glass of grog each that night, a proof that they 
had drank until they were good-natured. Bramble said to me, as 
we sat down outside, " It will be clear to-morrow morning, Tom, 
that's sartain — it must be to-night or never. I've been thinking 
of lowering the quarter boat down, when they are a little more 
mizzled — they are getting on pretty fast, for Frenchmen haven't 
the heads for drinking that Englishmen have. Now it pours down 
beautifully, and here they come down again for shelter." 

For three hours we watched ; it was then four o'clock, and the 
men were most of them asleep, or more than half drunk. Those 
of the middle watch came down dripping wet, and called the 
others to relieve them, but only two of them answered to the call. 
They who had come down began to drink freely to warm them- 
selves, after their ducking, and by half-past four, except the two men 
on deck, every Frenchman was either fast asleep or muddled. 

" Tom," said Bramble, " now's our time — slip up on deck — go 
forward if no one is there, and saw through the cable as quickly 
as you can — it won't take long, for it's a coir rope. As soon as 
you have got through two strands out of the three, come aft." 

I went on deck, and looked round ; I could not see the two men, 
it was so dark. I then walked forward, and looking well round to 
see that they were not on the forecastle, I sat down before the 
windlass, and commenced operations. In a couple of minutes I 



POOR JACK. 367 

had divided the two strands, and I went aft, where I found Bramble 
at the binnacle, in which a light was burning. 

" I have done it," said I, '• and if the wind freshens at all, she 
will part" 

•• All's right," said Bramble, u those two fellows are fast asleep 
under the tarTrail, covered up with the trysail, which lies there. 
Now, Tom, for a bold push ; go down once more, and see how 
they are getting on in the cabin.'' 

I went down : every man was asleep — some on the locker, 
some with their heads on the table. I came on deck : it rained 
harder than ever. 

"This will be a clearing shower, Tom, depend upon it; and 
the wind is freshening up again. Now, have you looked out for a 
handspike or crowbar ? " 

" Yes, I know where there are two." 

" Then come with me : we must unship the ladder, and pull it 
up on deck, and then put on the grating ; after that we must take 
our chance — we may succeed, and we may not — all depends upon 
their not waking too soon." 

We went to the hatchway, cut the cleat-lashings, hauled the 
ladder on deck, and ihen put on the grating. 

" That will do, Tom, for the present. Xow do you take the 
helm with a crowbar all ready by your side. I will go forward 
and cut the cable ; if those fellows rouse up while I am forward, 
you must do your best. I leave you, Tom, because you are more 
powerful than I am." 

;i I'll manage them both, never fear," whispered I. 

u When she swings, mind you put the helm a-starboard, Tom," 
said Bramble, in my ear. 

This was the most nervous part of the whole transaction : the men 
abaft might wake, and I should have to master them how I could 
— and even if I did, the scuffle might awake those below, who 
were not yet secured ; although, for a time, it would be difficult 
for them to get on deck. But fortune favoured us ; the cable 
was severed, the ship swung round, and Bramble returned aft, and 
took the helm. 



368 POOR JACK. 

" Now is the time to see if I'm a pilot or not, Tom," said 
he. " I think 1 can steer her through by compass, now that 
it's nearly high water — luck's all." It was fortunate that we 
got the staysail hoisted for us, or we could have made nothing 
of it. 

" It's clearing up fast," said I, as I kept my eyes upon where 
the men were lying abaft; " and there'll be plenty of wind." 

" Yes, and we'll have daylight soon. Tom, I don't want you . 
I should like you to step aft, and stand over those two chaps ; 
if they wake, knock them senseless — don't kill them, as you can 
easily bind them while they are stupefied. And, Tom, look about 
you for some seizings all ready. I wish they would wake, for 
we are not safe while they are not secure. Put a handspike by 
me, and, if necessary, I will leave the helm for a minute, and 
help you : it's better that she should go on shore, than they 
should master us. We're pretty safe now, at all events — I see 
the land — all's right." 

It was now daylight. After this whispering with Bramble, I 
went aft with a handspike in my hand — and I had not been there 
more than two minutes when one of the privateer's-men turned 
the canvass on one side, and looked up. The handspike came 
down upon his head, and he dropped senseless; but the noise 
roused up the other, and I dealt him a blow more severe than 
the first. I then threw down my weapon, and, perceiving the 
deep-sea lead-line coiled up on the reel, I cut off sufficient, and 
in a short time had bound them both by the hands and feet. They 
groaned heavily, and I was afraid that I had killed them — but 
there was no help for it. 

" They are safe," said I, returning to Bramble. 
" I thought I heard you, but I did not look round at the time. 
Half an hour more, Tom, and, even with this wind, we shall be 
safe — and, Tom, our fortune's made. If they wake below, we 
must fight hard for it, for we've a right to salvage, my boy — 
one eighth of the whole cargo — that's worth fighting for. Depend 
upon it they'll be stirring soon — so, Tom, go aft, and drag the 
trysail here, and put it on the hatchway grating — its weight will 




Wi if 

V % 



TOM BEATING DOWX THE FREXC" 



POOR JACK. 369 

prevent their lifting it up in a hurry. If we can only hold our 
own for twenty minutes longer, she is ours, and all right. ' 

As soon as I had stowed the trysail on the hatchway grating, 
I looked about to see what else I could put on the skylight, 
which they might also attempt to force up. I could find nothing 
but the coils of rope, which I piled on ; but, while I was so doing, 
a pistol was fired at me from below, and the ball passed through 
the calf of my leg ; it was, however, not a wound to disable me, 
and I bound it up with my handkerchief. 

" They're all alive now, Tom, so you must keep your eyes 
open. However, we're pretty safe — the light vessel is not a mile 
off. Keep away from the skylight — you had better stand upon 
the trysail, Tom — you will help to keep the hatchway down, for 
they are working at it." 

Another pistol was now fired at Bramble, which missed him. 

" Tom, see if there's no bunting aft, and, if so, just throw 
some over this part of the sky -light, it will blind them at all events ; 
otherwise I'm just a capital mark for them." 

I ran aft, and gathered some flags, which I brought and laid 
over the sky-light, so as to intercept their view of Bramble; 
but whilst I was so doing another pistol-shot was fired — it passed 
me, but hit Bramble, taking off one of his fingers. 

" That's no miss, but we've got through the worst of it, Tom — 
I don't think they can see me now — don't put that English 
ensign on — but hoist it Union downwards. I shall round to 
now ; there's the men-of-war in the Medway. Why don't the 
fools look out, and they will see that they can't escape." 

" Thev've only the stern windows to look out of: the quarter- 
galleries are boarded up." 

<•' Then, Tom, just look if they have not beat them out, for you 
know they may climb on deck by them." 

It was fortunate that Bramble mentioned this : I went aft with 
the handspike in my hand, and when I was about to look over, I 
met face to face a Frenchman, who had climbed out of the star- 
board quarter-gallery, and was just gaining the deck. A blow 
with the handspike sent him overboard, and he went astern ; but 

B B 



370 POOR JACK. 

another was following him, and I stood prepared to receive him. 
It was the officer in command, who spoke English. He paused at 
the sight of the other man falling overboard and my uplifted 
handspike; and I said to hint, "It's of no use — look at the En- 
glish men-of-war close to you : if you do not go back to the cabin, 
and keep your men quiet, when the men-of-war's men come on 
board we will show you no quarter/' 

We were now entering the Medway ; and the Frenchman per- 
ceived that they could not escape, and would only bring mischief 
on themselves by any farther assaults, so he got into the quarter- 
gallery again, and spoke to his men. As soon as I perceived that he 
was entering, I ran over to the other side to the larboard quarter- 
gallerv, and there again I found a Frenchman had nearly gained the 
deck. I levelled the handspike at his head, but he dodged, and 
returned to the cabin by the way he came; and after that there 
were no more attempts at recovering the vessel. In five minutes 
more we were abreast of the Euphrosyne, Sir James O'Connor's 
frigate, which was now lying, with only her lower masts in, along- 
side of the hulk. I hailed for assistance, and let fly the foretop- 
mast staysail sheet, while Bramble rounded the ship to. The boats 
were sent on board immediately; and as we had not a cable 
bent, they made the ship fast to the hulk astern of them. We 
stated our case in few words to the officer ; and having ascertained 
that Sir James O'Connor was on board, requested that we might 
be sent to the frigate. 

" Is it you ? " said Sir James, as I came on the gangway ; 
" what is it all about — are you hurt ? Come down in the 
cabin." 

Bramble and I followed him down into the cabin ; and I stated 
the whole particulars of the capture and re-capture. 

" Excellent — most excellent! I wish you both joy; but first 
we must have the surgeon here." Sir James rang the bell ; and 
when the surgeon came he went on deck to give orders. 

The ball had passed through my leg, so that the surgeon had 
little to do to me. Bramble's finger was amputated, and in a few 
minutes we were all right, and Sir James came down again, 



u 




POOR JACK. 371 

" I should say, stay on board till you are able to get about 
again ; but the ship will be paid off" to-morrow, so I had better send 
you up to Chatham directly. You are entitled to salvage, if ever 
men were, for you have earned it gloriously ; and I will take care 
that you are done justice to. I must go now and report the 
vessel and particulars to the admiral ; and the first lieutenant will 
send you to Chatham in one of' the cutters. You'll be in good 
hands, Tom, for you will have two nurses." 

"\Ye were taken up to Chatham to the hotel, where we found 
Lady O'Connor and Virginia very much surprised, as may be 
imagined, at our being brought there wounded ; however, we 
were neither of us ill enough to go to bed, and had a sitting-room 
next to theirs. 

This re-capture made a great deal of noise. At first the agent 
for the prize wrote down a handsome letter to us, complimenting 
us upon our behaviour, and stating that he was authorised to 
present us each with 500/. for our conduct; but Sir James 
O'Connor answered the letter, informing him that we claimed, 
and would have, our one- eighth, as entitled to by law, and that he 
would see us righted. Mr. Wilson, whom we employed as our 
legal adviser, immediately gave the prize agent notice of an action 
in the Court of Admiralty, and finding we were so powerfully 
backed, and that he could not help himself, he offered 40,000/., 
which was one-eighth, valuing the cargo at 320,000/. The cargo 
proved to be worth more than 4-00,000/., but Mr. Wilson advised 
us to close with the offer, as it was better than litigating the ques- 
tion ; so we assented to it, and the money was paid over. 

In a fortnight we were both ready to travel again. Sir James 
O'Connor had remained a week longer than he intended to have 
done at Chatham on our account. We now took leave of them, 
and having presented Virginia with 5000/., which I had directed 
Mr. Wilson to settle upon her, we parted, the O'Connors and 
Virginia for Leamington, and Bramble and I for Deal. 



b b 2 



372 POOR JACK, 



CHAP. LI. 

BEING THE LAST CHAPTER, THE READER MAY PRETTY WELL GUESS 
THE CONTENTS OF IT. 

" Tom, do you know that I very often find myself looking about 
me, and asking myself if all that has happened is true or a dream," 
said Bramble to me, as we sat inside of the coach to Dover, for 
there were no other inside passengers but ourselves. " I can't help 
thinking that great good fortune is as astounding as great ca- 
lamity. Who would have thought, when I would, in spite of all 
Bessy's remonstrances, go round in that ship with you, that in the 
first place we should have been taken possession of by a privateer 
in the very narrows (he was a bold cruizer that Frenchman)! 
After we were captured I said to myself, Bessy must have had a 
forewarning of what was to happen, or she never would have been, 
as I thought, so perverse : and since it has turned out so for- 
tunately, I can't help saying how fortunate it was that we did not 
allow her to persuade us ; for had we not both gone, nothing 
could have been done. Well, I think we may promise Bessy this 
time, when w r e meet her, that we will not trust ourselves to salt 
water again in a hurry. What do you think, Tom?" 

" No; I think the best thing I can do is to marry, and live on 
shore," replied I. 

" Yes, Tom — that's it, — give me your hand ; you don't know 
how happy you make me. We'll all live together ; but where 
shall we live, for the poor little cottage that I thought quite big 
enough for us a month ago will not do now ? " 

" We have plenty of time to talk that, over, father. I love the 
cottage for many reasons ; although, as you say, it is not large 
enough now for our means, or future w r ay of living." 

" And I love it too, boy ; I love to look out of the door and see 
the spot where my Bessy rescued me from death. God bless her ! 



POOR JACK. 373 

she is a noble girl, Tom, though I say it who — but I'm not her 
father after all ; and if I were, I would still say it." 

" It is evident, by her letter to you, that she has been most 
anxious about us. What will she say when she hears we have both 
been wounded ?" 

"Ay! it wouldn't have done to have told her that, or she 
would have set off for Chatham, as sure as we are sitting here." 

Here a pause ensued for some time, and we were busied with 
our own thoughts : the silence was at last broken by me. 

« Father," said I, " I should like to ask my father and Peter 
Anderson to come down to us ; they can easily get leave." 
" Is it to be present at your wedding, Tom ?" 
" Exactly — if Bessy will consent." 

« Well, I have no doubt of that, Tom ; but she will now require 
a little courting — you know why." 

« Why — because all women like it, I suppose." 
" No, Tom ; it is because she was in love before you were, d'ye 
understand;— and now that things are all smooth, and you follow 
her, why it's natural, I suppose, that she should shy off a little in 
her turn. You must mind that, Tom ; it's a sort of soothing to the 
mortification of having at one time found herself, as it were, 
rejected." 

" Well, I shan't mind that ; it will only serve me right for being 
such a fool as not to have perceived her value before. But how 
do you understand women so well, father ? " 

" Because, Tom, I've been looking on, and not performing, all 
my life : except in one instance in a long life, I've only been a 
bystander in the way of courtship and matrimony. Here we are 
at last, and now for a chaise to Deal. Thank God, we can afford 
to shorten the time, for Bessy's sake, poor thing ! " 

We arrived at the cottage ; the sound of the wheels had called 
out not only Bessy and Airs. Maddox, but all the neighbours ; for 
they had heard of our good fortune. Bessy, as soon as she had 
satisfied herself that it was Bramble and me, went into the cottage 
again. Once more we entered the humble roof. Bessy flew into 
her father's arms, and hung weeping on his shoulder. 

b b 3 



374 POOR JACK, 

'•' Hav'n't you a kind word to say for Tom?" said Bramble, kiss- 
ing her as he released himself. 

" Does he deserve it, to leave me as he did. laughing at my dis- 
tress ? He had no right to treat me so." 

" Indeed, Bessy, you do me injustice. I said at the time, that I 
thought there was no risk ; and I certainly did think there was 
none. Who would have expected a privateer half way up the 
Thames, any more than a vessel with twenty men on board could 
be re-captured by two men ? " 

" Well, Bessy, you ought to make friends with him ; for without 
his arm, your father would not have been back here quite so soon. 
He beat down the Frenchmen, one after another, in good style, 
when they attempted to recover the vessel — that he did. I can tell 
you, wounded as he was." 

" Wounded ? " cried Bessy, starting, her eyes running over me 
to find out where, 

" Yes, with a bullet in his leg ; I didn't like to say a word about 
it in the letter. But I suppose if he had been killed you would 
not have cared? n 

" Oh, father ! " cried Bessy, as she turned towards me, and I 
received her in my arms. 

Bessy soon recovered her smiles, and thankful for our preserv- 
ation and good fortune; and satisfied with our mutual affection, 
we passed a most happy evening. Somehow or another, Bramble 
having sent Mrs. Maddox on a message, found out that it was very 
sultry in-doors, and that he would take his pipe on the beach, 
He left me alone with Bessy; and now, for the first time, I plainly 
told her the state of my affections, and asked her to consent to be 
my wife. I did not plead in vain, as the reader may suppose from 
what he has already been made acquainted with. 

After Bessy had retired, and I was sitting with Bramble, who 
had his glass of grog and pipe as usual, I made him acquainted 
with my success. 

" All right. Tom," said he, "I'm thankful — and God bles- 
you both." 

And had I not reason also to be thankful? When I had retired 




fi 



POOR JACK. 375 

to my room that night I thought over the various passages in my 
life. What might I have been if Providence had not watched 
over me? When neglected in my youth, in a situation which 
exposed ine to every temptation, had not Old Anderson been sent 
as a guardian to keep me in the right path, to instruct me, and 
to give me that education, without which my future success might 
have turned out a disadvantage instead of a source of gratitude. 
In Bramble, again, I had met with a father, to supply the place 
of one who was not in a situation to do his duty to me, or for- 
ward me in life. In Old Nanny I had met with a kind friend, 
one who, at the same time that she would lead me right, was a 
warning to me from her sufferings. To Mrs. St, Felix I was 
equally indebted — and had I not been permitted to pay the debt 
of gratitude to both of them ? Even my mother's harshness, which 
appeared at first to my short-sightedness to have been so inde- 
fensible, was of great advantage to me, as it had stimulated me 
to exertion and industry, and pointed out to me the value of 
independence. Was I not also most fortunate in having escaped 
from the entanglement with Janet, who, had I married her, would, 
in all probability, have proved an useless, if not a faithless help- 
mate ; and still more so, in finding that there was, as it were, es- 
pecially reserved for me the affection of such a noble, right- 
minded creature as Bessy? My life, commenced in rags and 
poverty, had, by industry and exertion, and the kindness of 
others, step by step progressed to competence, and every prospect 
of mundane happiness. Had I not, therefore, reason to be 
grateful, and to feel that there had been a little cherub who had 
watched over the life of Poor Jack? On my bended knees I 
acknowledged it fervently and gratefully, and prayed that, should 
it please Heaven that I should in after life meet any reverse, I 
might bear it without repining, and say, with all humility, i( Tin- 
will and not mine, O Lord, be done! " 

How bright was the next morning, and how cheerful did the 
dancing waves appear to me! — and Bessy's eyes were radiant as 
the day, and her smiles followed in rapid succession; and Bramble 
looked so many years younger — he was almost too happy to 

b b 1< 



376 POOR JACK. 

smoke — it was really the sunshine of the heart which illumined 
our cottage. And thus did the few days pass, until Anderson and 
my father made their appearance. They were both surprised at 
Bessy's beauty, and told me so : they had heard that she was 
handsome, but they were not prepared for her uncommon style ; 
for now that her countenance was lighted up with joy, she was 
indeed lovely. 

"Well, Tom,"' observed my father, ."there's onlv one thins 
which surprises me." 
" What is that ? " 

" Why, how, with such a fine craft in view, you could ever have 
sailed in the wake of such a little privateer as — but I must not 
mention her — never mind, don't answer me that; — but another 
question — when are you going to be spliced? "' 

" Very soon, I hope ; but I really don't exactly know : all I 
can say is, the sooner the better." 

" And so say I. Shall I bring up the subject on the plea of my 
leave being only for ten days ? " 

" Yes, father, I wish you Mould, as it is really a good reason 
to allege for its taking place immediately." 

" Tom, my dear boy," said Old Anderson, « from what I can per- 
ceive, you have great reason to be thankful in having obtained 
this young woman for your future partner in life. I admire her 
exceedingly, and I trust in Heaven that you will be happy.' 9 

" I ought to be," replied I, f; and grateful also, particularly to 
you, .to whom, under Providence, I am so much indebted." 

" If the seed is sown upon good ground, it will always yield a 
good harvest, Tom. You are a proof of it, so thank Heaven, and 
not me. I wish to tell you what your father has mentioned to me. 
The fact is, Tom, he is in what may be called a false position at 
Greenwich. He is a pensioner, and has now sufficient not to 
require the charity, and he thinks that he ought not to avail him- 
self of it, now that you have made him independent; but if he 
leaves the Hospital and remains at Greenwich, he and your mother 
would not agree well together: they are very good friends at a 
certain distance, but I do not think, with her high notions, that they 



POOR JACK. 377 

could ever live together in the same house. He says that he 
should like to live either with you or near you; and I think myself, 
now that he is become so very steady a character, it does require 
your consideration whether you ought not to permit him. He 
will be a very good companion for Bramble, and they will get on 
well together. I do not mean to say that it might not be more 
agreeable if he were to remain at Greenwich, but he is your 
father, Tom, and you should make some sacrifice for a parent." 

" As far as I am concerned, Anderson, I most gladly consent. 
Bramble is to live with us — that is arranged, and if no objections 
are raised by others, you may be sure of my acceding, and indeed, 
if objections should be raised, of persuading all I can." 

(( You can do no more, Tom," replied Anderson ; " nor can 
more be expected." 

This point was very satisfactorily arranged. Bramble and Bessy 
both gave their cheerful consent, and it was settled that as soon 
as we had a house to receive him, my father should quit Green- 
wich, and live with us. The arguments of my father, added to 
the persuasions of Bramble and me, had their due weight, and 
on the 13th of September, 1807, Bessy and I exchanged our vows, 
and I embraced her as my own. 



FINALE. 

If the reader will refer back to the first part of this narrative, he 
will find that I was born in the year 1786 ; and as I am writing 
this in the year 1840, I am now 54 years old. I was but little 
more than 21 when I married : I have, therefore, the experience of 
32 years of a married life ; but I will not anticipate. I ended the 
last chapter with my own happy union ; I must now refer to those 
events which followed close upon that period. 



378 POOR JACK. 

Sir James and Lady O'Connor bad taken up their residence at 
Leamington, then a small village, and not the populous place which 
it has since become. After a few months' residence, during which 
I had repeated letters from Lady O'Connor and Virginia, they 
were so pleased with the locality and neighbourhood, that Sir 
James purchased a property of some hundred acres, and added 
to a house which was upon it, so as to make it a comfortable and 
elegant residence. Lady O'Connor, after the first year, presented 
her husband with a son, and has since that been very assiduous in 
increasing his family — more so, perhaps, than would have been con- 
venient to Sir James O'Connor's income at the time that he pur- 
chased the property, had it not been that the increase of its value, 
in consequence of a large portion of it having been taken as build- 
ing land, has been so great as to place them in most affluent cir- 
cumstances. About a year after my marriage, I had notice from 
Ladv O'Connor that a certain gentleman had arrived there who 
had shown great attention to Virginia ; and she added, that he 
had been very well received by my sister, being an old acquaint- 
ance of the name of Somerville, a clergyman, with a good living, 
and a very superior young man. I immediately recollected 
him as the preceptor, who had behaved with such propriety 
when my sister was persecuted by the addresses of the young 
nobleman ; and I, therefore, felt very easy upon the subject. A 
few months afterwards I had a letter from Virginia, stating that 
he had proposed, and that she had conditionally accepted him. I 
wrote to her, congratulating her upon the choice she had made, 
giving her father's consent and blessing (of my mother hereafter) ; 
and shortly after they were married ; and I am happy to say, that 
her marriage has turned out as fortunate as my own. 

We had remained in the cottage for some months after my own 
marriage, very undecided what we should do. Bramble did not 
like to quit the sea- side, nor, I believe, his old habits and localities. 
Money was of little value to him ; indeed, on my marriage, he 
had insisted upon settling upon Bessy and her children the whole 
sum he had received for the salvage of the Dutch Indiaman, re- 
serving for himself his farm near Deal. It did so happen, how- 



POOR JACK. 379 

ever, that about that period, while we were still in perplexity, I 
received a letter from Mr. Wilson's son, at Dover, telling me that 
the manor-house and 300 acres of land, adjoining to Bramble's 
farm, were to be disposed of. This exactly suited, so I made the 
purchase, and took possession, and then sent for my father to join 
us, which he hastened to do. Bramble did not, however, give up 
his cottage on the beach. He left Mrs. Maddox in it, and it was a 
favourite retirement for my father and him, who would remain 
there for several days together, amusing themselves with watching 
the shipping, and gaining intelligence from the various pilots as 
they landed, as they smoked their pipes on the shingle beach. It 
was not more than half a mile from the great house, so that it was 
very convenient ; and Bessy and I would often go with the children 
and indulge in reminiscences of the former scenes which had there 
occurred. 

My father and mother parted very good friends : the fact was, 
that she was pleased with the arrangement, as she did not like my 
father wearing a pensioner's coat, and did not want his company 
at her own house. When he left the Hospital, she insisted upon 
paying him his rent ; and she did so very punctually until she 
gave up business. On her marriage, my sister requested that 
we would come to Leamington and be present ; to which we 
all consented, particularly as it was a good opportunity of intro- 
ducing Bessy to her and Lady O'Connor. My mother was also to 
join the party on the occasion. The only circumstance worth 
mentioning was the surprise of my mother on being introduced 
to Lady O'Connor, and finding that in this great lady she met 
with her old acquaintance, Mrs. St. Felix. Whatever she may 
have felt, she certainly had tact enough to conceal it ; and was as 
warm in her congratulations as the best well-wisher. I must say, 
that I never knew my mother appear to such advantage as she did 
during this visit to Leamington ; she dressed remarkablv well, 
and would have persuaded those who did not know her historv, 
that she had always been in good society : but she had been a lady's 
maid and had learnt her mistress's airs ; and as she could dress others 
so well, it would have been odd if she did not know how to dress 



380 POOR JACK. 

herself. A good copy will often pass for an original. It was 
not till about six years after our marriage that my mother decided 
upon retiring from business. She had made a very comfortable 
provision for herself, as Mr. Wilson informed me, and took up her 
abode at Cheltenham, where she lived in a very genteel way, was 
considered quite a catch at card-parties, and when she did ask 
people to tea, she always did the thing in better style than any 
body else ; the consequence was that she was not visited by most 
people, but in time became rather a person of consideration. As 
she never mentioned her husband, it was supposed that she was a 
widow, and, in consequence of her well-regulated establishment, she 
received much attention from several Irish and foreign bachelors. 
In short, my mother obtained almost the pinnacle of her ambition, 
when she was once fairly settled at Cheltenham. I ought to ob- 
serve that when she arrived there, she had taken the precaution of 
prefixing a name to her own, to which by baptismal rite she cer- 
tainly was not entitled, and called herself Mrs. Montague Saunders. 

Shortly after Mrs. St. Felix had given notice to the doctor 
that she should not return, and that her shop, and the good- 
-will thereof, were for sale, I received a letter from my friend, 
Tom Cobb, the doctor's assistant, telling me that as he per- 
ceived he had now no chance of Mrs. St. Felix, he had some 
idea of taking her shop, and setting up as a tobacconist; his 
reasons were, that physic was a bore, and going out of nights when 
called up, a still greater. I wrote to Lady O'Connor inclosing 
Mr. Tom's letter, and pointed out to her that I thought it would 
be a public benefit to prevent Tom from killing so many people, as 
he certainly would do, if he continued in his present profession, and 
eventually set up for himself. She replied that she agreed with me, 
but at the same time that she was anxious to benefit fat Jane, who 
really was a very good girl ; and that therefore she empowered me 
to enter into a treaty with Mr. Thomas, by which : provided he 
could obtain the lady's consent, he was to wed her, and receive the 
stock in trade, its contents and fixtures, and good-will, &c. as her 
portion. 

As this was an offer which required some consideration before it 



POOR JACK. 



381 



was refused, I wrote to Tom, pointing out to him the advantages 
of settling down with a good business, with a wife to assist him, 
and a cat and dog all ready installed, upon such advantageous 
conditions. Tom agreed with me, won the love of fat Jane, 
which was easily done, as he had no rival, and in a short time was 
fairly set down as the successor of Mrs. St. Felix. As for the 
doctor, he appeared to envy Tom his having possession of the 
shop which his fair friend once occupied ; he was inconsolable, and 
there is no doubt but that he, from the period of her quitting 
Greenwich, wasted away, until he eventually was buried in the 
churchvard. A most excellent man was Doctor Tadpole, and his 
death was lamented by hundreds who esteemed his character, and 
many hundreds more who had benefited not only by his advice but 
by his charitable disposition. About ten years after my marriage 
Ben the Whaler was summoned away. His complaint was in the 
liver, which is not to be surprised at, considering how many gallons 
of liquor he had drank during his life. 

Peter Anderson — my father, my friend, my preceptor — was 
for many years inspecting boatswain of the Hospital. At last he 
became to a certain degree vacant in mind, and his situation was 
filled up by another. He was removed to what they call the help- 
less ward, where he was well nursed and attended. It is no un- 
common, indeed I may say it is a very common thing, for the old 
pensioners, as they gradually decay, to have their health quite 
perfect when the faculties are partly gone ; and there is a helpless 
ward established for that very reason, where those who are infirm 
and feeble, without disease, or have lost their faculties, while their 
bodily energies remain, are sent to ; and there they pass a quiet 
easy life, well attended, until they sink into the grave. Such Mas 
the case with Peter Anderson : he was ninety-seven when he died, 
but long before that time his mind was quite gone. Still he was 
treated with respect, and many were there who attended his 
funeral. I erected a handsome tombstone to his memory, the 
last tribute I could pay to a worthy, honest, sensible, and highly 
religious good man. 

Mr. Wilson has been dead some time : he left me a legacy of 



382 POOR JACK. 

500/. I believe I have mentioned all my old acquaintances now, 
except Bill Harness and Opposition Bill. In living long, certainly 
Opposition Bill has beat his opponent, for Harness is in the 
churchyard, while Opposition Bill still struts about with his hair 
as white as snow, and his face shrivelled up like an old monkey's. 
The last time I was at Greenwich, I heard the pensioners say to 
one another, " Why you go ahead about as fast as Opposition Bill." 
I requested this enigma to me to be solved, and it appeared that 
one Greenwich fair, Opposition Bill had set off home rather the 
worse for what he had drank, and it so happened that, crossing 
the road next to the Hospital, his wooden leg had stuck in one of 
the iron plug-holes of the water conduit. Bill did not, in his 
situation, perceive that anything particular had occurred, and 
continued playing his fiddle and singing, and, as he supposed, 
walking on the whole time, instead of which he was continually 
walking round and round the one leg in the plug-hole with the 
other that was free. After about half an hour's trotting round 
and round this way, he began to think that he did not get home 
quite so fast as he ought, but the continual circular motion had 
made him more confused than before. 

" By Gum !" said Bill, " this hospital is a confounded long way 
off. I'm sure I walk a mile, and I get no nearer — howsoebber, 
nebber mind — here goes." 

Here Billy struck up a tune, and commenced a song along with 
it, still walking round and round his wooden leg which was firmly 
fixed in the plug-hole, and so he continued till he fell down from 
giddiness, and was picked up by some of the people, who carried 
him home to the Hospital. 

I have but one more circumstance to relate. I was one day 
sitting with Bessy and my children, at the old cottage on the 
beach, Bramble and my father were smoking their pipes on a 
bench which they had set up outside, when one of the Deal boats 
landed with passengers. As they passed by us, one old gentleman 
started, and then stopped short, as he beheld Bessy. " Mine frau!" 
he cried, " mine frau dat was in Heaven!" 

We stared very much, as we did not comprehend him ; but he 
then came up to me and said — 



POOR JACK. 383 

"I beg your pardon, mynheer, but what is dat young woman?" 

" She is my wife," replied I. 

" I was going to say dat she was my wife, but dat is impossible. 
Look you here, sar." 

The old man pulled a miniature out of his breast, and certainly 
the resemblance to Bessy was most remarkable. 

" Now, sar, dat was my wife. Where did you get dis young 
woman ? " 

I requested him to walk into the cottage, and then told him the 
history of Bessy. 

(i Sar, my wife was coming home with her child in a brig, and 
the brig was never heard of. ]t was supposed that she did perish, 
and every one else too. Sar, this lady must be my daughter." 

« I'm sorry that we have no proofs to offer you," replied I ; "she 
had only bed-clothes on when she was taken into the boat, and 
there is nothing to establish her identity." 

" I am content, sar ; she must be my daughter. She was in a 
brig with her mother, and she was saved the very same year that 
her mother come home. There, sar, look at this picture ; it is the 
same person. I want no more proof— she is my daughter." 

Although this was what might be called only collateral proof, I 
did agree with the old gentleman, that it was very strong ; at all 
events it was sufficient for him, and he claimed Bessy as his child. 
Had he claimed her to take her away, I might have disputed 
it ; but as he loaded her with presents, and when he died, which 
he did three years afterwards, and left 20,000 rix dollars, of course 
I was perfectly satisfied with his relationship. 

So much for what has occurred since the time I married; and 
now, as the reader may, perhaps, wish to know something about the 
present condition of myself and family, I must inform him that my 
father and Bramble are still alive, and flourishing under their grey 
hairs. My sister has four children, and her husband is now a dean : 
they do. say, that, from the interest of his patron, he will in all pro- 
bability be a bishop, a distinction not to be envied in these days, and 
therefore I do not wish him success. My mother is, however, of the 
contrary opinion ; having been told that her daughter as a bishop's 
lady will take precedence, and be led out before Lady Hercules. 



R JACK. 

Sir James and Lady O'Connor are still well,- and as happy as tlu\ 
well can be. Bessy has blessed me with three boys and thru 
girls, grown up ; but the boys came first The eldest is • 

Lieutenant in his Majesty's service, the second is a captain of an 
Indiaman, and the third commands a free trader. They are all 
well to do, and independent of their father. My girls, who are 
much younger, have been well educated, and people say that they 
are very handsome; at all events, they are modest and good-tem- 
pered. I have not attempted to conceal what I once was, 
Time has called away most of those who knew me in my pro- 
fession. I am still considered as having been a seafaring man. 
but nevertheless, in consequence of my property, I am gene- 
rally addressed by the title of 'Squire Saunders. By not as- 
suming a station which does not Income me. I find myself 
treated not only with respect, but with friendship, by those who 
are in birth, as well as other qualifications, my superiors. Mv 
daughters are invited out to all the balls and fetes in the neigh- 
bourhood, and are great favourites wherever they go: thev all of 
them are like their mother, not only in appearance but in temper 
and disposition. We have plenty of young men who visit the 
house, and I am afraid that we shall soon have to part with two of 
them, my eldest, Virginia, being engaged to a ship-builder at 
Limehouse, and Elizabeth to a young clergyman in the neigh- 
bourhood. Jane thinks she never will marry, and, as I tell her, 
1 suppose she never will till she is asked. To wind up, I may 
say, that Bessy and I have been very happy, and promise still to 
be as happy as most people are who pass through this pilgrimage. 
We have competence — the good opinion of the world — a family 
who have never caused us one hour's uneasiness (how few can say 
that?), and we have. I trust, a due sense of God's mercy and kind- 
ness towards us. and never lie down in our beds without thanking 
Him for the many mercies we have received, and acknowledging 
how unworthy we are to have been so signally blessed. 

FHE END. 


