


In the course of readiDgand investigatioii, n^oesftaiy 
ftr acquiring that measure of knowledge which I was 
anxious to possess, respecting my country, its^ people. 
Its government, its interests, its pdicy, and itslaws» I 
was mety and in some d^ree surprised, by ^extraoiv 
dinary difficulties, when I arrived at that part of my 
inquiries which related to India. On other subjects* 
of any magnitude and importance, I generally found, 
that there was some one book, or smaU number of 
books, containing the material part of the requisite 
information ; and in which direction was obtained, by 
reference, to other books, if, in any part, the reader 
found it necessary to extend his researches. In re- 
gard to India, the case was exceedingly different. 
The knowledge requisite for attaining an ade^ate 
conception of that great scene of Britifib action, was 
collected no where. It was scattered in m gte^ 
variety of repositories, sometimes in consideraUe. por- 
tions, often in very minute ones ; sometimes by itself 
often mixed up with subjects of a very different nature: 
and even where information relating to India stood 
disjoined from other subjects, a small portion of what 
was useful lay commonly imbedded in a large mass of 
what was trifling and insignificant ; and of a body of 
statements, given indiscriminately as matters of fiiet, 
VOL- 1. b 



ii PREFACE. 

ascertained by the senses, the far greater part was in 
general only matter of opinion, borrowed, in succes* 
mm, by one set of Indian gentlemen from another*^ 

In bestowing the time, labour, and thought, neces- 
sary to explore this assemblage of heterogeneous 
things, and to separate, for my own use, what was 
true and what was useful, from what was insignificant 
and what was &lse, I was led to grieve, that none of 
those who had preceded me, in collecting for them- 
selves a knowledge of Indian affairs, had been induced 
to leave their collection tor the benefit of others ; and 
perform the labour of extracting and ordering the 
dispersed and confused materials of a knowledge of 
India, once for all. The second reflection was, that, 
if those who preceded me had n^ected this impor- 
tant sendee, and in so doing were not altogether free 
from Uame, neither should I be exempt from the same 
condemnation, if I omitted what depended upon me, 
to fiuilitate and abridge to others the labour of ac- 
quring a knowledge of India ; an advantage I should 
have valued so highly, had it been afforded by any 
fiarmer inquirer. 

In this manner, the idea of writing a History of 
India was first engendered in my mind. I should 
have shrunk from the task, had I foreseen the labour 
in which it has involved me. 

* TIm ^ftcolty arisiiig from this source of (klsa mlbnnation wm Mt 
bjT the vary tet aocortte biitorian. 

•Oi yof mApmtnt rtif toioctf rm ir^cywij/KCMM, xm r,9 twiym^ v^cru ?», p/u#f 

c/S«^iv<fwfir«^aXXi|Xaf»liXo»r«. Thucyd. lib. i. c. x'. Other excellent 
obswrattoos to the same purpose are found in tbe two following 
ifb«||ter8. 



PREFACE. Ill 

T^lie books,, in which more or less of information 
reelecting India might be expected to be found, were 
suflSciently numerous to compose a Ubrarj. Some 
w^re books of Travels. Some were books of History. 
Some contained philological, some antiquarian re- 
searches. A considerable number consbted of trans- 
lations from the writings of the natives in the native 
tongues; others were books on the religion of the 
people of India ; ' books on their laws ; books on their 
sciences, manners, and arts. 

The transactions in India were not the only trans- 
actions o[ the Britififh nation, to which the affairs of 
India had given birth. Those affairs had been the 
subject of much discussion by the press, and of many 
legislative, executive, and even judicial proceedings, 
in England. , Those discussions and proceedings 
would form of course an essential part of the History 
of British India ; and the materials of it remained to 
be extracted, with much labour, from the voluminous 
records of British literature, and British legislation. 

The British legislature had not satisfied itself with 
deliberating, and deciding ; it had also inquired ; and 
inquiring, it had called for evidence. This call, by 
the f(Mrtunate publicity of parliamentary proceedings/ 
brought forth the records of the councils in India, and 
their correspondence, with one another, with their ser- 
vants, and with the constituted authorities in England : 
a portion of materials, inestimable in its value ; but 
so appalling by its magnitude, that many years ap- 
peared to be inadequate to render the mind familiar 

with it. 

bL> 



IV PREFACE. 

Such is a short and very imperfect description of 
the state of the materials.^ The operations necessary, 
to draw from them a useful history, formed the second 
subject of consideration. To omit other particulars» 
which will easily present themselves, and are common 
to this with all undertakings of a similar nature, a 
peculiar demand, it is evident, was presented for the 
exercise of discrimination, that is, of criticism, in a 
chaotic mass, of such extent, where things related to 
the subject were to be separated from things foreign 
to it ; where circumstances of importance were to be 
separated from circumstances that were insignificant ; 
where real facts, and just inferences, were to be sepa- 
rated from such as were the contrary ; and above all 
things, where facts, really testified by the senses, were 
to be discriminated from matters, given as testified by 
the senses, but which, in truth, were nothing but mat- 
ters of opinion, confounded with matters of fact, and 
mistaken for them, in the minds of the reporters 
themselves.^ 

1 U y avoit plus de choses la dessus qu'on ne le crojoit commnnement, 
mais elles etoient noy^es dans ane foule de recueils immenses, en langues 
Latine, Espagnole, Angloise, et HoUandoisey ou parsonne ne s'avisoit de 
les aller chercher; dans une quantity de routiers tres-secsy tresen- 
nujeux, relatifs ^ cent autres objets, et dont il seroit presque impossible 
de rendre la lecture inteiressente. Les difficult^s ne touchent gu^re 
ceux qui ne les essuyeut pas. Hist, des Navigation aux Terres Aus- 
trales> par M. le President de Brosse. 

' ^ L'on ne sent que trop, says Mr. Gibbon, combien nous somnies 
port^s k mdler nos id^es avec celles que nous rapportons. Memoire sur 
la Monarchie des Medes, Gibbon's Miscel. Works, iii. 61. Ed. 8vo. This 
infirmity of the human mind, a fact of great importance, both in specula- 
tion and in action, the reader, who is not already acquainted with it, will 
find very elegantly illustrated in one of the chapters of the second volume 



PREFAClS. V 

A history of India, therefore, to be good for any 
thing, must, it was evident, be, what, for want of a 
better appellation, has been called, " A Critical His- 
tory." * To criticise means, to judge. A critical 
history is, then, a judging history. But, if a judg- 
ing history, what does it judge ? 

It is evident that there are two, and only two, 
classes of objects, which constitute the subject of 

of tbe work of Mr. Dugald Stewart, on the Plulosophy of the Human 
Mind. See p. 72, vol. ii. of tbe present work. Many examples of it 
will present themselves in the course of this history ; for as it is a habit 
peculiarly congenial to the mental state of the natives, so a combination 
of circumstances has given it unusual efficacy in the minds of those of 
oar oountrymea by whom India has been surveyed. 

1 The idea of a critical history is not very old. The first man who 
80ems to have had a distinct conception of it, says, ** Je traiterai mon 
sojeC en critique, suivant la ragle de St. Paul, Examines toutei ckotesy et 
ne reienog que ce qui ett bon. Lltistoire n'est bien souvent qu'un 
melange confus de faui et de vrai, entass^ par des ecrivains mal instruits, 
credules, on passiones. C'est au lecteur attentif et judicieux d'en faire 
le discemement, iL I'aide d'une critique, qui ne soit ni trop timide, ni 
temeraire. Sans le secours de cet art, on erre dans I'histoire, comrae 
on pilote sor le mer, lorsqu*ii n'a ni boussole, ni carte marine.'' Beau- 
sobre. Hist, de Manichee, Disc. Prelim, p. 7. ^ 

The same writer has, also, said, what is not foreign to the present pur- 
pose; " Une bistoire critique ne pouvant 6tre trop bien justifi^^e, j'ai en 
soin de roettre en original, au has des pages, les passages qui servent de 
preuve aux faits que j'avance. C'est un ennuyeux travail, mais je Fai 
cm necessaire. Si Ton trouve les citations trop amples et trop abon- 
dantes, c'est un superflu qui n'a codU qu*a moi, et le l^teur pent bien 
rnVn pardonner la depense.'^ Id. Ibid. Pref. p. S4. 

A great historian of our own has said : " It is the right, it is 
the duty of a critical historian to collect, to weigh, to select the 
opinions of his predecessors ; and the more diligence he has exerted in 
the search, the more rationally he may hope to add some improvement 
to the stock of knowledge, the use of which has been common to all/* 
Gibbon's Miscel. Works, iv. 589. 



VI PREFACE, 

historical judgments. The first is, the matter of 
statement, the things given by the historian, as things 
really done, really said, or really thought. The se- 
cond is, the matter of evidence, the matter by whidi 
the reality of the saying, the doing, or thinking, is 
ascertained. 

In regard to evidence, the business of criticism 
visibly is, to bring to light the value of each article, 
to discriminate what is true from what is false, to 
combine partial statements, in order to form a com- 
plete account, to compare varying, and balance con- 
tradictory statements, in order to form a correct 
one. 

In regard to the matter of statement, the business 
of criticism is, to discriminate between real causes 
and false causes ; real effects and false effects ; rear 
tendencies and falsely supposed ones ; between good 
ends and evil ends ; means that are conducive, and 
.means not conducive to the ends to which they are 
applied. 

In exhibiting the result of these several judgments, 
the* satisfaction, or the instruction of the reader^ is 
very imperfectly provided for, if the reasons are not 
adduced. I have no apology, therefore, to make, for 
those inductions, or those ratiocinatioDs, sometimes 
of considerable length, which were necessary to ex- 
hibit the grounds upon which my decisions were 
founded. Those critical disquisitions may be well, 
or they may be ill performed; they may lead to 
correct, or they may lead to en'oneous conclusions ; 
but they are, indisputably, in place ; and my work. 



P]t£FAC£. ' Tn 

whatever had been kg virtues in otlier respects^ 
weuld have remained most imperfect withoot them/ 

There wiU be bot one opmion, I nqppoee* with m- 
gard to the wq;K)rtance of the service, which I hove 
aspired to the honour of rendering to my countij ; 
for the puUic are inclined to exaggerate, rather thaa 
extenuate, the magmtude of the interests whidi are 
involved in the management of their IndKan affaink 
[And it may be ^yCnned, as a principle, not suscepCtt^le 
of dispiite, that good management of any povtien 
of the affairs of any community is almost alwi^a 
proportional to the degree of knowledge respecting 
it diffused in that community Hitherto the know- 
ledge of India, enjoyed by the British commimity, 
has been singularly ddfective. Not only among the 
uneducated, and those who are regardless of know- 
ledge» but aoMmg those who are solicitous to obtakk 

< Even those strictures, which sometimes occur, oo institutioiis purely 
Bkidsh, will be all ^nd, I an persoadedy to be not onlj strictly con- 
nected with measurts which relate to India, and which hatve vctsnUy 
grown out of those institutions ; but indispensably necessary to ooavty 
complete and correct ideas of the Indian policy which the institutions in 
<|«mtion contributed mainly to shape. The whole cmirse of cor Isfisa 
policy hafiAgy for eiample, been diffeeted fay the kwa of parMiiwtiUfy 
influence, how could the one be eiplained without adducing;^ as ia tba 
last chapter of the fourth volume, and in some other i^ces, the leading 
principles of the other f The result of aU the judicial inquiries, which 
have been attempted i» Ellwand, on Indian afiirsydependiiig in ft giMC 
depee on the state of the law in England, how could those erents ha 
sufficiently explained, without adducing, as in the chapter on the trial 
of Mr. Hastings, those particulars in the state of the law of En^imd, on 
which the reenks in qaestioa appMftd mora remaikab^ to depead? 
The importance of this remark will be felt, and, I hope, reniemfoere4 
when the time for judging of the use and pertinence of those elucida- 
tiims, arrives. 



▼IQ FREFACir. 

a competent share of informatioii with respect to 
every other great branch of the national interest^ 
Bothii^ is so rare as to .meet widi a man who can 
with propriety.be said to know any thing of In^Ka^ 
and its affairs. A man who has any considerable 
acquaintance with them, without having been forced 
to acquire it by the offices he has Med, is scarcely 
perhaps to be found. 

The same must continue to be the case, till the 
knowledge of India is rendered more accessible. 
Few men can afford the tiine suflicient for perusing* 
even a moderate portion oi the documents from 
which a knowledge of India, approachiog to com- 
pleteness, must have hitherto been derived. Of 
those, whose time is not wholly engrossed, either by 
business or by pleasure, the proportion is very mode- 
rate whom the prospect of a task so heavy, and so 
tedious, as that of exploring the numerous reposi 
tories of Indian knowledge, would not deter. And, 
with respect to the most important of all the sources 
of information, the parliamentary documents, they 
were not before the public, and by the very nature 
of the case within the reach of a number compara- 
tively small. 

But though no dispute will arise about the im- 
portance of the work, I have no reason to expect 
the same unanimity about the fitness of the work- 
man. 

One objection will doubtless be taken, on which I 
think it necessary to offer some observations, not- 
withstanding the unfavourable sentiments which are 



PllEPACE; iX 

<ioiiimonly exdted by dmost any language in which 
a man can urge pretensions which he may be sus- 
pected of urging as his own; pretensions which, 
though they must exist, in some degree, in the case 
of every man who writes a book, and ought to be 
encouraged, therefore, rather than extinguished, had 
better, in general, be understood, than expressed. 

This writer, it will be said, has never been in 
India ; and, if he has any, has a very slight, and 
elementary acquaintance, with any of the languages 
of the East. 

I confess the facts ; and will now proceed to men- 
tion the considerations, which led me, notwithstand- 
ing, to conclude, that I might still produce a work, 
of considerable utility, on the subject of India. 

In the first place, it appeared to me, that a suffi- 
cient stock of information was now collects in 
the languages of Europe, to enable the inquirer to 
ascertain every important point, in the history of 
India. If I was right in that opinion, it is evident, 
that a residence in India, or a knowledge of the 
languages of India, was, to express mysdif moderately, 
not indispensable. 

In the next place, I observed, that no exceptions 
were taken to a President of the Board of Control, 
or to a GU>vemor-6eneral, the men entrusted with 
all the powers of government, because they had 
never been in India, and knew none of its languages. 

Again, I certainly knew, that some of the most 
successfiil attempts in history had been made, with- 
out ocular knowledge of the country, or acquaintance 



with its language. Robertson^ for example^ never 
beheld America, though he cooiposed its history* 
He never was either in Germany or Spain> yet he 
wrote the history of Charles the Fifth. Of Germany 
he knew not so much as the langsage ; and it was 
necessary for him to learn that of Spain, only be^ 
cause the documents which it yielded were not trana- 
lated into any of the languagies with which he was 
acquainted. Tacitui5» though he never was in Ger« 
many» aod was certainly not acquainted with the 
language of our uncultivated ancestors, wrote the 
exquisite account of the manners of the Germans. 

But^ as some knowledge may be acquired by seeing 
India, which cannot be acquired without it ; mid ad 
it can be pronounced of hardly any portion of know- 
ledge that it is altogether useless^ I will not go so 
far as to deny, that a man woidd possess advantages^ 
who, to aU the qualifications for writing ahistoty df 
India which it is possible to acquire in £urop€(» should 
add those qualifications which can be acquired e^y 
by seeing the country and conversing with its people. 
Yet I have np doubt of being able to make out, tO 
the satisfaction of all reflecting minds, that the man 
who should bring to the composition of a history of 
India the qualifications alone which can be acquired 
in Europe, would come, in an almost infinite degree, 
better fitted for the task, than the man who should 
faring to it the qualifications alcme which eaa be 
acquired in India ; and that the btisiness of acq»iring 
the one set of qualifications is almost wholly incom- 
patible with that of acquiring the other. 



For, let us inquire what it is that a ma& can leani,. 
by going to India, and understanding its languf^;eflL 
He can treasure up the fact^, which are presented 
to his senses ; he can leani the facts which are re- 
corded in such native books, as have not been trana* 
laled ; and he can ascertain facts by conversation with 
the natives, which have never yet been conunitted 
to writing. This he can do ; and I anv not aware 
that he can do any thing further. 

Bi4, as no fact is more certain, so none is of 
more importance, in the science of human nature 
than this ; that the powers of Observation, in every 
individual, are exceedingly linuted; and that it is 
only by coeabiniBg the observations of a number of 
individuals, that a com^tent knowledge of any ex* 
tensive subject can ever be acquired. Of so extensive 
and complicated a scate as India, how small a por- 
tion would the whole period of his life enaUe any 
man to observe ! 

If, then, we may assume it as an acknowledged 
&ct, that an account of India, omiplete in all ite 
parts, at any one moment, still more through a 
series of ages, could never « be derived from the 
personal observation of any one individual, but must 
be collected from the testimony of a great number of 
individuals^ of any one of whom the powers of per^ 
ception could extend but a little way, it follows, as 
a necessary consequence, that the man best qualified 
ibr dealing with evidence, is the man best qualified 
for writing the history of India. It will not, I pi«*i- 
sume, admit of much dispute, that the habits which 



xii FllEFACE. 

are subservient to the successful exploration of evi« 
dence are more likfely to be acquired in Europe, 
than in India. 

The man who employs himself in treasuring up, 
by means of perception and the languages, the 
greatest portion of knowledge ' in regard to India, 
is lie who employs the greatest portion of his life, 
in the business of observing, and in making himself 
familiar with the languages. But the mental habits 
which are acquired in mere observing, and in the 
acquisition of languages, are almost as different as 
any mental habits can be, from thfe powers of com- 
bination, discriminatian, classification, judgment, 
comparison, weighing, inferring, inducting, philoso- 
phizing in short; which are the powers of most 
importance for extracting the precious ore from a 
great mine of rude historical materials. 

Whatever is worth seeing or hearing in India, can 
be expressed in writing. As soon as every thing of 
importance is expressed in writing, a man who is 
duly qualified may obtain more knowledge of India 
in one year, in his closet in England, than he could 
obtain during the course of the longest life, by the 
use of his eyes and his ears in India. 

As soon as the testimony is received of a sufficient 
number of witnesses, to leave no room for mistake 
from the partial or the erroneous statements which 
they may have separately made, it is hardly doubt- 
ful, that a man, other circumstances being equal, is 
really better qualified for forming a correct judgment 
on the whole, if his information is totallv derived 



• •« 



PREFACE. XIU 

from testimony, than if some little portion of it is 
derived from the senses. It is well known» how fatal 
an effect on our judgments is exerted hy those im- 
pulses, called partial impressions; in other words, 
how much our conceptions of a great whole are apt 
to be distorted, and made to disagree with their 
object, by an undue impression, received from some 
particular part. Nobody needs to be informed, how 
much more vivid, in general, is the conception of an 
object which has been presented to our senses, than 
that of an object which we have only heard another 
man describe. Nobody, therefore, will deny, that,- 
of a great scene, or combination of scenes, when 
some small part has been seen, and the knowledge 
of the rest h. s been derived from testimony, there is 
great danger, lest the impression received from the 
senses should exert an immoderate influence, hang a 
bias on the mind, and render the conception of the 
whole erroneous. 

If a man were to lay down the plan of preparing 
himself for writing the history of India, by a course 
of observation in the country, he must do one of two ^ 
things. Either he must resolve to observe minutely 
a part ; or he must resolve to take a cursory view of 
the whole. Life is insufficient for more. If his de- 
cision is to observe minutely ; a very small portion 
comparatively is all that he will be able to observe. 
What aid he can derive from this, in writing a his- 
tory, has partly been already unfolded, and may for 
the rest be confided to the reflections of the inteUigent 
reader. 



fldr PREFACE. 

^What I expect to be insisted upon with greatest 
emphasis is» that, if an observer were to take an 
expamdve view of India, noting, in his progreas, 
tiiose circumstances idone which are of greatest im- 
portance, he would come with peculiar advantage to 
the composition of a history; with lights capaUe of 
yidding the greatest assistance in judging even of 
the evidence of others. To estimate this pretension 
csonectly, we must not forget a well-known and im- 
pcnrtant law of human natnre. From this we shall 
see, that a cursory view, of the nature of that which 
is here described, is a process, in the highest degree 
effi^ual, not for removing error, and perfecting, 
ioDowledge, but for strengthening all the prejudices,/ 
and confirming all the prepossessions or false notions,j 
with which the observer sets out. This result is 
proved by a very constant experience ; and may fur- 
ther be seen to spring, with an almost irresistible 
necessity, from the constitution of the human mind. 
In a cursory survey, it is understood, that the mind, 
unable to attend to the whole of an infinite number 
of objects, attadies itself to a few ; and overlooks 
the multitude that remain. But what, then, are the 
objects to which the mind, in sudi a situation, is in 
preference attracted ? Those which fall in with the 
current of its own thoughts ; those which accord with 
it-s former impressions ; those which confirm its pre- 
vious ideas. These are the objects to which, in a 
hasty selection, all ordinary minds are directed, over- 
looking the rest. For what is the principle in the 
mind by which the choice is decided? Doubtlesst 



PREFACE. KV 

that of aflsociation. And is not association governed 
bf the predomioant ideas ? To this remains to be 
addedt the powerful influeqce of the affections ; firet, 
the wdl-known j>lea8ure, which a man finds, in meet- 
ingy at every step, with proofs that he is in the right, 
inspiring an eagerness to look out for that source of 
satisfiGu:tion ; and, secondly, the well-known aver- 
sion, which a man usually has, to meet with proofs 
that he is in the wrong, yielding a temptation, com- 
monly obeyed, to overlook such disagreeable ob- 
jects- 
He who, without having been a percipient witness 
in India, undertakes, in Europe, to digest the ma- 
terials of Indian history, is placed, with regard to 
the numerous individuals who have been in India, 
and df whom one has seen and reported one thing, 
another has seen and reported another thing, in a 
situation very analogous to that of the Judge, in re- 
gard to the witnesses who give their evidence before 
him. In the investigation of any of those compli- 
cated scenes of action, on which a judicial decision 
is sometimes required, one thing has commonly been 
observed by one witness, another thing has been ob- 
served by another witness ; the same thing has been 
observed in one point of view by one, in another 
point of view, by another witness ; some things are 
affirmed by one, and denied by another. In this 
scene, the judge, putting together the fragments of 
information which he has severally received from the 
several witnesses, marking where they agree and 
where they differ, exploring the tokens of fidelity in 
7 



XVI PREFACE. 

ope, of infidelity in another ; of correct conception, 
in one^ of incorrect conception in another ; comparing 
the whole collection of statements with the general 
probabilities of the case, and trying it by the esta* 
blished laws of human nature, endeavours to arrive 
at a complete and correct conception of the com- 
plicated transaction, on which he is called to decide. 
Is it not understood, that in such a case as this, 
wliere the sum of the testimony is abundant, the 
judge, who has seen no part of the transaction, has 
yet, by his investigation, obtained a more perfect con- 
ception of it, than is almost ever possessed by any 
of the individuals from whom he has derived his in- 
formation ? ^ 

> The Indiaos themselves have a striking apologue to illustrate the 
superiority of the oomprehensive student over the partial observer. 

" One day in conversatioo/' says Alr« Ward^ ** with the S&ngslLritft 
head pilndit of the College of Fort William, on the subject of God, this 
man, who is truly learned in bis own Shastr&s, gave the author, from 
one of their books, the following parable :— In a certain country, there 
existed a village of blind men, who bad heard of an amazing animal 
called the elephant, of the shape of which, however, they could procure 
no idea. One day an elephant passed through the place : the villagers 
crowded to the spot where the animal was standing ; and one of them 
seized his trunk, another his ear, another his tail, another one of his 
legs. After thus endeavouring to gratify their curiosity, they returned 
into the village, and sitting down together, began to -communicate their 
ideas on the shape of the dephant, to the villagers : the man who had 
seized his trunk said, he thought this animal must be like the body of 
the plantain tree ; he who had touched his ear was of opinion, that he 
was like the winnowing fan; the man who had laid hold of his tail said, 
he thought he must resemble a snake ; and he who had caught his leg 
declared, he must be like a pillar. An old blind man, of some judgment, 
was present, who, though greatly perplexed in attempting to reconcile 
these jarring notions, nt length said — ^You have all been to examine the 
aniroai, and what you report, therefore, cannot be false : I suppose, 



PRSFACE. XtU 

Bttt, if a life; in any great degree devoted to the 
colkctingtxf facts by the aenses and to the acquiring of 
tongueS) is thus inconipatible with the acquisition of 
that knowledge^ and those powers of mind, which 
aie most conducive to a masteiij treatment of evi- 
dence ; it is still lesis compatible with certain other 
endowments, which, the disdiai^ge of the highest 
ihitaes of tfafe historian imperiously demands. Great 
and diffieult ai is<the task qf extracting perfectif the 
light of evidence from a chaos of rude materials, it 
is yet wA the most difficidt of his itinerations, nor 
that which requires the highest and rarest qualifi- 
cations of the mind. It is the business of the his- , 
torian not merely to display the obvious outside of 
things ; the qualities which strike the most ignorant 
observer, in the acts, the institutions, and ordinances, 
which form the subject of his statements. His duty v 
is, to convey just ideas of all those objects ; of all/ 
the transactioas, legislative, administrative, judicial, | 
mercantile, military, which he is called upon to de- ) 
scribe. But ip just ideas, of great measures what is 
implied ? A dear discernment^ msdoubtedly, of their 
causes ; a ctear discernment of their consequences ; a 
e)ear discernment of their sactuial tendencies ; and of 
the drcumstances likdy . to operate either in com* 

then, that the part resembling the plantain tree mast be his troiik; 
what you thought similar to a fan must be his ear; the part like a snake 
mnst be the tail; and that like a pillar must be- his leg. Ih this waj; 
the old mail, unitiog all their anyectaret, made out something of the 
Ibrm of the elephant.'' A View of the Hisioiy, literaitore, and AeHgtoa 
of the Hindoos. By the Rei(. W. Weid. Iiitrod. p. Ixiivii. London 
Ed. 1817. 

VOL. I. e 



XviH PREFACE. 

bifiation with these natural tendeDcies, or Jn oppo- ' 
sition to them. To qualify a man for this great dutf, 
hardly any kind or degree of knowledge is not de> 
manded ; hardly any amount of knowledge, which 
it is within the competencci of one man to aoquiiev 
will be regarded at etiqii^. It is plain, for exam]d^ 
diat he needs the most profound knowledge of the 
laws of human nature^ which is the end, as well aa 
instrument, of every thing. It is piatn, that he^re^ 
quires the most perfect comprehension of ihe prin-* 
C9|des of hunum society ; or the course, into which 
the laws of huoum nature impel the human being, 
in his gregarious state, or when formed into a com- 
|dex body along with others of his kind. The his- 
torian requires a dear comprehension ciibe practiciA 
play of the. machinery of gofemment ; for, in like 
manner as the general laws of motion are counter^ 
acted and modified by friction, the pow» of which 
may yet be accuratdy ascertained and provided for, 
so it is necessary for the historian ecmectly to af^ie-^ 
ciale the counteraction which the m<»e general laws 
of human nature may receive from individual or 8pe>. 
dfic varieties, and that allowance for it with which hh 
antimpations and condusions ought to be formed. In 
short, the whole fidd of human nature, the whde field 
of legislation, the whole fidd of judicature, the whole 
fidd of administration, down to war, commerce, and 
diplomacy, ought to be fomiliar to his mind J 

I Aas 3raax d'on philotoplM, !«• ftiu ooanpoaent k pvtie fai motnt 
imammnte d* llnstoira. Omt la oemMUMiioe d»* llioiiiiiie; la mo- 
rale^ et la politiqqe qull j trouT^ qui la rdevent dam son esprit. Oib- 



PREFACE. Xix 

What then ? it will be said, and most reasonably 
said ; do you hold yourself up, as the person in whom 
aH these high qualifications are adequately combined ? 
No. And I am well assured, that by not one of 
those by whom I ^all be eritieised, not even by those 
by whom I shdl be treated with the greatest severity, 
wiH the ^stance between the qualifications which I 
possess, and the qualifications which are desirable in 
the writer of a history, be estimated at more than it is 
estimated by myself. But the whole of my life, which 
I may, without scruple, prcmounoe to have been alabo:. 
rioMone, has been devotedto the acquisition o(4ho0e 
quatificaticms; and I am not unwitting to confess, that 
I de^Aed it probaUe I should be ibund to possess them 
in a greater degree, than those, no part of whose life» 
or ayery small part, had been applied to the acquisi- 
tion of them. I was also of opinion, that if nobody ap- 
peared, with higher qualifications, to undertake the 
work, it was better it should be done imperfectly, 
better it should be done even as I might be capable 
of doing it, than not done at all. 

Among the many virtues whieh have been dis* 
played by the Company's servants, may justly be 
enumerated the can(k)ur with which they them* 
selves confess the necessity under which they are laid, 
of remaining to a great degree ignorant of India. 
That they go out to their appointments, at a time q£ 
life when a considerable stock of general knowledge 
cannot possibly have been acquired, is a fact which 

boiH Mem. sur la Moaarchte d^ Medes, Uisc. Works^ iii. 190. 
£d. 8vo. 

C2 



XX PREFACE. 

nobody will dispute* And they are the foremost to 
declare^ that their situation in India is such, as to 
preclude them from the acquisition of local know- 
ledge. Notwithstanding the high degree of talentf 
theiefore, and even of literary talent, which many of 
them have diq>layed« more than some very limited 
portion of the history of India none of them has ven- 
tured to undertake. ' 

'^ When we consider/* said Lord Teignmonth, in 
his celebrated Minute on the Revenues of Bengal, 
^' the nature and magnitude of our acquisitions, the 
charaoters of the people placed under our dominion^ 
their difference of language, and dissimilarity of man- 
ners ; that we entered upon the administration of the 
government ignorant of its former constitution, and 
with little practical experience in Asiatic finance, it 
will not be deemed surprising that we should have 
fallen into errors ; or if any should at this time require 
correction. — If we further consider the form, of the 
British government in India, we shall find it ill cal-' 
culated for the speedy introduction of improvement. 
The members composing ij; are in a state of coQstant 
fluctuation, and the period of their residence ofl:en 
expires, before experience can be acquired, or reduced 

I The following words are not inapplicable^ ori^nallj applied to a 
much more limited subject. De quibus partibus singulis, quidam 
separatim scribere maluerunt, velut onus totius corporis Teriti, et 
sic quoqne complures de unaquaque earum libros ediderant: quaa 
ego omnes ausus contezere, prope infinitum mibi lahorem prospicio, et 
ipsa cogitatione suscepti muneris fatigor. Sed durandum est quia 
co^imus : et si veribus deficiemur, aniroo tamen ' perseTerandom. 
Qttinct. Inst. Or. lib. 4. Prooem. 



PREFACE. Xxi 

to practice. Official forms necessarily occupy a large 
portion of time; and the constant pressure of business 
leaves little leisure for study and reflection, without 
which^ no knowledge of the principles and detail of 
the revenues of this country can be attained. True 
information is also procured with difficulty, because 
it is too often derived from mere practice, instead of 
being deduced from fixed principles." * 

Lord William Bentinck, after being Governor of 
Fort St. George, and President of the Coundl at 
Madras, expresses himself in very pointed terms. 
** The result of my own observation, during my resi- 
dence in India, is, that the Europeans generaUy know 
little or nothing of the customs and manners of the 
Hindoos. We are all acquainted with some promi- 
nent marks and facts, which all who run may read: 
but their manner of thinking ; their domestic habits 
and ceremonies, in which circumstances a knowledge 
of the people consists, is I fear in great part wanting 
to us. We understand very imperfectly their lan- 
guage. They, perhaps, know more of ours ; but their 
knowledge is by no means sufficiently extensive to 
give a description of subjects not easily represented 
by the insulated words in daily use. We do not, we 
cannot, associate with the natives. We cannot see 
them in their houses, and with their families. We 
are necessarily very much confined to our houses by 

I No. 1, Appmdix to ^e Fifth Report of the Select CoiDBiittee of the 
House of Commoos, oothe Affain of the East India Companyj in 1810. 
This |>assage, the Committee have thought of ^uffideot importance to be 
incorporated in their Report. 



XXll PREFACE. 

the heat. All our wants and business^ which would 
create a greater interoourse with the natives^ is done 
for us ; and we are in fistct strangers m the land." ^ 

Another senrant of the Company^ Sir Henry 
Strachey, distinguished both by his local expenenc^ 
and by general knowledgCf r^narkiog upon the state 
of judicature, under the English government in India» 
says, ** Another impediment, though of a very diffe- 
rent nature from those I have mentioned, and much 
more diflicult to remove^ is to me too palpable to be 
overlooked,—! mean, that arising from Europeans in 
our situation being necessarily ill qualified, in many 
points, to perfinrm the duties required of us, as judges 
and magistrates. This proceeds chiefly from our 
very imperfi^ connexion with the natives; and our 
scanty knowledge^ aflter all our study, of their man- 
ners, cujstoms, and languages." ** We cannot study 
the genius of the people in its own sphere of action. 
We know little of their domestic life, their knowledge, 
conversation, amusements, their trades, and casts, or 
any of those national and individual characteristics^ 
which are essential to a complete knowledge of them.** 
^ The difficulty we experience in disceming truth 

> ObeervationsofLard William Bentinck, printed in the Adfertiie- 
ment) prefixed to the << Description of the Character, &c. of the People 
of India/' bjr the Ahb^ J. A. Doboisi Missipnaiy in the Mysore. 
If any oae should object to the testimony of this Ruler, as that of a man 
who had not been bred in India, it is to be remembered that the testimony 
is adduced, as expressing his own opinion, b}* the translator of that 
work, whose knowledge of India is not liable to •dbpute ; and gifea to 
the world as the opinion of the Court of Directors, to whom the mann- 
script belonged, and under whose aathori^ hnd directKMif it was both 
transUted and published. 



FBEFACB. Xxiii 

and falsehood among the natives, may be ascribed, 
I think, chiefly, to our want of connexion and inter- 
eonne with them ; to the peculiaritj of then- manners 
and habits; their excessive ignoraiiee of our charac- 
ters; and our almost eq^al ignorance of theirs.'*^ 

1 FiAkBcport, utM|»a^p.634,<M• "< it is • fiipt,"* m/s anotlMr 
cnlightgDid obienrw, ^ whioh, howevw singdlar and milbrtiiiMtei is yet 
fcnmM in trathy thntthoie penons from whom comet inlbraiadon on 
iktm inl joc ^ aigM joitly be ospoeted, m pntnUy the leeti ebK 
fcom the pecntier cbcamitenom of their Mtoetion, to lepply it ; Imeen, 
the Compeo/s terrants^— During the earlj period of their re t idence in 
the East, ererj hoar must be employed, in the acquisition of the lan- 
gnagstyin the stdly ofthelnwsof the eoontry, and the mannen of the 
untjiei; whilst the latter years of thehr service an still mote onremit- 
tiof^y enpossedj in the discharge of the irksome and arduous duties of 
their profcssion." Considerations on the Pftsent Political State of 
India* ByAkaMttder FrascrT^rtier, late assismnt Judge in the Twenty- 
Ibnr r >s n in n nahs, Bengsl gsfabiiibwenf, Prefiuse^ p. xii. See other 
passagss to the same purpose. Introduction, p. ir, t, xi ; also i. 77, 357^ 
415. And Mr. Tytler quotes with peculiar approbation the passages 
already given from the lUnnte of Lord Teignmooth. 

** I mast hag yeo always «• bear in nind, that when an Eqglish gen* 
tieman mMtertailes to g^ve an account of Indian manners and habits of 
private life, he labours under many disadvantages. The obstacles which 
prevent our ever viewing the natives of India in theic domestic circles are 
g^eat and insuperablei such as, the restrictiens of casu on their side, 
nnk and sttnation on om, tec We do not interroanry with them, as 
the Portuguese did : nor do we ever mix with them, in the common 
duties of social Ufe, on terms of equality. What knowledge we have of 
their doasestic ammgements has been geined cUeiy by inquiry, kc*** 
LetterswritteninaMahraCtaCamp, Itc. by T. D. Broogbcon, Esq. p. S. 

See to the same purpose. Sir John Malcolm, Sketch of the Political 
History of Indim, Ice. p. 449. 

After adverting to esclain erroneous notions on Indian subjects, 
laeatehant Bioor, the well-informed' anther of the ^ Narrative of the 
Operations of Captain Little's Detachment,'^ observes, ** Other opinieils 
equally correct and en(6rtaining, aro indulged by the good people 4f 
England ; which it is vain to oppose, for the party * was told so by a gen- 



XXIT PREFACE. t 

One or tiro thiogsl may venture to affirm that 
I have done. ^ 

I have performed the budiness of research^ with a 
labour, and ptetience, which it would not : be easy to 
surpass. And I bdieve there is no point, of grwt 
importance, involved in the History of India, which 
the evidence I have adduced is not sufficient to de- 
termine. I am, at the same time, aware, that in 
regard to some things there are documents whidi 
were not within my reach ; and, concerning the 
latter part of the history, in particular, that there 
are individuals in England, possessed of information, 
which, in several places, would have rendered the 
narrative richer, and perhaps more accurate, in mat* 
ters of detail. If I shall be found to have performed, 
with any tolerable success, what I had the means of 
performing, the liberality which distinguishes the 
gentlemen of India gives me reason to hope, that many 
of those who are possessed of useftd information, but 
.whom it was impossible for me to find out, will not 
be unwilling to contribute their aid to the improve* 
ment of the History of British India* 

Having thus placed before me the materials of 



tlemanwho had been in India;' perhaps a Tojage or two; hut these, 
however respecublo in their profession, are sorely not the persons to 
deceive ioformation froro, on the subject of the polidcal characters of 
the East; no more (nor indeed much less) than some gentlemen who 
may have re$ided a few years in Indin; for we can easily admit the 
possibility of a person spending many years of his life in the cities of 
Calcutta^ Madras, or Bombay, without knowing much more of the 
politics, ppBJodices, &c. of interior states or countries, thKn if he hail 
never stirred out of London, pi|b|in|Or £dinbui|;h,'' p« 190. 



PllEFACE. XXV 

Indkiii hisiory in a itate, I befieved, of greater fiilness 
and completeness, than any" preceding inqmrer, I 
fottowed the course of my own thoughts, in the 
judgments which I formed; not because I vainly 
imagined my thoughts more raluaUe than those of 
all other men, but because the sincere and determined 
pursint of truth imposes this r^d law. It would 
not allow me to give for true theapinhm of any man, 
tiU Ihad satisfied myself that it was true; still less to 
give the opinion of any man for true^ when I had 
satisfied myself that it was not true. 

ALr. Locke has declared ; that he who follows his 
own thoughts in writing, can hope for approvers in 
the small number alone of those who make use of 
their own thoughts in reading ; that, by the rest, ^* a 
man is not permitted, wiUiout censure, to fcdlow his 
own thoughts in the search of truth, when they lead 
him ever so little out of the common road/^ 

If this is the severe condition, under which a man 
follows his own thoughts, in writing even on abstract 
and general truths, how much harder must be the 
lot of him who follows them, in writing of the actions 
and diaracters of powerful men, and bodies of men ? 
Consdoua, however^ that I had been faithful in form« 
ing my opinions, I bdieved that I lay under an 
indispensable obligation to be faithfol in expressing 
them : *^ to give them without violation of modesty, 
but yet with the courage of a man unwillii^ to 
betray the rigfatsogjeaHon ;'* and with that manlyii.^ 
pbinnesg,^wWcfrthe sincerity of the historical cha- j 
racter appeared to require. 



JCXTl PUCFACE. 

I oould not overlook the probable oonsequenoes. 
<' La perfection d'ooe Jhatone" says a great judge, 
^est d'etre desagrdabk k toutes les sectes, et itout^ 
les nations ; car c'est une premre que I'autenr ne flate 
ni les uns ni les autres, et qu'il a dit i chacun ses 
verity** * 

He who desireff to obtain a conaideraUe portioii of 
inmiediate applause, has two wdi-known, and wdl« 
trodden paths, before him. 

The first is, to be a aedot for some particular 
and powerful party; to pan^;yrize its leaders; 
attack its of^pwents ; place its principles and practi- 
ces in the fiEurest possible light; and labour to bring 
odium upon the principles and practices of its c^ipd- 
nents* This secures the loud and vehement appbnise 
of those who are gratified; and the vehement ap- 
fdause of a great party carries, by contagion, along 
with it, all, or the greater part of thoK, wiioare not 
very strongiy engaged by their interests or passions 
on the opposite side. 

The next of the easy ways to the acquintion of 
fiune, consists of two principal parts. The first ii^ 
^ towMiton in amimon topics, whae a train of sen- 
timent genenlfy received enahks a writer to shine 
without labour, and to conquer without a contest/' * 
The second is, to deal for ever in compromise ; to 
give up the half of every opini<m and principle; go no 
fiirther in fiivour of any side of any question, than maj 
be recondleaUe in some degree with the good opi 

I Bayle,EclaircissemenSf surle Dictionnatre. 
« Rambler, No. ii. 



PX£FAC£. XXVU 

Dion of those who o|^N»e it; and having written as 
much on one side, as to extract applause fiom one 
set of persons^ to turn immeiUately and write as mudi 
en the other, as will extract applause from the opposite 
ssrt. This is done» without glaring marks of inoon* 
sistencjt by avoiding all dose encounter with the 
Mtgect, and keeping to vague and general jrinrases. 
And in this maBner« by a proper command o£ plausi- 
ble language, it is ea^ to obtain reputation with 
aU parties; reputation, not only of great talenta^ 
but of great moderation, great wisdom, and graat 
virtue. * 

If my book were possessed of a much greater share 
of the titles to applause, than even the partialities of 
the writer allow him to ascribe to it; I have tnvdled 
so very wide of those beaten paths to success, that 
my only chance for it depends, I cannot fiul to par- 
cdve, upon Che degree in which real liberality, that 
is, strei^h of mind, is diffused in the community* 
I have done enough, doubtless, to secure to myself the 
malignity of the intemperate, and the narrow-minded, 
of all parties. I have encouraged mysd( however, 
with the belief, that civilization, and the improvement 
oi the numan mind, had, in this country, attained a 

I Some coasiderabld repvtations SmTe been acquired, by praising every 
thing in one's own oountrf. And there are many persons who sincerely 
insist upon it, that a writer ooght always to contrive to put bis oounliy 
ill the right; and that it a a preof of his not bean a firiend to it, if he 
ever pots it in the wrong. This is a motive which I utterly disclaim. 
This u the way, not to be a friend to one's country^ but an enemy* It is 
to bring upon it the disgrace of falsehood and misrepresentation, in the 
first iostaace ; and, next, to afford it all the indaoemeat, in the writat^s 
power, to persevere in mischievoas, or in disgraceful courses. 



XXVIU PREFACE. 

suflkient elevation to make a book be received as 
useful, though it neither exaggerated, nor extenuated 
the good, or the evil, of any man, or combination 
of men : to afford a multitude, in every party, far 
enough removed from the taint of vulgar antipathies, 
to yield to an author, who spoke with sincerity, and 
who though he has not s^idcen with a view to gratify 
any party, or any individual, most assuredly has 
never spoken with a view to hurt any, a compensation 
for the hostilities of the lower and more ungenerous 
portion of every party. 

Though I am aware of many defects in the work 
which I have ventared to offer to the public ; and 
cannot forget how probable it is, that more impartial 
and more discerning eyes will discover many which 
are invisible to mine, I shall yet appeal from the sen- 
tence of him, who shall judge of me solely by what I 
have not done. An equitable and truly useful 
decision would be grounded upon an accurate estima* 
tion of what I have done, and what I have not 
done, taken together. 

It win also deserve to be considered, how much 
was in the power of any individual to compass. In 
so vast a subject, it was clearly impossible for one 
man to accomplish every thing. Some things it was 
necessary to leave, that others might be taken; some 
things it was necessary to handle but slightly, that 
others might be treated with greater attention. The 
geography, for example, alone, would have occupied a 
life-time. To nicety in the details of geography, I was, 
therefore, unable to aspire. I followed, without much 
criticism, the authors whom I was consulting, and 



was only carefbl to give, with correctness, that outline 
and those particulars, which were necessary for 
understanding completely the transactions recorded 
in my work. To compensate as far as possible, for 
that which, in this department, I mjrself was unaUe 
to perform, I was anxious to afford the reader the 
adirantage of Mn Arrowsmith's map^ by far tiie 
finest display which has yet been made of the geo- 
graphy of India ; and in any discrepancy, if any 
diould appear, between the text and that reduction 
of his noble map, which is prefixed lo the second 
volume, I desire the reader to be guided rather by the 
geographer than by the htstorian. 

In the orthography of Indian names, I should notv^ 
have aimed at a learned accuracy, eren if . my know- 
ledge of the languages had qualified me for the task. 
I have not been very solidtous even about umformity 
in the same name ; for as almost every author diflEers 
from another in the spelling of Eastern names, it 
appeared to me to be not altogether useless, that, in a 
book intended to serve as an introduction to the 
knowledge of India, a specimen of this irregularity 
should appear. 

There is another apparent imperfection, which I 
should have more gladly removed. In revising my 
work for the press, some few instances have occurred, 
in which I have not been able to verify the references 
to my authorities. This arose from one of the difficul- 
ties of my situation* Unable to command at once the 
large and expensive number of books, which it was ne- 
cessary for me to consult, I was often dependent upon 
6 



XXX PRBFACE. 

acddent for the period' of my supply; and, if no* ' 
provided with tb^ best cbannds of information, ob- 
liged to pursue my inquiries, at the mooient, in such 
as Ipossessed. It was often, in these cases, useful, 
for the sake of memory, and of following out the 
thread of research^ to quotes in the first instancy atM 
second hand» When I afterwards obtained the 
better authority, it was a matter of anxious care ta» 
adjust the refiorenoe ; but I have met with some in* 
stances in which I am afraid the acyustment has not < 
been perfinrmedb I mention this, to obviate cavib at. 
the appearance of inaccuracy, where the reality does 
not exist ; inaccuracy in fornix rather than in sub- 
stance : fi>r I have no apprehension that those who 
shall trace me with the requisite perseverance w91 
accuse me of wanting either the diUgenee, or the. 
fiddity of an historian ; and I ought not to have 
undertaken the task, if I had not possessed the pro« 
qpect of obtaining, sooner or later, the means of car- 
ryii^ it to completion. 



GLOSSARY. 



Adawlut. Jostioey eauity; • ocmit of 
jnrtioe. The teron Dewannj Adaw- 
lat, and Foojdarry Admwloty denote 
the OTil and crimmel oonrU of justice. 
See Deweonj and Foigdarry. 

Amebb, Mxeb, Emib. a nobleman. 

AvEBB VL Ombah. NoUe of nobles, 
lords of lords. 

Avy A. A piece of moneyy- the mteentfa 
partefarapee* 

AuMEEV. Trustee, comvisHoner. A 
tenpofary coUedof or supnTtsor, a|H 
pointed to the charge of a country, on 
the reoMyral of a Zemindar, orlbr any 
other particidar purpose of local in- 
^festi|pation or arranKenent* 

AoMtL. AfSBt,oAioer,aati¥ecolleetor 
of revenue. Sopeiuitendent of a dis- 
trict or diTision of a country, either 
on the part of the goremment. Zemin- 
dar, or renter. 

AmiLnAB. Agent, the holder of an of- 
fice. An iatendant and collector of 
the revenue, uniting ctvtl, military, 
and finandal powers, under the Ma- 
heneoan government. 

AuBUBo. The place where goods are 



Bala-Gbavt. Above the Ghants, in 
ooatradistiaction to Payeen Ghaut, 
below the Ghauts. The terms are 
generally applied to the high table- 
land in the centre of India, towards 
its southern extremity. 

Bavtav. a Hindu merchant^ or shop- 
keeper. The term Banyan is used m 
Bengid to denote the nadve who ma- 
nages the money concerns of the Eu- 
ropean, and sometimes serves him as 
an ittterpreter. AtMadras, the same 
description of persons u c^ed Du- 
basb, which signifies one who can 
spf^aktwo languages. 



Batta. Defideney, discount allew- 
ance. Allowance to troops in the 
field. ^^ 

Baeab. Daily market, or marlwt place* 

Bbga. a fauM measure equal, in T 
gal, to about the third part of 1 

Beoum. a hdy, princess, woman of 
hig^rank. 

BtcB, Vaista. a man of the third 
Hindu cast, who by birth b a trader^ 
or husbandman. 

Bbabmbv, Bbahmiv, Bbahmab, Bba* 
mir. A divine, a priestj the first 
Hindu cast. 

Bribjabbie, Bihjabt, Bbbjabt, Bav« 
JABT. A gniin merchant. 

BoBGALOW. The name used b Bengal, 
for a species of country-house, erect- 
ed by Europeans. 

Calt Yiro, CALrooorM. The p re s e n t, 
or fiiurth age of the world, accofding 
to the chroBoloQr of the Hindus. 

Caste, Cast. Atnbe,orda8Bofpeople. 

Cabavav-sbbai. The serai of the ca- 
ravan. See Serai aiMl Choultry. 

Cawei, Casi, Kazt. a Mahomedan 
judge, or justice, who also officiates 
as a public notary, in attesting deeds, 
by affixing his seal. The same as the 
officer we name Cadi, in Tuikey. 

Cauzt-ul-Cazavt. Judge of ju(%es; 
the chief judge, or Justice. 

Chavdala. One of the names for the . 
most degraded of the Hindu casts. 

Choky, Cboeeb. A chair, seat; guard, 
watch. Tte station of a guwd, or 
watchman. A place where an officer 
is stationed to receive tolls and cus- 



CnoviTBT. A covered public building, 
Amt the accommodation of passengers. 

Chout. a fourth : a fourth part of sums 
litigated. Mabrattachout; aiburth 



XXXll 



GLOSSARY. 



of the rerenuesy exacted as tribute by 
the MahfBttas. 

Chuboar. Staff-bearer. An attendant 
on a man of rank. He waits with a 
long staff, plaited with siWer, an- 
nounces the approach of visitors, and 
runs before his master, (Atidainling 
aloud his titles. 

Chunam. Lime. 

CiRCAR. Head of affairs ; the state or 
government ; a grand division of a 
province ; a head man ; a name used 
oy Europeans in Bengal, to denote 
the Hindu writer and accountant, em- 
ployed by thenuelves, or in the public 
offices. 

CoLLVRiES, CoLEREES. Salt-works, the 
places where salt is made. 

Coolies, Cooly. Porter, labourer. 

Coss. A term used by Europeans, to 
denote a road-measure of about two 
miles, but differing in different parts 
of India. 

Crore. Ten millions. 

CSHATRITA, KSBATRIYA, CpETTERIE, 

K HETERY. A man of the second, or 

military caste. 
CuTCHEARY. Courtofjustioe; also the 

public office where (he rents are paid, 

and other business respecting the re* 

venue transacted. 
CvTWAt, Katwal. The chief officer 

of police in a large town or city, and 

■ttperintendant of the markets. 

Dar. Keeper, holder. This word is of- 
ten joined with another, to denote the 
holder of a particular office or em- 
ployment, asChob-dar, staff-holder; 
Zemin-dar, land-holder. This com- 
pound word, with t, ee, ^, added to. it, 
denotes the office, as Zemindar-ee. 

Darocah. a superintendant, or over- 
seer; as of the police, the mint, &c. 

Daum, dam. a copper coin, the for- 
tieth part of a rupee. 

Deccan. Literally « the south. A term 
employed by Mahomedan writers, to 
denote the country between the rivers 
Nerbuddnh and Crisbna. 

Decoxts. Gaug-robbers. Deco^jf, gang- 
robbery. 

Dewak, Duan. Place of assembly. 
Native minister of the revenue de- 
partment; and chief jnsiice, in civil 
causes, within his jurisdiction; re- 
ceiver-general of a -provi^ice. The 



term is also used, to designate the 
principal revenue servant under an 
European collector, and even of a 
Zeniindar. By this title, the East 
India Company are receivers-general 
of the revenues of Bengal, under a 

' grant from the Great Mwd. 

Dewakny, Duannee. The office, or 

. jurisdiction of a Dewan. 

DewahnyCourtof Adawlut. Acourt 
for trying revenue, and other civil 
causes. 

DoAB, DoowAB. Any tract of comitry 
included between two rivers* 

Droog. a fortified hill or rock. 

Dub ASH. See Banyan. 

Durbar. The court, the hall of au- 
dience; a levee, 

Faqueer, Fakir. A poor man, men- 
dicant, a religious beggar. 

FiRMAUN, Phirmaund. Order, man- 
date. An imperial decree, a royal 
grant, or charter. 

FOUJDAI^, FOJEDAR, PUOUSAAR, FoGE- 

DAR. Under the Mogul government, 
a majgistrate of the police over a lai^ge 
district; who took cognizance of all 
criminal matters within his jurisdic- 
tion, aud sonaetimes was employ- 
ed as receiver-general of the reve- 
nues. 

FOUJDARRY, FOJEDAREE. Office of R 

Foujdar. 
FoujOARRY Court. A court for ad<* 
'ministering the criminal law. 

Ghaut. A pass through a mountain : 
applied also to a range of bills, and 
the ford of a river. 

GuEE. ClariBed butter, in which state 
they preserve that article for culinary 
purpose^!. 

GuiRDAWAR, QiRowAR. An ovoTseer 
of police, under whom the gcjfendagp 
or m formers, act. 

GoMASTAH. A commissioner, factor, 
agent. 

GooRoo, Guru. Spiritual guide. 

GoYENDA. An inferior oflicer of police; 
a spy, informer. 

GuuGE. A granary, a depot, chiefly of 
crain fur sale. Wholesale markets, 
held on particular^ days. Commercial 
dep6ts. 

Gurry. A name given to a wall flank- 
ed with towers. 



GL08SART. 



XXXUI 



Haram . SongliD, th« plaoe where the 

ladies reside. 
HiacARRAy Harca&eah. a giiide^ a 

spy, a messenger. 
HowDA. The seat of great men fixed 

bnan elephaot, not much unlike the 

body of a sedan in shape. 

jAcaiREyJAGHEER. literally, the place 
' of taking. An assignment to an in- 
dividual of the government share of 
the produce of a portion of land.' 
There were' two species of jagbires ; 
one, personal, for the use of the 
grantee ; another, in trust, for some 
public service, most commonly, the 
maintenance of troops. 

Jamm A, JVMKA. Total* amount, col- 
lection, assembly, llie total of a 
territorial assignment. 

Jam||abitkdy, Jumm ABtJHDT. A writ- 
ten schedule, of the whole of an as- 
sessment 

j£CLy Keel. A shallow lake, or morass. 

JijiJAL. A large musket, fixed on a 
swivel, used in Indian forts, and fired 
with great precision. 

Jug. See Yug. 

Jij»6L£,Jakole. a wood, or thicket; a 
country overrun with shrubs, or long 
grass. 

Khalsa. Pure, unmixed^ An office of 
government, in which the business* of 
the revenue department is transacted : 
the eEcbequer. Khalsa lands, are 
lands, the revenue of which is paid 
into the exchequer. 

Kbak, Cawn. a title, similar to that 
of Lord. .; , 

KuiLADT, Ke,laut. A robe of ho- 
nour, with which princes confer dig- 
nity. 

Ki Li^DAR, Kellaoar* Warder . of a 
cattle ; commander of a fort. 

kiST. Stated payment, ihstalmeut .of 
rent. 

KusuooN, CusiiOGN. A body of- mili- 

. tary, Gorre^pppding nearest to our 
term brigade; varyiug from one to 
six or eight tbousaE^d. 

Lac* One hundred thousand. 

Lascar. Properiy a camf^foUower, but 
applied to native sailors and artillery- 
men. 

Limber.' A low two- wheeled carriage, 
VOL. I. • 



on which the trial of i( j^a is fised 
when travelling: it is released inu 
moment if wanted to fire, which is 
called unlimbering : the cattle being 
yoked to the limber, guns are of course 
always dragged breech first. 

Maal, Mabl, Mehal, Meal. Places, 
districts, departmeiits. Places, or 
sources of revenue, particularly of a 
territorial nature; lands. 

Maba. Great. 

MocURRERT. As applied to lands, it 
means lands let on a fixed lease. 

MofusstL. Separated, particularized; 
the subordinate divisions of a district, 
in contradistinction to Saddur, or 
Sudder, which implies the chief seat 
of government. 

MoFussiL Dewanny Adawlut. Pro- 

. vincial court of civil justice. 

Moluboeb. Manufacturer of salt. 

MooFTY, MiTFTEE. The Mahoinedan 
law-officer who declares the sentence. 

Monsoon. The rainy season. The 
periodical winds and rains. 

MooLAVY, MoBLAVEE. A learned and 
relicious man, an interpreter of the 
Mabomedan law. 

MooNSREE. Letter- writer, secretary. 
Europeans give this title to the native 
who instructs them in the Persian 
' language. 

Mosque. A Mabomedan temple. 

MtrsNun. The place of sitting; a seat; 
a throne, or chair of state. 

MuTSEDDYjMuTASEDDEE. LltentUpOO. 

Writer, accountant, secretary. 

Nabob, Nawab. Very great deputy 
vicegerent. The governor of a pro- 
vince under the Mogul government. 

Naib. a deputy. 

Naib Nazim. Deputy of the Nazim, 
or Governor. 

NAiO, N A I K. A petty militarv-officcr. 

Naxr.. Chief, ihe Nairs are a pecu- 
liar (kicription of Hindus, on .the 
Malabar coast. 

Nac^m. Comuo9er,amiBger, adjuster. 
The first officer of a province, and 
ministM of the department of cri-^ 
niinal justice. 

Nizam. Order^ unraogeitieot ; an arw 

. twger* 

NpAic m»MvljE» Tb« ;adiiiiiii«trator 

':of the empire, 
d 



XXXIV 



GlOSSARTr 



NuAuuT. Arrangement^ governiMiit; 
the office of the NazniH or Nisain« 

NivAMOT Adawlvt. The court of 
criminal justite. 

Nulla. Streamlet, wate^conr6e. 

NuzzER. A TOW, an oflEmng; a pre- 
sent made to a superior. 

Omrah. a lord, a grandee^ under the 
Mognl government. 

Pagoda. A temple ; also the name of 
a gold coin, in* the south of India, 
valued at eight shillings. 

Palakkbsn. a litter in which gen- 
tleman in India recline, and are 
carried on the shoulders of four 
mdn. 

Paeiar. a term used bj Europeans 
in India tu denote the outcasts of the 
Hindu trihes. 

Patan. a name applied to the Af- 
ghaun tribes. 

Pbshwa, Peishwa. Guide, leader. 
The prime minister of the Mahratta 
government. 

Peon. A footman, a foot soldier ; an 
inferior officer or servant employed 
in the business of the revenue, pc^ce^ 
or judicature. 

Perguvnau. a small district, con- 
sistittg of several villages. 

Pesucush. a present, particularly to 
government, m consideration ot an 
appointment, or as an acknowledg- 
ment for any tenure. Tribute, fine, 
quit-rent, advance on the stipulated 
revenues. 

Pettaii. The suburbs of a fortified 
town. 

PoLLiGAR, PoLYGAR. Head of R vUtae 
district. Military chieftain in the 
Peninsula, similar to hill 2emindar 
in the northern circars. 

PoLLAM. A district held by a Polligar. 

PoTAiL. The head man of a village. 
The term oorrespouds with that of 
Mocnddim and Mundul in Bengal. 

PoTTAU. A lease granted to the ealti- 
▼ators, on the part of go\'eniment, 
either written on paper, or enmved 
with a style on the leaf el* uie fan 
palmira tree. 

P0KDI7. A learned BiAhmen. 

PuRANA, Poor AN. Literally ancient : 

■ the name given to svdi Hindu books 

as treat of creation in general, with 



the history of ihtnt gods, and an- 
cient heroes. 
Pyre. A foot messenger. A person 
employed as a night-watch in a vil- 
lage, and as a runner or messenger on 
the bosiness of the revenue. 

Rajah. King, prince, chieftain, noble- 
man ; a tiUe in ancient times given 
to chieft «f the second or military 
Hindu tribe only. 

Rajepoot. Literally, son of a Idng. 
The name of a warlike race of Hindus. 

Rana. a species of rajah. 

Rannt, Ranee. Queen, princess, wife 
of a rajah. 

Roy Roy an. A Hindu title given to 
the principal officer of the Khalsa, of 
chief treasurer of the exchequer. 

Rupee. The name of a silver coin ; 
rated in the Company's accounts, the 
current rupee at 8<. ; the Bombay 
rupee at 2f . 3d, 

Ryot. Peasant, subject; tenant of 
house or land. 

Sayer. What moves; variable im- 
posts, distinct from land rent or re-^ 
venue ; consisting of customs, tolls, 
licenses, duties on goods, also taltes 
on houses, shops, bazars, &c. 

Sepoy. A native soldier. 

Serai. The same as Chonkry. 

Shaster. The instrument of govern- 
ment or instruction; any book of in- 
struction, particularly containing di- 
vine ordiniEuioes. 

Shroff, Shrof. A banker, or money- 
changer. 

Sirdar. Chief, captain, head roan. 

Soucar. a merchant, or banker; a 
money-lender. 

SuBAH. A province, such as Bengal. 
A grand division of a country, whicb 
is again divided into circars, chucklas^ 
pergunnahs, and villages. 

SuBAUOAR. The holder of the subah,^ 
tlie governor, or viceroy. 

SuBARbARRY. The office andjtttis- 
dscdonof Q sabahdar. ' 

SuDDER. The breast; the fore^ctNirt 
of a house; the chief seat of govern- 
ment, contradtstineuished from Mo- 
fiissi), or interior of the country ; the 
presidency. 

SuBOER Dewwanny Adavitlut. The 

' chief pi vil ccrtirt of justice under the 



GLOSSARY. 



xxxy 



CoDipany'i goyernment, held at the 
presidency. 
SuDDER N1ZA.MUT Adawlut. The 
chief crimiDal court of justice, under 
the Company's government. 

SUDBAy SuiJDKAy SOODER. A Hindu of 

the fourth, or lowest tribe. 
SuKNUD. A prop, or support ; a patent, 
charter, or written authority for hold- 
ing either land or office. 

Talookdar. a holder of a talook, 
which is a small portion of land; a 
petty land-agent. 

Tank. Pond, reservoir. 

Tannakdar. a petty police officer. 

Teep. a note of hand ; a promissory 
note given by a native banlLer, or 
money-lendttrt to ZeraiodarB and 
others, to enable them to furnish 
government with security for the pay- 
ment of their rents. 

Tehsildar. Who has charge of the 
collections. A native collector of a 
district acting under a European or 
Zemindar. 

TopABSES. Native black Christians, 
the remains of the ancient Portuguese. 

Tope. A grove of trees. 

Tunc AW, Tvkkba. An assignment on 
the revenue for personal support, or 
other purposes. 

Tumbril. A carriage for the gun 
ammunition. 

Vackbel, Va^tjeel; One endowed 



with authority to act for anotfier. 
Ambassador, agent sent on a special 
commission, or residing at a couit. 
Native law pleader, under the judi- 
cial system of the Company. 

VfziR, Vizier. Under the Mogul go- 
vernment, the prime minister of the 
sovereign. 

VcoAS, Veds, Beeds. Science, know- 
ledge. The sacred scriptures of the 
Hindus. 

Yog IBS, JoGiES. Hindu devotees. 
YuG, Jug, Yooo. An age; a great 

period of the Hindus, also a religious 

ceremony. 

Zemindar. From two words signifying, 
earth, land, and holder or keeper. 

' Land-keeper. An officer who, upder 
the Mahomedan government, was 
charged with the superintendance df 
the lands of a district, Boancially con- 
sidered ; the protection of the calti- 
vators, and the realization of the go- 
vernment's share of its produce, 
either in money or kind. 

Zemindarry. The office or jurisdictioQ 
of a Zemindar. 

Zenana. The pUiee where the ladies 
reside. 

ZiLLAH. Side, part, district, diviuon. 
^A local division of a comitry, hav- 
ing reference to personal jurisdic- 
tion. 



N. B. The explanations of the above terms are taken, for the most part, from 
the Gk>ssary attached to the Fifth Report of the Committee of the House of Com- 
mons on Indian afiiurs, appointed in 181(>. 



ERRATUM. 

The correction, which the following notice in the first edition required 
to bq made, was forgotten till that part of the text wa^ reprinted* The 
passage therefore stands as in the first edition. 

I Vol. III. — Page 150. It has .been suggested to me, that the allusion to 
the death of 400 Gentoos, made in the note of the translator of the . 
Seer Mutakhareen, may have a stress laid up<m it, which I should 
regret. I copied the note, merely as a specimen of tlie criticisms 
which were made on the spot, by persons not partial to the Eng- 
lish. This, 1 conceiTed, was matter of instruction. But I never 
meant that any fact should stand, as confirmed, upon the autho- 
rity of the translator of the Seer Mutakhareen ; nor will it be so 
understood by any considerate reader. Had the statement ap- 
peared to me to rest upon proof, I should have thought it of suffi- 
cient importance to eive it a place in the text. I have, since the 
volume was printed, nad reasons given to me, by which I am con- 
vinced, that the allusion is not well founded, and tliat no such 
catastrophe ever occurred. 



HISTORY 

OF 

BRITISH INDIA. 



BOOK I. 



1527—1707. 



Commencement of the British Intercourse with 
India ; and the Circumstances of its Progress, 
till the Establishment of the Company on a 

. durable Basis by the Act of the Sixth of Queen 
Anne. 

Two centuries have elapsed, since a few British 
merchants humbly solicited permission of the Indian 
princes to traffic in their dominions. 

'The British power at present embraces nearly the 
whole of that vast region, which extends from Cape 
Comorin to the mountains of«Tibet, and from the 
mouths of the Brahmapootra to the Indus. 

In the present undertaking, it is proposed, to collect^ 
from its numerous and scattered sources, the informa- 
tion necessary to convey correct and adequate ideas 
of this empire, and of the transactions through which 
it has been acquired; and for that purpose, 

VOL. I. B 



8 Subject of the Work^ 

BOOKT, I. To describe the circumstances in which the 
' intercourse of the British nation with India com- 

menced, and the particulars of its early progress, tiQ 
the era when it could first be regarded as placed on a 
firm dnd durable basis : 

II. To exhibit as accurate a view as possible of the 
character, the history, the manners, i^ligion, arts^ 
Cterature, and laws of the extraordinary people 
with whom this intercourse had begun ; as well as of 
the physical circumstances, the climate, the soil, and 
productions, of the country in which they were placed: 

III. To deduce to the present times a history of 
that part of the British transactions, which have had 
an immediate relation to India ; recording the train 
of events ; unfolding the constitution of that Body, 

/ half political, half commercial, through which the 
business has been ostensibly performed; describing 
the nature, the progress^ and effects of its commercial 
operations ;^ exhibiting the legislative proceedings, the 
discussions and speculations, to which the connection 
of Great Britain with India has given birth ; analysing 
the schemes of government which she has adopted fof 
her Indian dominions; and attempting to discover 
the character and tendency of that species of relation 
to one another in which the mother country and her 
eastern dependencies are placed. 

The subject forms an entire; and highly interest- 
ing, portion of the British History ; and it is hardly 
possible that the matter should have been brought 
together, for the first time, without being instructive, 
how unskilfully soever the task may have been per- 
formed. If the success corresponded with the wishes 
of the author, he would throw light upon a state of 
society, curious, and commonly misunderstood ; upon 
the history of society, which in the compass of his 
work presents itself in almost all its stages and all its 



P^rtuguae Intercourse with India. J 

riiapes ; upon the principles of legislation, in which BOOK i. 
he has so many important experiments to describe; ■ 
and upon interests of his country, of which, to a 
great degree, his countrymen have remained in igno- 
rance, while prejudice usurped the prerogatives of 
understanding. , 



CHAP. I. 



From the Commencement of the Efforts to begin d 
Trade with India, tiU the Change of the Com- 
pdny from a regulated to a joint-stock Company. 

The Portuguese had formed important establish- 
ments in India, before the British offered themselves 
as competitors for the riches of the East 

From the time when VascQ de Gama distinguished 
his nation by discovering the passage round the Cape 
of Good Hope^ a whole century had elapsed, during 
which, without a rival, the Portuguese had enjoyed, 
and abused, the advantages of superior knowledge 
and art, amid a feeble and half-dvilized people. They 
had explored the Indian ocean, as &r as Japan ; had 
discotered its islands, rich with some of the favourite 
productions of nature ; had achieved the most brilliant 
concpiests; and by their commerce poured into Eu- 
rope, in unexampled profusioii, those commodities of 
the East, on whidi the nations at that time set an 
extraordinary value. 

The circumstances of this splendid fortune had vio- 
lently attracted the attention of Europe. Tiie com- 
merce of India, even when confined to those narrow 
limits which a carriage by land had prescribed, was 



4 Commercial State of England. 

BOOK I. supposed to have elevated feeble states into great 
'^' ones ; and to have constituted an enviable part in 
the fortune even of the most opulent and powerful ; to 
have contributed largely to support the Grecian mo- 
narchies both in Syria and Egypt ; to have retarded 
the downfall of Constantinople ; and to have raised 
the small and obscure republic of Venice to the 
rank and influence of the most potent kingdoms. 
The discovery therefore of a new channel for this 
opulent traffic, and the happy experience of the Por- 
tuguese, inflamed the cupidity of all the maritime 
nations of Europe, and set before them the most 
tempting prospects. 

An active spirit of commerce had already begun 
to display itself in England. The nation had hap- 
pily obtained its full share of the improvement which 
had dawned in Europe ; and the tranquil and econo- 
. mical reign of Elizabeth had been favourable both to 
the accumulation of capital, and to those projects of 
private emolument on which the spirit of commerce 
depends. A brisk trade, and of considerable extent, 
had been carried on during the greater part of the 
sixteenth century with the Netherlands, at that time 
the most improved and commercial part of Europe. 
The merchants of Bristol had opened a traffic with 
the Canary Islands; those of Plymouth with the 
coasts of Guinea and Brazil : the English now fished 
on the banks of Newfoundland ; and exjdored the 
sea of Spitzbergen, for the sovereign of the waters : 
they engrossed, by an exclusive privilege, the com-* 
merce of Russia : they took an active part in the 
trade of the Mediterranean : the company of mer- 
chant-adventurers pushed so vigorously the traffic 
with Germany and the central parts of Europe, as 
highly to excite the jealousy of the Hanse Towns : 
and the protestant inhabitants of the Netherlands and 



North^tcest Passage attempted, 5 

France, flying from the persecutions of their own op- BCX)K I. 
pr^ssive and bigoted governments, augmented the ^"^'^* 
commercial resources of England by the capital and . -o^ 
skill of a large importation of the most ingenious and 
industrious people in Europe.^ 

In these circumstances, the lustre of the Portuguese 
transactions in the East peculiarly attracted the admi- 
ration of the English. Already a most adventurous 
spirit of navigation was roused in the nation. The 
English were the first who had imitated the example 
of the Spaniards in visiting the New World. In 
1497, Cabot, with a small squadron, explored the 
coast of America, from Labrador to Virginia, and 
discovered the islands of Newfoundland and St. 
J(^n.^ An English merchant, named Robert Thome» 
who had been stationed for many years at Seville in 
Spain, and had acquired particular knowledge of the 
intercourse which the Portuguese had opened with 
the East, presented a project to Henry VIII. about 
the year 1527, the accomplishment of which he 
imagined would place his countrymen in a situation 
no less enviable than that of the Portuguese. As 
that nation had obtained a passage to India by a 
course to the south-east, and pretended a rights 
which they defended byTorce, to its exclusive occu* 
patiouy he supposed that his countrymen might readi 
the same part of the globe by sailing to the north- 
west, and thus obtain a passage at once expeditious 
and undisputed/ What effect this representation 



' Anderson's History of Commerce in the reipi of Elizabeth, passim. 
See also Hakluyt's Voyages, ii. S, 96, Ibid. iii. 690. Gtiicciardini'a 
Descripdon of the Netherlands. Sir William Temple. CamdeD, 406. 

* Hakluyty iii. 4. Rymer's Foedera, xii. -595. Anderson's History of 
Commerce, pablished in Macpherson's Annals, ii. 11. Robertson'a 
History of America, iv. 138. 

3 Hakiuyt, iii. 139. Harris's Collection of Voyages, i. 874* 



6 Northeast Passage attempted. 

BOOK I. produced on the mind of Henry is not accurately 

Chap. 1. t|,Q^n. But two voyages in the course of Ms reign 

IQ^^ were undertaken for the discovery of a north-west 

passage, one aboiit this period,^ and another ten 

years later.^ 

Nothing can more dearly prove to us the ardour 
with which the English covet^ a share in the riches 
supposed to be drawn from the Bast, than the perse- 
vering efforts which they made to discover a channel 
from which the Portuguese should have no pretence 
to exdude them. Two attempts in the reign of 
Henry to obtain a passage by the north-west having 
£Euied, their exploring fancy anticipated a happier 
issue from a voyage to the north-east. A small squa* 
dron, under the direction q£ Sir Hugh Willoughby, 
was fitted out in the reign of Edward VI.; and, 
sailing along the coast of Norway, douMed the North 
Cape,^ where it was encountered by a storm. The 
^p of Sir Hugh was driven to an obscure spot in 
Russian Lapland, where he and his crew perished 
miserably by the climate. The other principal vessel 
found shelter in the harbour of Archangel, and was 
the first foreign ship by which it was entered. So 
well did Chancellour, its captain, improve the inci- 
dent, that he opened a commercial intercourse with 
the natives, visited the monarch in his capital, stipu- 
lated important privileges for his countrymen ; and 
laid the foundation of a trade which was immediately 
prosecuted to no inconsiderable extent. This voyage 
but little damped the hopes of obtaining a north-east 
passage to the riches of India. Some vigorous at- 
tempts were made by the company in whose hands 
the commerce with Russia was placed ;^ the last of 

» Haklayt, ut supra. • Ibid. 131. > Hakloyt, i. S36, &e. 

* Anderson's History of Commerce ip Mwpherson, ii. 16a. 



North-west Passage, re*<iitempted, 7 

them in IfiSO^.when two ships were setit out to ex- book i. 
plore the passage through t;he straits of Waygatz : ^"^''^ ^' 
after strnggiiog with many perils, and difllcuities firom ,-g.y 
the ice wbA the coM, one of die vesseb returned un- 
successfid ; of the other no intelligence was ever re- ' 

G^ved. 

•Before this hope was abandoned, the project of ob- 
taining a passage by the north-west was ardently 
resumed. No fewer liian six voyages were made in 
the course of a few years. Two barks of twenty* 
five tons each, and a pinnace of ten^ sailed under 
Martin Frobisher in the year 1567, and entered 
Hudson^s bay, which they at first imagined was the 
inlet about to conduct them to the golden shore« 
The same navigator was encouraged to make a. se« 
cond attempt in the same direction in 1576. As he 
brought home some minerals, which were su{^)osed 
to be impregnated with gold, the attention of govern- 
ment was excited ; and after two years, Frobisher 
was sent out with fifteen of the Queen's ships, mi- 
ners for the supposed ore, and 120 persons as the 
rudiments of a colony. Having spent his provisions, 
and lost one of his dups, but not having found the ex- 
pected passage, nor left his settlers, he returned with 
300 tons of the supposed treasure, which proved to be 
cmly a glittering sand/ The nation persevered in 
its hc^ies and its enterprises. A few years after- 
wards. Captain John Davis sailed as far as 66^ 40' 
north, and discovered the straits distinguished by 
his name. In a second voyage, undertaken in 1586, 
he explored in vain the inlet which he had thus dis- 
covered, and after a few years was enabled to pro- 
ceed in a third expedition, which had no better 
success than the preceding two.* 

> Hakluyt. Anderson, nt supra, ii. 145, 158, 159. 
* Hakluyt. Anderson, ut supra, ii. 175, 180, 185. 



8 Captain Drake's Voyage. 

BOOK I. After the defeat of so many efforts to discover a 
Chap.i. j^g^ passage to India, the English resolved to be no 
■y^^y longer deterred by the pretensions df the Portuguese. 
A voyage to China by the Cape of Good Hope was 
undertaken in 1582. Four ships proceeded to the 
coast of Brazil, fought with some Spanish men of 
war, and were obliged to return for want of pro- 
visions.* Another exi^edition, consisting of three 
ships, was fitted out in 1596, the commander of 
which was furnished with Queen Elizabeth's letters 
to the Emperor of China. This voyage proved emi- 
nently unfortunate. The ships were driven upon 
the coast of Spanish America, where only four men 
were preserved alive from the effects of storms, fa- 
mine, and disease.^ 

Amid these utisucc^ssful endeavours two voyages 
were accomplished, which animated the hopes of tlie 
nation, and pointed out the way to more fortunate en- 
terprises. Francis Drake, the son of a clergyman in 
Kent, who at a tender age had been put an apprentice 
to the master of a slender bark trading to the coast of 
Holland and France, had early evinced that pas- 
sionate ardour in his profession which is the usual 
forerunner of signal success.^ He gained the af- 
fections of his master, who left him his bark at his 
death ; at the age of eighteen he was purser of a 
ship which sailed to the bay of Biscay ; at twenty he 
made a voyage to the coast of Guinea; in 1565 he 
ventured his all in a voyage to the West Indies, 
which had no success ; and in 1567 he served under 
his kinsman Sir John Hawkins, in his unprosperous 
expedition to the bay of Mexico. In these different 

> Anderson, ut supra, ii. 171. 
• Purchas, b. iii. sect. 2. Anderson, ii. 210. 
3 Hakluyt, iii. 440. Harris's Collection of Voyages, i. 14. Cam- 
den's Anonb, 301, &c 



Captain Drake^s Voyage* 9 

sendees, his nautical skill, his courage, and sagacity, BOOK I. 
had been conspicuously displayed. In 1570 his repu- ^*"^'*- ^' 
tatioQ enafiled him to proceed to the West Indies ,.^- 
with two vessels under his command. So vehemently 
was he bent on executing some great design, that he 
renewed his visit the next year, for the sole purjjose 
of obtaining information. He had no sooner re- 
turned than he planned an expedition against the 
Spaniards, executed it with two ships and seventy^ 
three men, sacked the town of Nombre de Dios, 
and returned with great treasure. It is said that, 
in this voyage, he saw from the top of a high-tree, 
that is, fancied he sai^^ across the American isthmus, 
the Southern Ocean, and became inflamed with the 
desire of reaching it in a ship of England. 

For this expedition he prepared on a great scale ; 
obtaining the commission of the Queen, and the com- 
mand of five vessels, one of 100 tons, another of 
eighty, one of fifty, another of thirty, and a pinnace 
c^ fifteen ; the whole manned with 164 select sailors. 
The historians of his voyage are anxious to display 
the taste and magnificence, as well as judgment, of 
his preparations; expert musicians, rich furniture, 
utensils of the most curious workmanship, vessels of 
silver for his table, and many of the same precious 
metal for his cook-room. 

The expedition sailed from Plymouth on the 13th 
of December, 1577. Having passed the Straits of 
Magellan, and ravaged the western coast of Spanish 
America, Drake feared the encounter of a Spanish 
fleet, should he attempt to return in the same direc- 
tion, and formed the bold design of crossing the 
Pacific Ocean, and regaining England by the Cape of 
Good Hope. 

With one ship, the only part of the fleet which re- 
mained, he steered along the coast of America to the 



10 Captain JDrake^s Voyage, 

BOOK I. latitude of 88® north, and then entered upon that im- 
^^' mense navigation, in which Magellan, the only cir- 
1577. cumnavigator who preceded him, had sustained so 
many disasters. No memorable occurrence attended 
the voyage. Of the islands whidi have been dis- 
cbvered in the Pacific Ocean none were deserved till 
he approached the Asiatic coast. Fixing his atten- 
tion on the Moluccas, of which the fame had been 
circulated in Europe by the rich spices thence im- 
ported by the Portuguese, he passed, with little ob- 
sanation, the more eastern part of the numerous 
islands which stud the Indian seas, and held his 
course for Tidore. From ititelligence, received on 
the passage, he waved his intention of landing on 
that island, and steered for Temate, the sovereign of 
which he understood to be at enmity with the Por* 
tuguese. 

His intercourse with tiiat island forms a remark- 
able epoch in the history of the British nation in In«- 
dia» as it wb& the b^inning of those commercial 
transactions which have led to the greatest results* 
The King, having received assurances that his new- 
visitants came with no other intention than that of 
trading with his country, gave them a very favour- 
able reception. This monarch possessed oonsideraUe 
power, since the English navigators were informed 
that be ruled over seventy islands, besides Temate, 
the most valuable of aU the Moluccas ; and in the 
visits which they paid to his court they were eye* 
witnesses of no contemptible magnificence. They 
exchanged presents with him, and received him on 
board ; they traded with his subjects, laid in a cargo 
of valuable spices, and acquainted themselves with 
the nature and facilities of a commerce which was 
the object of admiration and envy in Europe. 

Not satisfied with the information or the commo- 



Captain Drake^s Vayage. 11 

dkies vhidh they received on one island, they visited book l 
several, being always amazed at their prodigious fer- ^^^'* ^' 
tiUty, and in general delighted with the manners of ^^^ 
tbe inhabitants. Among other places they landed 
in the great island of Java^ famous afterwards as the 
seat of the Dutch government in India. They held 
some fiiendly intercourse with the native, and de- 
parted f¥ith a tolerable knowledge both of the charac- 
ter q£ the people, and the productions of the country. 
They now spread their sails for that navigation be- 
tween Europe and India, to which the Portuguese 
daimed an exclusive right, and by which they mono- 
polized the traffic with India. Those discoverers had 
craftily disseminated in Eur^c^ terrific accounts of 
dangers and horrors attending the navigation round 
the Cape of Good Hope. As the voyage of the Eng- 
lish proved remarkably prosperous, they were sur- 
prised and delighted with the safety and ease wh^ch 
seemed to them to distinguish this envied passage, and 
conceived a still more lofty opinion of the advantages 
enjoyed by the nation that engrossed it. After leaving 
Java, the first land which they touched was the Cape of 
Good Hope. They landed once more at Sierra L^ne, 
on the African coast, and received supplies which suf- 
ficed for the remainder of the voyage. They arrived 
at Plymouth on Monday the 26th of September, 1580, 
after a voyage of two years, ten months, and a few 
days ; exhibiting to the wondering eyes of the spec- 
tators the first ship in England, and the second in the 
world, which had circumnavigated the globe. The 
news quickly spread over the whole kingdom, which 
resounded with the applauses of the man who had 
performed so daring and singular an enterprise. 
Whoever wished to be distinguished as the patron of 
merit hastened to confer some mark of his admiration 
on Captain Drake. The songs, epigrams, poems, and 



12 ' ' ^'^y^S^ ?/ Cavendish. 

BOOK I. other pieces, which were composed in celebration of 
Chap. 1. ^jg exploits, amounted to, several collections.^ The 
Queen, after some delay, necessary to save appear- 
ances with the Spanish court, which loudly complained 
of the depredations of Drake, though as reprisals per- 
haps they were not undeserved, paid a visit in person 
to the wonderful ship at Deptford ; accepted of an 
entertainment on board, and conferred the honour of 
knighthood on its captain ; observipg^ at the same 
time, that his actions did him more honour than bis 
tUle.^ 

We may form some conception of the ardour which 
at that time prevailed in England for maritime ex- 
ploits, by the number of men of rank and fortune, 
who chose to forego the indulgences of wealth, and 
to embark their persons and properties in laborious, 
painful, and dangerous expeditions. Among them 
we find such names as those of the Earls of Cumber- 
land and Essex, of Sir Richard Greenville, Sir Walter 
Ralegh, Sir Humphry Gilbert, Sir Robert Dudley, 
who prepared squadrons at their own expense, and 
sailed to various parts of the world. No undertaking 
of this description was attended with more important 
circumstances than that of Thomas Cavendish. 

This gentlenmn, descended from a family of dis- 
tinction, and inheriting a large estate in the county of 



> Harris is not satisfied with the merit of these productions, which 
reached not, in his opinion, the worth of the occasion ; and seems to be 
rather indignant that no modern poet has rivalled the glory of Homer, 
'* by displaying in verse the labours of Sir Francis Drake :"" i. 20. 

^ Her Miyesty appears to have been exquisitely gracious. The crowd 
which thronged after her was so great that the bridge, which had been 
constructed between the vessel and the shore, broke down with the' 
weight, and precipitated 200 persons into the water. As they were all 
extricated from their perilous situation without injury, the Queen re- 
marked that so extraordinary an escape could be owing only to the For- 
tune of Sir Francis Drake. Harris, i. -ZO, 



Voyage of Cavendish. 13 

Suffolk^ had been early fired with a passion for man* BOOK r. 
time adventure : in a vessel of his own, he had ac- ^^^^' ^' 
companied Sir jEUcbard GreenviUe in his unsuccessfiil ^^^^ 
voyage to Virginia ; and now sold or mortgaged his 
estate, to equip a squadron with which he might rival , 
the glory of Drake. It consisted of three ships, the 
largest of 140 tons, one of sixty, and a bark of about 
forty, the whole supplied with two years' provisions, 
and manned with 126 officers and sailors, of whom 
several had served in the celebrated expedition of 
Drake. 

They sailed from Plymouth on the 21st of July, 
1586. Their voyage through the Straits of Magellan, 
and the depredations which they proceeded to com* 
mit alon^ the western coast of the American conti- 
nent, iipt only in the spirit of avarice, but even of 
wanton devastation, form no part of our present sub* 
ject, and may without regret be left to other recorders. 
They had reached the coast of Calefornia, and nearly 
24° of northern latitude ; when, having taken a very 
rich Spanish ship, and completed their schemes of 
plunder, they commenced their voyage across the 
Pacific Ocean. They left the coast of America on 
the 19th of November, and came in sight of Guam, 
one of the Ladrone islands, on the Sd of January. 
From this island they were visited by sixty or seven- 
ty canoes full of the inhabitants, who brought provi- 
sions to exchange for commodities, and so crowded 
about the ship, that the English, when they had finish- 
ed their traffic, discharged some of their fire arms to 
drive them away.* With the Philippines, to which 

1 I am sorry to observe that no great respect for haman life seems to 
have been observed in this proceeding ; since, directly implying that the 
guns had been charged with shot, and levelled at the men, the liistorian 
of the voyage jocosely remarks, '' that 'tis t€n to one if any of the ta* 
vages were kUM; for they are so very nimble that they drop immediately 



14 ' Voyage o^ Cavendish. 

BOOK I. they next proceeded, tiiey opened a more protracted 
^^'^' ^' intercourse ; having cast anchor at one of the islands, 
1586 ^^^^ ^^^y ^^y ^^^ ^^°^ days, and carried on an ac« 
tive trade with the inhabitants. 

The cluster of islands, to which the Europeans 
hare given the name of the Philippines, was discovered 
by Mai^ellan. Philip II., shortly after his accession 
to the^Spanish throne, planted there a colony of Spa- 
aiards, by an expedition from New Spain ; and a 
curious commerce had from that time been carried 
on across the Great Pacific between this settlement 
and the dominions of Spain in the new World. To 
Manilla, the capital of the Philippine colony, the 
Chinese, who resorted thither in great numbers, 
brought all the precious commodities of India ; and 
two ships were sent annually from New Spain, which 
carried to the Philippines the silver of the American 
mines, and returned with the fine productions of the 
East. The impatience, however, of the natives under 
the Spanish yoke, was easily perceived. When they 
discovered that the new visitors were not Spaniards, 
but the enemies of that people, they eagerly testified 
their friendship ; and the princes of the island, whero^ 
Cavendish landed, engaged to assist him with the 
whole of their forces, if he would return and make 
war upon the common adversary. 

This adventiurous discoverer extensively explored 
the intricate navigation of the Indian Archipelago^ 
and observed the circumstances of the new and ex- 
traordinary scene with a quick and intelligent eye. 
He visited the Ladrones ; shaped a coursean^ong the 
Philippines, which brought the greater part of those 
islands within his view; passed through the Mo- 

into the water, and dive beyond die reach of all danger, upon the least 
waming in the world,'' Harris's Collect, of Voyages, L «r. 



Voyage of CavendUh. 15 

luccas ; sailed along that important chain of islands, BOOK L 
which bounds the Indian Archipelago from the Strait ^"^^^ ^' 
of Malacca to the extremity of Timor-; and passing 15S8. 
the Strait of Ballj, between the two Javas, cast an* 
chor on the south-west side of the great island of that 
aame, where he traded with the natives fbr provisions^ 
and formed a sort of treaty, stipulating a fisrourable 
reception when his visit dumld be renewed. 

He sailed for the Cape of Good Hope on the I6th 
of March, careful to treasure up information respect- 
ing a voyage^ which was now the channel of so im- 
portant a commerce. He made astronomical obser- 
vations ; he studied the weather, the winds, and the 
tides ; he noted the bearing and position of lands ; 
and omitted nothing which might facilitate a repeti- 
tion of the voyage to himself or his countrymen* He 
passed the Cape with prosperous navigation about the 
middle of May, and, having touched at St. Helena to 
recruit his stores, he landed at Plymouth on the 9th 
of September, 1588. In the letter which, on the very 
day of bis arrival, he wrote to LfOrd Hunsdon, then 
Chamberiain to Queen £Iizabeth, he says, ^^ I navi- 
gaited to the islands of Philippines, hard upon the 
coast of China, of wliich country I have brought 
such intelligence as hath not been heard of in these 
parts ; a country, the stateliness and riches of which 
I fear to make report of, lest I should not be credited. 
I sailed along the islands of Moluccas, where, among 
some of the heathen people, I was well entreated, and 
wiiere our countrymen may have trade as freely as the 
Fortugals, if they themselves will." 

The tide of maritime adventure which these splen- 
cUd voyages were so well calculated to swell, flowed 
aatuvaUy towards India, by reason of the fancied opu* 
lence, and the prevailing passion for the commodities, 
of the East. The impatience of our countrymen had 

6 



16 Value attached 

BOOK I. already enj^aged them in a circuitous traffic with that 
^."^''' ^' part of the globe. They sailed to the eastern shores 
1588. of the Mediterranean Sea, where they found cai^oes 
of Indian goods conveyed over land : and a mercan«- 
tile company, denominated the Levant Company^ was 
instituted, according to the policy of the age, to secure 
to the nation the advantages of so important a com« 
merce.^ The Company which, after the discovery gI 
the port of Archangel, had been formed to carry on 
the trade with Russia, had, opened a communication 
with Persia, and thence imported the commodities of 
India : Mr. Anthony Jenkinson, an active and enter* 
prising agent of the Russia Company, sailed down the 
Volga, in 1558, to the Caspian Sea, which he crossed 
into Persia, and at Boghar, a city of some importance, 
found merchants hot only from various parts of the 
Persian empire, but from Russia, and China, and 
India. This voyage he performed seven times ; and 
opened a considerable trade for raw and wrought silk, 
carpets, spices, precious stones, and other Asiatic pro- 
ductions. In 1563, there was business enough to 
require the presence of three agents at Cashin, the 
seat of the Persian court; and the traffic flourished 
for several years. 

Accidental circumstances contributed to enliven the 
admiration excited by the Indian trade. During that 
expedition to the coast of Spain, on which Sir Francis 
Drake was sent, by Queen Elizabeth, to harass the 
Spanish shipping, and prevent as far as possible the 
preparations for the Invincible Armada, he took one 
of the Portuguese ships from India, known at that 
time by the name of Carracks. The value of her 
cargo inflamed the imaginations of the merchants ; 
and the papers which she carried afforded information 

> Monson's Naval Tracts. Hakluyt. Anderson's Hist, of Com. piilH 
Ush«d iu Macpherson's Annals^ ii. 169, i9S. Rymer's Foedera. 

7 



to the Trade with India. 17 

respecting the teaffic in which she was engaged.^ A BOOR i. 
atiU more unportiant capture of the same sort was made ^°^^' ^' 
in 1598. An expedttion. fitted out for the West In- 1593. 
died by Sir Walter Aale^, and commanded by Sir 
John Boroughs^ encountered near the Azdres the 
greatest c^ aH the Portuguese Ccarracks, a vessel of 
li600 tons, carrying 700 raet-, apd thirty-six brass 
cannon, and after an obstinate contest carried her into 
Dartmouth. She was the lai^st vessel which had • 
ever been seen in Englcmd, laden with spice?, calicoes, 
^Ik^, gold, pearls, drugs, porcelain, ebony, &c. ; and 
stimulated the impatience of tlieEnglish to be engage^ 
In so opulent a ocimmerce.^ 

Somt members of the Turkey or Levant Company 
finished about the same timie an expedition mto India,^ 
They had carried sdme doth, tin, >and other goods 
from Aleppo to Bagdat, which they next conveyed 
down the Tigris to Ormus in the Persian Gulf, and 
thence transported to Goa, the great mart between 
the P(Hrtug<iese and Indians on th^ coast of Malabar. 
From this ptacer they commenced an extensive survey 
of thet a4)oinhig counteies ; repaired to Agra, at that 
time the o^ital and relidenoe of the iVXogul Emperw; 
visited Labor; traversed Bengal; travelled to Pegu 
and MalitcQft; and, cetunting by sea to Ormus, re- 
traced jtheir stepd td Aleppo, whenee.tfaey saHed fi>r 
England, beairiilg with t^m important add extensive 
infpiTnittiQn re;9pectii(g the cowbtriesthey hadexi^ored. 
Intelligence dow potn^ itself into thef nation by 
a vadety of diannels. An Eoglishman, of the name 



« This 19 not a conclusion merely drawn from the circamstances of the 
case, which however would sufficiently warrant it; but stated on tha 
tesdmony of Cambden, who related what he beard and saw. Cambden's 
Annals. Anderson's Hist, of Commerce. 

* Anderson's Hist, of Commerce in Macpherson's Annals, ii. 201. 

^ They returned to London in 1591. Anderson, ut supm, ii. 198, 
VOL. L C 



.18 Raymoiid^s Voyage. 

BOOK 1. of Stevens, had sailed with the Portuguese from Lis- 

Chap. 1 ® 



bon to Goa, by the Cape of Good Hope, and wrote an 
159S. account of his voyage, which was read with avidity, 
and contributed to swell the general current of enter- 
prise which now ran so vehemently toward India.^ 

The first application which was made to govern- 
ment was by a memorial, in the name of" divers mer- 
chants," addressed to the hords of Council, in LSSQ, 
for the royal permission to send three ships, and as 
many pinnaces, on a voyage to India. They enumerated 
the different places, at which the Portuguese had 
already effected settlements, on the coasts of Malabar 
and Coromandel, in Malacca, and in the Banda and 
Molucca islands, places from which it seemed to be 
tacitly understood that other nations were bound to 
abstain. But they added, that the islands and shores 
of the Indian ocean presented many other places, open 
to the enterprise of ISnglish merchants, an intercourse 
with which might yield the greatest advantages.^ 
What reception this application received is unknown. 
But the unfortunate expedition of Captain Raymond; 
remarkable as being the first of which India was the 
immediate destination, though its object was not trade, 
so much as plunder, by cruising against the Portu- 
guese ; was fitted out in 1591. Disease had made 
such ravages among the crews, before they reached 
the Cape of Good Hope, that one of the vessels was 
sent home with the sick ; and the rest, two in num- 
ber, had not long doubled the Cape, when the princi- 
pal ship was lost in a storm. Captain James Lancaster^ 
in the remaining vessel, after a disastrous voyage to 
the East, sailed to the West Indies, where he lost the 

1 Harris's Voyages, i. 875. 

ft This Memorial is preserved in the State Paper Office^ and a short 
account of it has been given as by Mr. Bruce, Annals of the East India 
Companyi i. 109. 



Mildenkalts Embassy. ' .19 

ship, and with great difficulty found means to return book I. 
in a French privateer/ ^"^^' ^' 

While the English fluctuated between desire and 1599. 
execution in this important enterprise, the Dutch, in 
1595, boldly sent four ships to trade with India by 
the Cape df Good Hope.'' This exploit added fuel, 
at once, to the jealousy, and to the amUtion of the Eng* 
lish. In 1 599» an association was formed, and a fund 
subscribed, which amounted to 80,183/. 6s. Sd., and 
consisted of 101 shares, the subscriptions of individuals 
▼arjring from 100/. to 8,000/. It was agreed to peti*- 
tion the Queen for a warrant to fit out three ships, 
and export bullion, and also for a charter of privileges. 
A committee of fifteen, the origin and foundation 
dia Court of Directors, were diosen to manage. The 
approbation of the government was readily signified; 
but as a treaty was then pending with Spain, policy 
appeared to counsel delay. The subscribers, known by 
the name of the adventurers, were impatient, and pre* 
sented a memorial, dirtinguishing the places with 
which the Spaniards and Portuguese had estaUished 
an intercourse, firom others to which, without ai)y 
ground of complaint on the. part of those nations, the 
English might with un^ieakable advantage resort. 
The council rejdied* that ** it was more benefiidall for 
the generall state of merchandise to entertay ne a peace, 
then that the same should be hindered, by the stand- 
ing W^^ y^ Spanishe comissions, £»* the mayntayu- 
ing of this trade, to forgoe the oportunety of the 
conduding of the peace."^ The memorial was referred 
to Sir Foidke Greville, who made a &vourable report : 
and in the course of the same year, the Queen sent 
John Mildenhall over land by Constantinople on an 
embassy to the Great Mogul. 

^ Anderson's Hist, of Commerce in Macphenon's Annais, ii. 199. 
Harris's Voyages, i. 875. 
> Anderson, at supra, ii. 209* Harris's Voyages, i. 990. 
3 MiQutes, &c. (Indian Register Office.) ' Bruce 's Aniials^ i. 112. 

C2 



20 JPtVsf Charier granted 

BOOK I. It was attended with littk success. The Porta* 
Chap. 1. guese and Venetian agents exerted themselves to raise 
-g-.Q suspidoWs against the designs of the Engfish, and ef- 
fectuatty obstructed the endeavours of the ambassa- 
dor. 

Towards the end of the yenr 1600 the efforts of the 
adventurers were renewed ; and the consent of govern* 
. ment was obtained to proceed in preparations for an 
Indian voyage, while the patent of incorporation was 
stUl under consideration. Meanwhile an application 
was made from government, with what view does not 
appear, for the employment of Sir Edward Michd^ 
bourne in the expedition. The answer of the com* 
mittee, though petitionersfor a favour notyetconceded, 
affords a curious specimen of their independence, and 
of the mode of thinking of the times. They stated 
it as their resolution ** not to employ any geniUnum 
m snj place of charge," and requested *' that they 
may be allowed to sort theire business with men of 
their own qualitye, lest the suspicion of the employm^ 
of gentlemen being taken hold uppon by the generali- 
tie, do dryve a great number of the adventurers 
to withdraw their contributions." ^ The adventure 
was prosecuted with ardour. On the 8th of Octob^ 
the five following ships were already provided ; the 
Malice Scourge, of 200 men, and 600 tons burden; 
the Hector, of 100 men, and 800 tons ; the Ascension, 
of eighty men, and 260 tons; the Susan, of eighty 
men, and 240 tons ; and a pinnace of ft>rty men, and 
100 tons. To provision these sliips for twenty months 
the cost was computed at 6,600/. 4^ . l(kl. ; and the 
cai^o consisting of iron and tin, wrought and mn- 
wrought, of lead, cloths, and .some smaller articles, 
chiefly intended as presents, was estimated, exdusive 



' Minutes of a General Court of Adventurers, presenred in the Indian 
Repster Offiotn Bnice's Annals, i. 198. 



to trade with India. S] 

of bullion, at 4,545/. It was determined that thirty- I^OOK i. 
six factors or super-cargoes should be appointed for ' ^' 
the voyage, divided into separate classes, rising above i^qq^ 
one another in trust and emoluments. Captain James 
i#apcaster, whose difficult return from a preda- 
tory expedition has already been mentioned, was 
chosw to command the fleet ; and on the 31st of De- 
cember the charter of privileges was obtained.^ 

This chaiter, the origin of a power so anomalous 
and important as that which was afterwards accumu- 
lated in the hands of the East India Company, con- 
tained nothing which remarkably distinguished it from 
the other charters of incorporation, so commonly in 
that age bestowed upon trading associations. It con- 
stituted the adventurers a body politic and corporate 
by the name of " the Governor and Company of Mer- 
chant3 of London, trading to the ^fist Indies ;'' and 
vested them with the usual privileges and powers^ 
The plan which they had already adopted for tlie 
management of their aiTairs, by a committee of twenty- 
four, and a chairman, both to be chosen annually, was 
confirmed and rendered obligatory. With a reserva- 
tion in favour of the rights granted to other associa- 
tions, and with prohibition extending to all such 
places as might be already occupied by the subjects 
of states in amity with her Majesty, and whose ob- 
jection to rivals should be declared, the privilege of 
trading to the East Indies, that is, to all places 
beyond the Cape of Good Hope and the Straits of 
Magellan, was bestowed upon the Company, with 
power to export in .each voyage 30,000/. in gold and 
silver, English goods for the first four voyages exempt 
from duties, and to re-export Indian goods in English 
ships under the same privilege to the end of the char- 

' Brace's AnnaU, i. 139—^86. Andenon's History ofComnteice in 
Maqifaenon's AnnaU, ii. 3 16. Hairis's Collection of Voyages, i. 875. 



22 First Voyage 

BOOK I. ter. According to the principle of the times, the 
^^^' ^' charter was exclusive ; prohiUting the rest of the 
1600. community from trading within the limits assigned to 
the Company, but granting to them the power, when- 
ever they pleased, of bestowing licenses for that pur- 
pose. It was granted for a period of fifteen years ; 
but under condition that, if not found to be advan- 
tageous to the country, it might be annulled at any 
time under a notice of two years : if advantageous it 
might, if desired by the Company, be renewed for 
fifteen years. 

The ardour of indhridnals, where any thing is to be 
risked, is more easily excited, than upheld. Though 
the list of subscribers, while the scheme of Indian ad- 
venture was yet in contemplation, had been readily 
filled up, the calls of the committees for the payment 
of the instalments were very imperfectly obeyed. Even 
when the charter was obtained, it was either under- 
stood to confer no power of compelling payment, or 
the directors were afraid to make use of it. Instead 
of exacting the stipulated sums, and trading upon the 
terms of a joint-stock company, the subscribers who 
had paid were invited to take upon themselves the 
expense of the voyage, and, as they sustained the 
whole of the risk, to reap the whole of the profit. 

The sums which were thus advanced amounted to 
68,87S/. which greatly exceeded the capital originally 
subscribed. Of this, 89,771/. was expended in the 
purchase and equipment of ships — the four, excluding 
the pinnace, which were taken up by the committee 
of original adventur^^ : 28,742/. was expended in 
bullion : and 6,860/. in goods ; consisting partly of 
British commodities, cloth, lead, tin, cutlery, glass, 
&c. ; partly of foreign, as quicksilver, Muscovy hides, 
&c. The choice of Captain Lancaster to command 
the, fleet was renewed ; and it sailed from Torbay on 



under the Charter. 23 

the 2d of Maj, 1601» carrjring letters of leoom- BOOR I. 
mendations from the Queen to the sovereigns of the ^^^' ^' 
different ports to which it might resort.^ i^w. 

A first and experimental attempt was naturally un- 
productive of any remarkable result: but the first 
voyage of the East India Company was not discou- 
raging. The first place in India to which they repaired 
was Acheen, a principal city in the island of Sumatra, 
atwhidithey were favourably received. They formed * 
a treaty of commerce with the diief or sovereign of 
the {dace ; obtained permission to erect a factory ; and» 
having taken on board a quantity of pepper, set sail 
for the Moluccas. In the Straits of Malacca they 
captured a Portuguese vessel of 900 tons burthen, 
carrymg calicoes and spices, which sufficed to lade the 
fleet. They diverted their course, therefore, to Ban- 
tam in the island of Java ; where the Captain, deliver- 
ing his letters and presents, and meeting with a 

1 Brace's Annals, i. 146. << But fonsmocfa/' says Sir WiUiam Monsoa 
{Naval Tracts, iii. Chorchiirs CoUccUon of Voyages, 475), "as every 
innovation conimoDly finds opposition, from some out of partiality, and 
from otben as enemies to novelty; so this voyage, though at fint it car- 
ried a great name and hope of profit, by the word India, and example of 
Holland, yet was it writ against.** He then exhibits the objections, seven 
in nnmber, and subjoins an answer. The objections were shortly as fol« 
lows, the answers, may be conceived: 

1. The trade to India woaki exhanst the treasure of the nation by the 
exportation of bullion. 

2. It would consume its mariners by an unhealthy navigation. 

3. It would consome its ships by the rapid decay produced in the sou- 
thern seas. 

4. It would hinder the vent of our cloth, now exported in exchange 
for the spices of the foreign merchants. 

5. It was a trade of which the returns would be very slow. 

6. Malice to the Turkey Company was the cause of it, and jealousy 
and hatred from the Dutch would be the unhappy effect. 

7. It would diminish the Queen's customs by the privilege of export- 
ing bulUon duty free. 

These objections, with the answers, may also be seen in Anderson's 
History of Commerce, od an« 

7 



24 Oiher Voyages. 

BOOK I. fkYourable recq)1ion» left some agents^ the first rudi* 

^^*^^'^' ments of the Company's factories ; aoid leturned to 

1603-13. England, where he amred, in September^ 1608, with 

a handsome profit to his owners on the capital of the 

voyage.^ 

In the course of the years from 1603 to 161S, eight 
other voyages were fitted out, on similar terms. The 
first, iti 1603, under the command of Captain Mid- 
dleton^ consbted of the ships which had but just re*- 
tumed from the preceding voyage ; and the capital 
subscribed was 60,450/. ; of which 48,140/. was laid 
out in the preparation and provision of the ships ; 
11,160/. in bullion, and 1,142/. in goods. The 
second, in 1606, consisted of three ships commanded 
by Captam Keeling, with a capital of 53,500/. ; of 
which 28,620/. was for the equipment of the fieet, 
17,600/. was in bullion, and 7,280/. in goods. The 
third, in 1607, consisted of two ships, 33,000/. capi- 
tal; .14,600/. of which was for the ships, 15,000/. in 
bullion, and 3,400/. in goods. The fourth voyage, in 
1608, had but one ship ; 18,700/. subscription ; ex- 
pense of equipment, 6,000/. ; bullion, 6,000/, ; goods, 
1,700/. The fifth, in 1609, had three ships, larger 
than in any former voyage; capital subscribed 82,000/. ; 
cost of shipping, 32,000/.; the investment, 28,500/. 
bullion, and 21,300/. goods. The sixth voyage, in 
1610, had four ships; and subscription, 71,581/. ; di- 
vide4 into 42,500/. for shipping, 19,200/. bullion, 
10,081/. goods. The seventh, in 1611, of four vessels, 
had 76,355/. subscription, expended 48,700/. on the 
fleet, had 17,675/. in bullion, and 10,000/. in goods. 
The eighth, in 1612, had one ship, and subscription, 
7,200/. ; divided, 5,300/. for the vessel, 1 ,250/. bullion, 

> Harris, i. 875. Anderson, ut supra, ii. 217, 218. Bruce'« Annali, 
i. 151, 152. 



Other Voyages. 25 

and 650/. in goods. All these vojagesi with one ex^ BOOK T. 
oeption^ that in 160T, of wMch both the vessels were ^''^^' ^' 



lost, were {Prosperous : the dear profits, hardly ever |qo3-13. 
bdow 100 per cent, being in general mo^ than 200 
on the cafntal of the voyage.^ 

The years in which these voyages were performed 
were not without other incidents of considerable im^ 
portanoe. In 1604, the Company were alarmed by 
a licence in violation of their charter ^ granted to Sir 
Edward Michelbome and others, to trade to ** Ca» 
thaia, China, Japan, Corea, and Cambaya, &c * 
This injury was compensated in 1609> when the 
&cility and indiscretion of Ring James encouraged 
the Company to aim at a removal of those restrictions 
which the more cautious policy of Elizabeth had im* 
posed. They obtained a renewal of thdr charter, 
confirming all their )n'eceding privileges, and const!*- 
tuting them a body corporate, not for fifteen yearsy 
or any other limited time, but for ever ; still, how* 
ever, providing that, on experience of injury to the 
nation, their exclusive privileges should, after three 
years' notice, cea^ and expire. 

The earliest of the Company's voyages were ex- 
clusively directed to the islands in the Indian Ocean, 
as Sumatra, Java, and Amboyna, the returns being 
raw silk, fine calicoes, indigo, cloves, and mace. In 
1608, the factors at Bantam and in the Moluccas re- 
ported that the cloths and calicoes imported from the 
continent of In£a were in great request in the 
islands ; and recommended the opening of a trade at 
Surat and Cambaya, to supply them with those com- 
modities, which might be exchanged, with extraor- 
dinary profit, for the spice and other productions of 
the islands. To profit by these advantages, the fleet 

I Bruce's Annals, i. 153—163. 



26 First Establishment in India. 

BOOK I. which sailed under the orders of Sir Hemy Middle- 
^°^''' ^' ton, in 1609, was directed to steer for the western 
1603-13 ^^^^^^ ^ ^^^ Asiatic continent, where they made se- 
' veral attempts to establish a commercial intercourse. 
At Aden and Mocha they were opposed by the 
Turks; who surprised one of the ships, and made 
the Captain and seventy men prisoners. On the 
coast of India their endeavours were firustrated by 
the influence of the Portuguese. A fleet which 
sailed in 1611 had better success. Attacked at 
Swally, a place at no great distance firom Surat, by 
a large Portuguese armament, it made a successful 
defence ; and, notwithstanding the intrigues and 
efforts of the Portuguese, obtained a fEivourable re- 
ception at Surat The English now succeeded in 
forming a commercial arrangement. They obtained 
permission to establish factories at Surat> Ahmeda- 
bad, Cambaya, and G<^a, which were pointed out, 
by the agents of the Company, as the best situations ; 
and agreeing to pay a duty of 3-^ per cent., received 
assurance, that this should be the only exaction to 
which their merchandise should be subject; that pro- 
tection should be afforded to their factories ; and that 
their property, even in the case of the death of their 
agents, should be secured till the arrival of another 
fleet. A phirmaun or decree of the Emperor, con* 
ferring these privileges, was received on the 11th of 
January, 1612 ; and authorised the first establishment 
of the English on the continent of India, at that time 
the seat of one of the most extensive and splendid 
monarchies on the surface of the globe.^ 

I Bnico's Annals, u 164.^ 



Trade on a MnUStoch. 27 



CHAP. 11. 



iFrom the Change of the Company into a Joint- 
stock Company^ in 1612, till the Formation of 
the third Joint-stock in 16S1-2. 

Hitherto the voyages of the East India traders book i. 
had been conducted on the terms rather of a regu- ' ^' 
lated than a joint-stock company; each adventure \q\^, 
being the property of a certain number of individuals^ 
who contributed to it as they pleased, and managed 
it for their own account, subject only to the general 
regulations of the Company. Whether this was more 
adapted or not, to the nature of commerce, and the 
interests of the nation, it was less favourable to the 
power and consequence of a Governor and Directors, 
than trading on a joint-stock, which threw into 
their hands the entire management and power of the 
whole concern. Accordingly, they exerted them- 
selves to decry the former method, and, in 1612, 
were enabled to come to a resolution, that in future, 
the trade should be carried on by a joint-stock only/ 

It stiU appears to have been out of their power to 
estaUish a general fund, fixed in amount, and divided 
into regular shares ; the capital was still raised by a 
sort of arbitrary subscription, some individuals, whose 
names stood as members of the Company, advancing 
nothing, others largely. They now, however, sub- 
scribed, not each for a particular adventure, with an 
association of his own choosing, but all into the hands 
of the Gk)vemor and Directors, who were to employ 
the aggregate as one fund or capital for the benefit 

* Bruc*y i. 165, 



Sg Trade on the Joint^Stock. 

BOOK I. of those hj whom it was advanced. On these terms 
^°^''' ^' 429,000/. was raised, which the Directors thought 
1613-16. P^'oper to divide for the purpose of four separate ad- 
ventures or voyages, to be undertaken in as many 
successive years. The voyages were regulated, and 
connposed as follows : 

Inveetmeot. 



Year. 


Vessels. 


r 

Bullion. 


Goods. 


1618 


8 


* 18,810/. 


12,446/. 


1614 


• 8 


1S,942 


23,000 


1615 


6 


26,660 


26,065 


1616 


7 


52,087 


16,506 



The purchase, repair, and equipment of the vessels 
amounted to 272,544/., being the remainder >of stock. 

The profit of these voyages was far from setting 
the mannagement of a court of Directors, as com- 
pared with that of individuals taking charge of their 
own affairs, in a favourable light. . The average of 
the profits on the eight voy^es which preceded, 
leaving out of the account the small adventure of 
what is called the Company's fourth voyage, wholly 
unfortunate, was 171 per cent. The average of the 
profit on the four voyages in question, was only 87-i- 
per cent^ 

As the power of the Portuguese in the East car- 
ried the usual consequences of power along with it, 
among other things, an overbearing and, insolent 
spirit, they had already embroiled themselves with 
the Mogul government : an event favourable to the 
English, who were thus joined with that govern- 
ment in a common cause. At the same time the splen- 
did achievements of the English, against an enemy 
wl)om the governments of India were ill able to resist, 

^ Bruce, i. 166 



Embassy of Roe. ^ ' ,29 

raifled high their reputation for prowess in war. A BOOK I. 
Portug^uese fleet burned the towns of Baroach and ^°^'*' ^' 
GogSLi and a powerful armament arrived at Swally 1513.16. 
with the Portuguese Viceroy, in January 1614; 
which attacked the English ; but was defeated, with 
a loss of 350 riien. To improve these favourable 
drcumstances, an agent of the Company repaii*ed to 
the Mc^ul court, where he was well received, and 
obtained a royal phirioaun for a general and perpe- 
tual trade ; and in the same year took place the ce- 
lebrated royal embassy of Sir Thomas Roe. Thfe 
character of stn ambassador,, and the respect attached 
to it by the discernment of more enlightened nations, 
were but little understood at the court of the Mogtil. 
On that occasion tJhie choice of the English Andbassa-^ 
dor was happy : Sir Thomas was a man of discern- 
ment, and temper, and made the most of the cir- 
cumatances in which he was placed ; though he soon 
discovered that it was bad policy by which he had . 
been sent. He obtained redress of some of the 
grievances of which the English merchants com- 
plained; and concluded, though with difficulty, a 
sort of treaty, in which liberty was promised them 
of tr»iing and establishing factories in any part of 
the Mogul doiliinions; Surat, Bengal, and Sindy 
being particularly named.^ 

Besides his other services. Sir Thomas bestowed 
advke. upon the Company. ** At my first arrival,** 
says^ he, ** I understood a fort was very Uedessary ; 
but experience teaches me we are refused it to our 
own advantage. If the Emperor would offer me 
ten, t would not accept of one/* He then states his 
reasons : first, he adduces evidence that it would be 



« Brace, i. 171, &c. Sir Thomas Roe's Journal tind Letters. Chur- 
ehill, i. 770— a09. 



30 Roe*^ Advice. 

BOOK I. of no service to their trade : *^ secondly, the chargjer," 
^^^^' ^ he says, •* is greater than the trade can bear; for to 
lg]4mg maintain a garrison will eat out your profit; a war 
and traffic are incompatible. By my consent you 
shall never engage yourselves but at sea, where yoa 
are like to gain as often as to lose. The Portugueses^ 
notwithstanding their many rich residences, are b^- 
gared by keejHng of soldiers ; and yet their garrisons 
are but mean. They never made advantage of the 
Indies since they defended them : observe this wdL 
It has also been the error of the Dutch, who seek 
plantations here by the sword. They turn a wonder- 
M stock ; they prole in all places ; they possess some 
of the best : yet their dead pays consume all the gain. 
Let this be received as a rule, that if you will profit^ 
seek it at sea, and in quiet trade ; for, without contro- 
versies, it is an error to aflfect garrisons and land wars 
in India." 

*^ It is not a number of ports, residences, and 
factories, that will profit you. They will increase 
charge, but not recompence it. The conveniency of 
one, with respect to your sails, and to the commo- 
dity of investments, and the well employing of your 
servants, is all you need.'* If Sir Thomas had Uved 
to the present day, he might have urged the trade 
with China as proof, by experiment, of the proposi- 
tion he advanced. 

** The settling your traffic here will not need so 
much help at court as you suppose. A Uttle coun- 
tenance and the discretion of your factors wiU, with 
easy charge, return you most profit ; but you must 
alter your stock. Let not your servants deceive 
you; cloth, lead, teeth, quicksilver, are dead com- 
modities, and will never diive this trade ; you must 
succour it by change." 

'* An ambassador lives not in fit honour here. A 



Roe's Advice. SI 

meaner agent would, among these proud Moors, booki. 
better effect your business. My quality, often, for ' ^' 
ceremonies, either begets you enemies, or suffers un- igis^i^. 
worthily. Half my charge shall corrupt all this 
court to be your slaves. The best way to do your busi- 
ness in it is to find some Mogul, that you may enter* 
tain for 1000 rupees a year, as your solicitor at court. 
He must be authorized by the king, and then he will 
serve you better than ten ambassadors. Under him 
you must allow 500 rupees for another at your port 
to follow theGovemor and customers, and to adver- 
tise his chief at court These two will effect all ; for 
your other smaller residences are not subject to much 
inconveniency.** 

The permission to the Company's servants to trade 
privately on their own account, which aftewards 
produced so many inconveniences, was, it seems, even 
at this early period, a source of abuse. ** Concerning 
this, it is my opinion,** says Sir Thomas, ** that you 
absolutdy prohibit it, and execute forfeitures, for 
your business will be the better done. All your loss 
is not in the goods brought home ; I see here the 
inconveniences you think not of; I know this is harsh 
to all men, and seems hard. Men profess they come 
not for bare wages. But you will take away tfaid 
plea, if you give great wages to their content ; and 
then you know what you part from ; but then you 
must make good choice of your servants, and use 
fewer.*" 

Sir Thomas tells the Company that he was very 
industrious to injure the Dutch. '' The Dutch," he 
says, *' are arrived at Surat from the Red Sea, with 
some money and southern commodities. I have done 
my best to disgrace them ; but could not turn them 
out without further danger. Your comfort is, here 



93 Spke Trade. 

BOOK J. are goods enough for both.r* If so, why seek to 

^"^'''^ turn them out? 

1617. ^"^ ^^ ^^^ objects, at which the adventurers from 
England most eagerly aspired was a share in the 
traffic of the Spice Islands. The spices, from their 
novelty, were at that time a favourite object of con- 
sumption to those the supply of whose wants is so 
naturally but thoughtlessly regarded by the dealer as 
peculiarly profitable^ the rich and the great ; and the 
commerce, brilliant as compared with that of other 
nations, which the enterprise and diligence of the 
Dutch now carried on with the East, almost entirely 
consisted of those commodities. The Englishi by 
their connexion with Sumatra and Java, had their 
full share in the article of pepper ; but were excluded 
from cinnamon, cloves, nutmegs, apd all the finer 
spices. Agents were now sent from Bantam to Am* 
boyna, Banda, and other islands, who fired the jea- 
lousy and cupidity of the . Dutch. Defeated in their 
endeavours at all the places where the Dutch had 
already established themselves, the ^glish projected, 
as a last resource, a factory at Macassar, of whicti 
the produce was only rice, but which might serve as 
a magazine for spices collected from the u^ighbowing 
islands.^ 

In the year 1617, or the year of thjE^ last of the four 
voyages in which the general subscription had been 

* Churchill, i. 106—108. He gives another account of his ende{h> 
▼ours to injure the Dutch, in the following words : — " The 10th, 11th, 
and 12th, I spent in giving the king and prince advice that a Dutch ship 
lay before Surat, and would not declare apon what>dafc3gn it came, till 
a fleet arrived; which ^as expected with the first fit season* This I 
improved to fill their heads with jealousies of the designs of the Dutch, 
and the dangers that might ensue from them; which was well taken: 
Mid, being denumded, I gave my advice to prevent coming to a ruptim 
with them, and yet exclude them the trade of India." ^b. 7f4. 

« Bruce, i. 174, 178. 

5 



State of the "Trade Abroad. 33 

employed, the Company's agents reported; that Surat BOOK I. 
was the place at which the cloths of India could best ^"^''' ?' . 



be obtained, though nothing could there be disposed i^x*;, 
of in return except China goods, spices, and money : 
That large quantities of Indian wove goods might be 
sold, amd gold, camphor^ and benjamin obtained, at 
the two factories of Acheen and Tekoo on the island 
of Sumatra : That Bantam afforded a still larger de- 
mand for the wove goods of India, and supplied 
pepper for the European market: That Jacatra, 
Jambee, and Polania, agreed with the two former 
places in the articles both of demand and supply, 
though both on a smaller scale : That Siam might 
afford a large vent for similar commodities, and would 
yield gold, silver, and deer skins for the Japan 
market : That English cloth, lead, deer skins, silks, 
and other goods might be disposed of at Japan for 
silver, copper, and iron, though hitherto want of 
skill had rendered the adventures to that kingdom 
unprofitable: That, on the island of "Borneo, dia- 
monds, bezoar stones, and gold, might be obtained 
at Succadania, notwithstanding the mischief occa- 
sioned by the ignorance of the first factoi's ; but from 
Banjarmassin, where the spine articles were found, it 
would be expedient, on account of the treacherous 
diaracter of the natives, to withdraw the factory : ' 
That the best rice in India could be bought, and the 
wove goods of India sold at Macassar : And that at 
Banda l;he same goods could be sold, and nutmegs 
and mace procured, even to a large amount, if the 
obstruction of European rivals were removed.^ 

Sur&t and Bantam were the seats of the Company's 
principal establishments. 

In the year 1617-18, a 'Subscription was opened 

i Br«c«, i. 188. 
VOL. I. T> 



^4 Hetottd Jeint^iQcL 

BOOK I. {or a new fund^ and was carrie4.tp tbe lai^e uaoimt 
^"^''' ^' Qf 1,600,000/. This was denouiinatad the Comiwiy's 
. ' Second Joint-stock. They were now, we are told^ 
possessed of thirty-six^ ships, froop 100 to 1^000 tona 
burthen ;. and the propi*ietors of s^)ck amounted to 
954. ^ But as the accounts of the Company have nervi^ 
l^een remarkable for cleamessi, or their histoHans for 
precision, we are not informed whether these shipa 
belonged to the owners of the first Joint-stock^ or to 
the owners of the. second; or if to hoth„ in. what 
proportion ; whether the 954 proprietors of stock were 
the subscribers to both funds, or to the last 6nly ; 
whether any part of the fii^t joint*stock had been 
paid back to the owners, as the proceeds came in ; 
or whether both funds were now in the hands of the 
Directors at once, employed for the respective be»» 
nefit of the respective Usts of subscribers : two trad- 
ing* capitals in the same hands, emjAoyed separately^ 
fin- the separate account of different associations* 
That such was the case to a certain extent may be 
concluded from this, that of the last of the voyages^ 
upon the first of the funds the returns were not yet 
made. We shall see that, afterwards, the Directors 
had> in their hands» at one and tlie same time, the 
funds of several bodies of subscribers, which they 
were bound to employ separately, for the separata 
ben^t of each ; that they, as well as their agenta 
abroad, experienced great inconvenience in preserve 
ing their accounts and concerns separate and distinct; 
and that the inteirests and pretensions of the several 
bodies w:ere prone to interfere. 

The new subscription was divided into.pqrtions for 
three separate voyages. 

The passion, natur^, of the Con^iany's agents, 

1 Sir Jeremy Sambrookc's Report on East India Trade (MS. in East 
India Rcpster Office) quoted Jby Btiiee, i. 193. 



Trade with Perma. S5 

at the dttfierent stations abroad, was to grasp at every boor l 
thing, with littJe regard to the narrowness of the ^"^'^ ^ 
funds upon which their operations depended. In ^^^^^ 
one point of vie^r this was advantageous r while the 
ground was jet imperfectly explored, it yielded a 
wider field for selection. The factors at Surat w^re 
ci^ivated with the project of a trade to Persia; it 
promised a vent for English woollens to a lai^ 
amount, and would furnish silk and other goods, 
which, both in Europe and in India, might sell to 
the greatest advantage. Sir Thomas Roe dissuaded 
the speculation ; on the ground, that the Portuguese 
were already in possession of the commerce, and 
that it woidd cost the Company more to protect 
themselves in it, than they could hope to gam by it. 
The views of the factors, because the most flattering, 
were the most persuasive; agents were sent to the 
comrt of Persia ; grants of [nivileges were obtained ; 
and a trade was opened, which experience proved to 
be oi little importance. 

The rivi^ship between the East India Company 
and the other nations of Europe includes, for a con- 
siderable time, the principal incidents of their history. 
The Portuguese, on the pretence of discoveiy, had 
long maintained an exclusive claim to the passage by 
the Cape of Good Hope : they had, partly by con^ 
quest, partly by agreement, made theifiselves mastery 
of Goa, Bombay, and other traces, on the Malabar 
coast ; of Aden, at the entrance c^ the Red Sea ; of 
Omus, in the Persian Gulf; of part of the Malay . 
coast, in the Straits of Malacca; of the Molucca 
ifliandl ; and of the coasts of Ceylon, the most valu- 
able of afl the eastern islands : they were possessed 
of factories in Bengal and in S^m; and they had 
erected the dty of Macao on the coast of China. 

d2 



161S. 



36 Rivalship of the Company 

BOOR I. The Dutch, while subject to the crown <^ Spaia; 

^^^^' ^' had been accustomed to repair to Lisbon for the pro- 
dubtions of the East ; which, even at that early 
period, they were employed in distributing to the 
rest of Ekirope. When they broke the chains of their, 
ancient masters, one of the means which Philip em-- 
ployed to distress them was, to defHrive them of the . 
commerce of his dominions. Prevented from obtain- 
ing Indian commodities by traffic with the subjects 
of Philip, they became ruinous competitors for the 
.trade with India itself. 

At the time when/ the Dutch commenced their 
voyages to the East, the crown of Spain was engaged 
in enterprises of so much importance, in other quartecs, 
and so much engrossed with the contemplation of its 
splendid empire in the New World, that the acqui- 
sitions, in the East Indies, of the Portuguese, now 
become its subjects, were treated with comparative 
n^lect. The Dutch, accordingly, who entered upoa 
the trade to India with considerable resourced and 
the utmost ardour, were enabled to supplant the 
Portuguese in the spice trade, and» after a struggle^ 
to expel them from the Molucca islands. Tliat cele-. 
brated people, now freed from the oppression of a bad 
government, were advancing in the career of pros*: 
perity with great and rapid strides. The augment-^ 
ation of capital was rapid, in Holland, beyosid what, 
has often been witnessed in any other part, of the 
glolie. A proportional share of this capital naturally, 
found its way into the channel pf the 'India trade^) 
and gave both extent and vigour to the ent^rises. 
of the nation in th^ East ; while the EngUah, whcMe: 
country, oppressed by misgovernraent^pr scourged wijth 
civil war, affcH^ded little capital to extend its trade,, 
or means to afford it proteotipnA fpundv thi^selves 



with other European Natiofis, "37 

unequal competitors, with a people so favourably si- book i. 
tuated as the Dutch. ^'^^- ^' 

During that age, the principles of pubMc wealth j^jg 
were very imperfectly understood, and hardly any 
trade was regarded as profitaUe but that which was 
exclusive. The different nations which traded to 
India, all traded by way of monopoly ; and the several 
exclusive companies treated every proposal for a par- 
ticipation in their traffic, as a proposal for their ruin. 
In the same spirit, every nation which obtained 
admittance into any newly explored channel of com- 
merce endeavoured to exclude from it all partici- 
pators, and considered its own profits as depending 
on the absence of all competition. 

The Dutch, who were governed by the same pre- 
judices as their contemporaries, and actuated, at least 
in that age, with rather more perhaps than the usual 
ihten^ty of the appetite for gain, beheld, with great 
impatience, the attempts of the English to share 
with them in the spice trade. A\Tiile contending 
for their independence against the power of Spain, 
and looking to England for support, they were con- 
strained to practise moderation and forbearance ; and 
during this time the English were enabled to form a 
connexion with Sumatra, to establish themselves at 
Bantam, and obtain a share in the traffic of pepper, 
which being a commodity so generally produced in 
the East, could not easily become the subject of 
monopoly. But before the English made efforts on 
any considerable scale to interfere with the trade of the 
further India, where the finer spices were produced, 
the power and confidence of the Dutch had greatly 
increased. 

That people were more prejudicial opponents than 
the Portuguese, between whom and tlic English the 
interference was not so direct. The chief settlements 



1618. 



38 ' Jtivalship 

BOOK I. of the Poiiuguese on the continent of India were oa 
CuAP. 2. the Malabar coast, at a great distance from Surat, 
' which was the principal seat of the English : / it was 
in the Persian trqde done that much incompatibility 
of interest existed : and feeble, in India, as the English 
at that time were, it is remarkable that they were 
an overmatch at sea for the Portuguese ; and hardljr 
ever encountered them without a brilliant victor/, 
or at least decided advantages. The case wai^ dif- 
ferent in i*egard to the Dutch : the pretensions of tiie 
English to the spice trade interfered with the very 
vitals of the Dutch commerce in the East ; and the 
fleets which the prosperous enterprise of the new 
republic enabled it to maintain were so far superior 
to those which the restricted means of the English 
Company allowed them to send, that contention 
became altogether hopeless and vain* 

It was not till the year 1617-18, that the hostility 
of the two nations displayed itself in opearations of 
force; the Dutch, in those places where they had 
formed establishments, having in general been able, 
by intrigue and artifice, to defeat the attempts of 
their rivab. The English took possession of two 
small islands, called Polaroon and Rosengin, which 
were not formally occupied by the Dutch, but inti- 
mately connected with some of their possessions. 
The Dutch raised pretensions to them, and attacked 
the English. The English had, however, so well 
fortified themselves, that the Dutch found it imprac- 
ticable at the first attempt to expel them ; but they 
found the means, partly by force, and partly by arti- 
fice, to get possession of two English ships, on their 
voyage to these islands; carried them to a Dutch 
settleipent, and refused to deliver them up, till every 
pretension to the Spice Ishmds was renounced.^ 

> Bruce, i. 199. 



with other European Nations, 39 

The ptoceeiSstgi of the Dutch, though regarded fioOR i. 
hj the English as in the highest degree unjust and ^^^'^•^- 
rapacious,, were fbanded on pretensions, not inferior ^^is. 
to those on whioii the Engiish Company mdea- 
voured to convert daims into rigl^; and on pre* 
tensions which it is clear, at anj rate, that the 
Dutch theoMslves regarded as vaHd and ecpiitaUe ; 
since they fwesented diem to the English monarch, 
as the ground ctf complaint i^inst his subjects, and 
of a demand for his interfin^nce to preT>ent the re- 
currence <tf similar injuries. In a memorial to Jam«s, 
in 16)S, the Dutch Company set forth, that, at thehr 
own cost and haaard, they had e^q^elled the Portu- 
guese from Ae Spice Idands, and had eStaiblished a 
treaty with the natires, on the express condition of 
affording the natives protection against the Portu- 
guese, and enjoying the exclusive advantage of tbeb 
trade; that the agents of the English Company, 
howover, had interfered with those well-estaUUshed 
rights, and had not only endeavoured to trade witii 
the natives, but to incite them against the Dutch. 

To these complaints the Engfish Company replied^ 
fay an enulneratiqn of injnries^ from the resistance, 
the intrigues, and violence of the Dntdi, in places 
where no &ctories of theirs had ever existed. But 
4hey also enumerated anwufg their grievances, the 
hostilities experienced at Tydore and Ambqjrna, 
places to which the pretensions of the Dutdi applied 
in all their fbroe.^ And if the ideas are admitted, 
wliM^ then prevailed, and on whkh the English as 
confidently grounded themselves as any other nation ; 
ideas importing that, in newly-discovered countries, 
priority of occupancy constituted sovereignty, and that 

1 Memorial of the Dutch East India Companj to King James, aad 
Heply of the London East India Company thereto, in the year 1616, 
<fiatt ladiii Papers in the 6tiite Paper Office) quoted, Bruce, i..SO«. ' 



40 Trtaty between 

BOOK I. the will of the natives was to be counted for nothing; 

Chap. 8, ^jj^ English could not make out a right to the trade of 
\ei9 ^^ Moluccas; for though Polaroon and Rosengin 
might liot, by actual occupancy, have accrued to thef 
Dutch, they form part of a narrow and closely con* 
nected cluster of islands, of which the Dutc^ had 
seized the principal, and with the security of which 
the presence of the English in any of the rest could 
as little be reconciled, as the security (^ Great Bri- 
tain could be reconciled with the dominion of the 
French in Ireland. With respect to Java, and the 
settlements at Bantam and Jacatra, the Engli^ had 
an equitable plea, of which they appear not to have 
availed themselves ; they might have insbted on the 
Qonsent of the Dutch, who bad not resisted their 
early settlement on that island, now sanctioned by 
time. 

After a tedious interchange of hostilities in wbicfa 
intrigue and force were combined, (the practice of 
buying up the pepper at prices higher than tiie English 
could aflRird, fornnng one of the principal subjects of 
English complaint), it was agreed between die two 
governments in Europe, at that time allies, to instil 
tute a mutual inquiry, and form im arrangement 
respecting the. claims of their subjects in the East. 
Commissioners were aj^iointed; and, after repeated 
conferences, a treaty was concluded at London, on 
the 17th July, 1619. It was stipulated, that there 
should be a mutual amnesty, and a mutual restitu* 
tion of ships and property ; that the pepper trade at 
Java should be equdly divided; that the English 
diould have a free trade at Pullicate on the Coror 
mandel coast on paying half the expences of the 
ganison ; and that of the trade of the Moluccas and 
Bandas they should enjoy one third, the Dutch two, 
paying the diarg^s of the garrisons in the same prcK 



the English and Dutch Companies. 41 

portions. Beside these conditions which re^garded dooki. 
their opposite pretensions, the treaty included ap* Cmap.^. 
rangements for mutual profit and defence. Each -^^^^^ 
Company was to furnish ten ships of war, whkh 
were not to be sent in the European voyages^ but 
employed in India for mutual protection; and the 
two naticms were to unite their efforts to reduce the 
duties and exactions of the native governments at 
the different ports. To superintend the execution of 
this treaty a council was appointed, to be composed 
of four members of each Company, called the Cou7i- 
cil of Defence. And the treaty was to be in force 
during twenty years.* 

^^This solemn engagement is a proof, if there was 
not another, of the imperfection which still adhered 
to the art of legislation. The principal stipulations . 
were so vague, and the execution of them dependent 
on so many unascertained circumstances, that the 
grounds of dispute and contention were rather mul* 
tiplied than reduced. For these evils, as far as they 
were foreseen^ the Council of Defence seems to have 
been devised, as the remedy. But experience taught 
here, what experience has uniformly tau§fht, that in 
all vague arrangements the advantages are reaped by 
the strongest party. The voice of four Eng^shtnen 
in the Council of Defence was but a feeble protect!^ 
against the superior capital and fleets of the Dutch. 
The English, to secure their pretensions, should have 
maintained a naval and military foix^e superior to 
that of their opponents. In that case, they would have 
been the oppressors; the Dutch would have been 
expelled from the spice trade ; the spice trade would 
have rested with the English, who would have over* 
looked the continent of India, because their capital 

iRymer's Feeders, xvii, 170. Bruce, i. 212. 
2 



42 The Dutch Trade. 

BOOK I. would not have sufficed to embrace it ; the continent 

^^''' ^' would have been left to the enterprise of other na*- 

1619 ^^™> ^"^ ^^^ brilliant empire, established by the 

English, would never, it is possible, have received 

a commencement. 

In consequence of this treaty, by which the English 
were bound to send a fleet of ten ships to India, a 
larger fund was this year raised than had been pro- 
vided for any preceding voyage: 62,490/. in the 
precious metals, and 28,508/. in goods, were ex« 
ported with the fleet. The return was brought back 
in a single ship, and sold at 108,887/.' 

In the interval between the time of conduding the 
treaty and the establishment of the Council of De- 
fence at Jacatra, the Dutch hlad committed various 
. acts of oppression on the English ; axid When the 
council b^gan its operations, after executing some of 
the least important conditions of the treaty, they 
Endeavoured to evade the rest. They ccmsented to 
iMtore the ships taken from the EngUeli, but not the 
goods or stores taken by individuals ; cm the pretext^ 
that the Company could not be responoble for any 
acts but their own; though, if the letters may be 
credited of the English fkctors at Jacatra, they ex* 
ploded the same pretension when it was urged against 
themselves : The^ refused to admit the English to 
their share of the pej^r trade, t31 indemnified for ' 
certain fortifications, and for the expences incurred 
by them at the siege of Bantam : They insisted that 
at Jacatra, and all other places where they had erected 
fortifications, they possessed the rights of sovereignty; 
and that the English could claim no permission to 
reside there except under the Dutch laws: They 
set forth the large expense they had immrred in for* 

' Bruce, i. ai3. 



The QmditioM of the Treaty. 4S 

tifying the Spice Islands; the maintenance of whidi BOOKL 
they estimated at €0,000/. per annmn ; and of all ^"^'- ^ 
this they required the English to advance their due j^^g^ 
proportion, before they could be admitted to the sti- 
pdated share of the trade. Tbe English objected^ 
that some of the fortifkatiotis were at places where 
no produce was obtained, and that none of them were 
usrfui but for defence against the Spaniards and 
Portuguese, with whom they were not at war. Oq 
the whole it may be remarked, that if there were 
fortifications at places where none were required, the 
English had a right to decline paying for the ])lunders 
of the Dutch ; but as they claimed a share of the 
trade upon the foundation of the Dutch conquests, 
and would not have been admitted to it without a 
war had not those conquests taken place, it was m 
less valid plea, to say that they were not at war with 
the Spaniards and Portuguese. In framing the 
treaty, no distinction was made between past and 
fiiture expenses : the English intended to Innd theml 
selves only for a share of the future: the Dutch 
availed themselves of the ambiguity to demand a 
share of the past : And in all these pretensions, they 
acted with so high a hand, that the English com- 
missioners of the Council of Defence reported the 
impracticability of continuing the English trade, 
unless measures were taken in Europe to check the 
overbearing and oppressive proceedings of the Dutch.* 
In the circle of which Surat was the centre, as the 
English were more of a match for their antagonist^ 
they had a better prospect of success. In 1630, two 
of the Company's ships, which sailed iVom Surat to 
Persia, found the port of Jasques Mockaded by a 
Portuguese fleet, conristing of five large and sixteen 

1 Brace, 1. ^23. 



44 Commercial Svccess, 

BOOK I. smaller vessels. Unable to cope witii so dispropor<» 
Chap. 2. ^^QQ^te a force, they sailed back to Surat; whare 
1622. *^^y ^^^^ joined by two other ships. Retuiiiing 
with this re-inforcementy they attacked the Portu- 
guese, and, after an indecisive action, entered the 
port. The Portuguese retired to Ormus, but, after 
refitting, came back for revenge. An obstinate con- 
flict ensued, in which the English were victorious 
over a vast superiority of force- Such an event was 
calculated to produce a great impression on the minds 
of the Persians. 

The English and Persians agreed to attack with 
joint forces the Portuguese on the island of Ormus, 
which that nation in the days of its prosperity had 
seized and fortified. The English furnished the 
naval, the Persians the military force ; and the dty 
and castle were taken on the 22d of April, 1622. 
For this service the English received part of the 
plunder of Ormus, and a grant of half the customs at 
the port of Gombroon ; which became their principal 
station in the Persian gulf. The agents of the Com- 
pany at Bantam, who were already vested with the 
superb title of President and Council, and with a 
sort of control over the otTier factories, condemned 
this enterprise ; as depriving them of the ships and 
effects, so much required. to balance the power, and 
restrain the injustice, of the Dutch.' 

The domestic proceedings of the Company at this 
period were humble. In 1621-22, they were able to 
fit out only four ships, supplied with 12,900/. in gold 
and silver, and 6,253/. in goods ; the followiqg yc«r, 
they sent five ships, 61,600/. in money, and 6,4S0/* 
in goods; in 1623-24, they equipped seven vessels, 
and furnished them witli 68,720/. in money, and 
375340/. in goods. This last was a prosperous year 

J Bruce, i. 23r, 238. 



Extortion by the Court. 45 

to the domestic exchequer. * Five ships arrived fi*oin book 1/ 
India with cargoes, not of pepper only, but of all the ^°^**' *' 



finer spices, of which, notwithstanding the increasing ^^^g. 
complaints against the Dutch, the Company's agents 
had not been prevented from procuring an assortment. 
The sale of this part alone of the cargoes amounted 
to 485,593/. ; that of the Pennan raw silk to 97>000/.; 
while 80,000/. in pursuance of the treaty of 1619> 
was received as compensation money from the Dutch.* 
Other feelings were the result of demands by the 
King, and by the Duke of Buckingham, Lord Hi^ 
Admiral, of shares, to the one as droits of the crown, 
to the other as droits of the admiralty^ of the prize 
money, gained by the various captures of the Com- 
pany, particularly that of Ormus. The Company, 
who deemed it prudent to make little opposition to 
the claims of the King, objected, as not having acted 
under letters of marque from the Admiral, hut under 
their own charter, to those of theDuke.of Buckingham.' 
The question was referred to the Judge of the Admi« 
ralty court ; witnesses were examined to ascertain the 
amount of the prize money, which was estimated at 
100,000/: and 240,000 reals of eight.. The Com- 
pany urged the expense of their equipments, the 
losses they had sustained, the detriment to their 
-mercantile concerns, by withdrawing, their ships 
from commerce to war. All possible modes of solid* 
tation to the King and the Admiral were employed ; 
but the desire for their money was stronger than their 
interest. Buckingham, who knew they must bse 
their voyage, if the season for sailing was passed^ 
made their ships be detained; and the Company,: to 
escape this calamity, were glad of an accommodation. 
The Duke agreed to accept of 10,000/., which he 

'^Accounts ia the Indian Register Office. Bruce i. 825, 234, 341, , 
^ £an India Papers in the State Paper Ofiice. Bruce» i. 241. 



46 Massacre ofAmbayna. 

BOOK I. received. A like aiim was demanded for the Kiogv 
^*^^- ^- but there is no direct evidence that it ever was paid. 
•g2« The animosities, between the English and Dutch, 
were now approaching to a crisis in the islands. The 
English complained of oppression, and were ao weak, 
as to find themselves at the mercy of their rivals* 
They represented that, in the execution of the joint 
articles of the treaty, they were charged with every 
item of expense, though their voice was entirely 
dkr^^rded in the disposal of the money, in the em* 
ployment of the naval and military force, and even 
ill the management of the trade; thfrt, inst^d of 
being admitted to their stipulated share of the spice 
commerce, they were almost entirely extruded from 
it; and that, under the pretext of a conspiracy, the 
Dutch had executed great numbers of the natives at 
Baiida, and reduced Pdaroon to a desert.^ At last 
arrived that event, which made a deep and lasting 
unpiression on the minds of Englishmen. Ilfi February, 
1623, Captain Towerson and nine Englishmen, nine 
Japanese, and one Portuguese sailor, were seized at 
Aniboyna, under the accusation of a conspiracy to 
surprise the garrison, and to expel the Dutch ; and, 
being tried, were pronounced guiky, and executed. 
The accusation was treated by the English as a mere 
pretext, to cover a plan for their extermination. But 
the facts of an event, which roused extreme indigna« 
tion in England, have never been exactly ascertained. 
The nation, whose passions wei^ kindled, was moref 
disposed to paint to itself a scene of atrocity, and M 
beKeve whatever could inflame its resentment, than to 
enter upon a rigid invesfligation of the case. If it be 

I Tho Dvtch, io their vindication, tUted tkat the Engluh UtriKiied 
with the Portaguese, and anderhand assisted the natives in leceiTing the 
Portuguese into the islands. See Anderson's History of ConunerGt, in 
Haq»he»on*s Annals, ii. 305. 

6 



Massacre ofAmbwfna. 47 

hapsobafalet however^ on the one hand* that the bookl 
English^ whose numbers were smaU, and by whom ^^^^' ^ 
ukimately so little advantage could be gained, were X623« 
reftUy guilty of any such design as the Dutch imputed 
to them ; it is on the other hand equsdly imprc^Me 
that the Dutch» without believing them to be guilty, 
wouldhave proceeded against them by the evidenceof 
a judicial trial Had simjde extermination been their 
ol^ect, a more qiUet and safe expedient presented 
itself: they had it in their power at any time to make 
the English disaj^iear, and to lay the blame upon the . 
natives. The probability is,'that» from certaui W'- 
cumstanoes, which roused their suspicion and jeakmsy, 
the Dutch really believed in the conspiracy, and were 
hurried on, by their, resentments and intarests, to 
bring the helpless ol:gects of their fiiry to a trial ; that 
the judges befiire whom the trial was conducted, were 
in too heated a state of mind to see the innocence, or 
believe in any thing but the guilt, of. the accused ; and 
that in this manner the suflferers perished. Enough, 
^uredly, of what is hateful may be found in thia 
transaction, without supposing the spirit of demons 
in beings of the same nature with ourselves, meoi 
reared in a siHoilar state of society, under a similar 
system of edAication, and a similar religion. To bring 
men rashly to a trial whom a violent composition of 
interests has led us to detest, rashly to believe them 
criminal, to decide against them with minds too 
much blinded by passion to discern the truths and to 
put them to death without remorse, are acts of which 
our own nation, or any other, would have been then, 
and would still be, too ready to be guilty. Happy 
woidd it be, how trite soever the reflection, if nations^ 
ftt)m the scenes which excite their indignation against 
others, would learn temper and forbearance in cases 
where they become the actors themselves ! 



1623. 



48 Massacre of Amboyna. 

BOOK I. One of the circumstances, the thought of whidh 
^"^''•^- most strongly incited the passions of the English, was 
the application of the torture. This, however, accotd-' 
ing to the Civil Law, was an established and regular 
part of judicial inquiry. In all the kingdoms of con-- 
tinental Europe, and Holland among the rest, the 
torture was a common method of extorting evidence 
from supposed criminals, and would have been ap- 
jJied by the Dutch judges to their own countrymen/ 
As both the Japanese, who were accused of being 
accessaries to the imputed crime, and the English- 
men themselves, made confession of guilt under 
the torture, this, however absurd and inhuman the 
law, constituted leg&l evidence in the code of the 
Dutch, as well as in the codes of all the other conti- 
nental nations* of Europe. By this, added to other 
artides of evidence which would have been insufficient 
without it, proof wqs Held to be completed ; and 
death, in all capital cases, authorized and required. 
Ttiis was an ancient and established law; and as 
there are scarcely any courses of oppression to which 
Englishmen cannot submit, and which they will not 
justify and applaud, provided only it has ancient and 
established law for its support, they ought, of all 
nations, to have been the most ready to find an excuse' 
and apology for the Dutch. ^ From the first moment 

1 The English had not been so Idng strangers to the torture them- 
selves, that it needed to excite in their breasts any emotions of astonish- 
ment. ** The rack itself," says Hume in his History of Elizabeth, 
v. 457, <* tfaoagh not admitted in the ordinary execution of jttdcey wat 
frequently used upon any suspicion, by authority of a warr^t from a 
secretary or the Privy Council. Even the CoujicU in the. Marches of 
Wales were empowered, by their very commission, to make use of top- 
tore whenever they thought proper. . There 'CMnot be a stronger pjoof 
]m)w - lifrhtly the rack was employed, than the fuUowii^ story, told hy 
Lord Dacon. We slmll give it in his oun words : ' The Queen wag 
mightily incensed against Haywarde, on account of a book he dedicated' 
to Lord Essex, thinking it a seditious prelude to put into the people's 



Massacre of Ambeymu 49 

df acting upon the treaty, the Dutch had laid it donii, book I. 
as a principle, that, at all the places where they had ^^^^' ^' 
erected fortifications, the English should be subject to j^g^^ 
the Dutch laws ; and though the English had r^non- 
strated, they had yet complied. 

It was in vain, that the English President and 
Council at Java, on hearing of the massacre, as they 
called it, remonstrated in terms of the utmost indig- 
nation,- and even intimated their design of withdraw- 
ing from the island. In their representations to the 
Court of Directors at home, they declared, what 
might have been seen from the beginning, that it was 

htad boldness and faction : [/« our apprekention^ $ays Humt, Hay^ 
wardens hook seems rather to have a contrary tendency ; but Queen Eliza- 
beth was very difficult to please on that head,] She said, she had au 
opinion that there was treason in it, and asked me if I could not find 

any places in it, that might be drawn within the case of treason ? 

Another time when the Queen could not be persuaded that it was his 
writing whose name was to it, but that it had some more mischievous 
author, she said, with great indignation, that she would have bim 

racked to produce his anthor/ Thus, continues Hume, << had it 

not been for Bacon's humanitj, or rather his wit, this author, a man 
of letters, had been put to the rack for a most innocent performance.'' 
— ^The truth is, that the Company themselves, at this very time, were 
in the regular habit of perpetrating tortures upon their own countrymen, 
and even their own servants— of torturing to death by whips or fiamine* ^ 
Captain Hamilton (New Account of the East Indies, i. 362^) informs 
us, that beibre they were intrusted with the powers of martial law^ 
having no power to punish capitally any but pirates, they made it a 
rule to whip to death, or starve to death, those of whom they wished to 
get rid. He produces (lb. 376,) an instance of a deserter at Fort St. 
Oeoi^e, '^ wbipt," as he expresses it, <* out of this world into the next/^ 
The power too, of executing as for piracy, the same author complains, 
was made use of to murder many ptivate traders. " Tliat power (he 
says, lb. 362,) of executing pirates is so strangely stretched, that if 
any privata trader is injured by the tricks of a Governor, and can find 
no redress— if the injured person is so bold as to talk of les talionis, he 
is infallibly declared a pirate.*' He gives an account of an attempt of 
an agent of the Company, and a creature of the Governor of Fort St. 
George, to swear away his life by penury at Siam, (lb. ii. 183.)-^ 
These parallels are presented, not for the sake of clearing the one party 
at the expense of the other; but, by showing things as they were, to 
give the woiid at laat possession of the real state of the case. 
TOL. !• E 



50 Massacre of Ajnboyna* 

BOOR I. impossible to trade on a combination of interests with 

Chap 9 

' the Dutch ; and that negotiation being fruitless, no- 
1624 ^^^^S ^^^ ^ force in the isJands, equal to that of their 
rivals, could ensure to their countrymen a share of 
the trade. 

When the news of the execution at Amboyna arriv- 
ed in England, the people, whose minds had been 
ak-eady inflamed against the Dutch, by continual re* 
ports of injustice to their countrymen, were kindled 
into the most violent combustion. The Court of Di- 
rectors exerted themselves to feed the popular fury. 
They had a hideous picture prepared, in which 
their countrymen were represented expiring upon the 
rack, with all the most shocking expressions of horror 
and agony in their countenance and attitudes, and all 
the most frightful instruments of torture applied to 
their bodies. The press teemed with publications* 
which enlarged upon the horrid scene at Amboyna ; 
and to such a degree of rage were the populace ex- 
cited, that the Dutch merchants in London became 
alarmed, and applied to the Privy Council for pro» 
tection. They complained of the inflammatory pub- 
lications; more particularly of the picture, which, 
being exposed to the people, had contributed to work 
them up .to the most desi)erate resolutions. The 
Directors, when called before the Privy Council to 
answer these complaints, denied that they had any 
concern with the publications, but acknowledged that 
the picture was produced by their order, and was in- 
tended to be preserved in their house as a perpetual 
memorial of the cruelty and treachery of tbe Dutch. 
The Directors were aware that the popular tide had 
reached the table of the council room, and that they 
had nothing to apprehend from confessing how tax 
they had been instrumental in raising the waters.^ 

4 East India Papers in the State Paper Office. Brace, i. 95^. 



Massacre of Ambcyna. 51 

• Application was made to the King, to obtain signal BOOK I. 
reparation from the Dutch government, for so great 



a national insult and calamity. The whole nation 1524. 
was too violently agitated to leave any suspicion that 
the application could be neglected. A commission of 
inquiry was formed of the King's principal servants, 
who reported in terms, confirming the general belief 
and indignation ; and recommended an order, which 
was immediately issued, for intercepting and detain- 
ing the Dutch East India fleets, till satisfaction was 
obtained. With great gravity the Dutch government 
returned for answer ; that they would send orders to 
their Governor General in the Indies to permit the 
English to retire from the Dutch settlements without 
paying any duties ; that all disputes might be referred 
to the Council of Defence ; that the Englbh might 
build forts for the protection of their trade, provided 
they were at the distance of thirty miles from any 
fort of the Dutch ; that the " administration, how- 
ever, of politic government, and particular jurisdic- 
tion, both civil and criminal, at all such places as 
owe acknowledgment to the Dutch,'' should remain 
wholly in their hands; and that to the Dutch be- 
longed the exclusive right to the Moluccas, Bandas, 
and Amboyna.^ 

This was an undisguised assumption of all the 
rights for which their subjects were contending in 
India. It is remarkable enough that the English 
East India Company, who were highly dissatisfied 
with the other parts of this answer, declared their 
acceptance of the first article, which permitted their, 
servants to retire from the Dutch settlements. And 
here, for the present, the matter rested. 

In 1624, the Company applied, by petition, to the 

> Bruce^ 1. 958. 
Eg 



5S CompanyU Debt, 

BOOR I. King, for authority^ to punish their servants abroad* 
^"^''' *' by martial, as well as municipal law. It appears not 
J 625 ^^^^ *^y difficulty was experienced in obtaining their 
request; or that any parliamentary proceeding, for 
transferring unlimited power over the lives and for- 
tunes of the citizens, was deemed even a necessary 
ceremony. This ought to be regarded as an era in 
the history of the Company.^ 

In the year 1624-5, the Company's voyage to 
India consisted of five ships; but of the amount of the 
capital with which they were supplied, no account, 
it should seem, remains. In 1625-26, it consisted of 
six ships : and in l626-27j of seven ; farther infcM^ma- 
tion wanting as before.^ In the last of these years, 
we gain the knowledge, collaterally, of one of those 
important facts, in the Company's history, which it 
has been their sedulous care to preserve concealed, 
except when some interest, as now, was to be served 
by the disclosure. Sir Robert Shirley, who had been 
ambassador at the court of Persia, made application 
to the Ring and Council to order the East India 
Company to pay him 2000/. as a compensation for 
his exertions and services in procuring them a trade 
with Persia. The Company, beside denying the 
pretended services, urged their inabUity to pay ; stat* 
ing that they had been obliged to contract so large 
a debt as 200,000/. ; and that their stock had &llen 
to 20 per cent, discount, shares of 100/. selling for no 
more than 80/.^ 

The Company's Persian trade was not prosperous, 
under the caprice and extortions of the .Persiaii ma- 
gistrates. At Java theur agents, tired out with the 
mortifications and disasters to which they were ex* 

1 Bruce,]. 25«. » lb. 252, 265, 271. 

3 East India Papers in the State Pftper Office. Brace, i. 272. 



Company's Trade. 5S 

posed from the Dutch, retired to the island of La- BOOK I. 
gundj, in the Straits of Sunda ; having abandoned ^^^^' ^' 
both Bantam and Jacatra, at which the Dutch, under iq^I. 
the name of Batavia, had now established their prin- 
cipal seat of government. The island of Lagundj 
was found to be so unhealthy, that, in less than a 
year, the imprudent English were anxious to return. 
Their distress was so great, that out of 250 indivi* 
duals 120 were sick; and they had not a crew 
sufficient to navigate a ship to any of the English ^ 
Ikctories. In these circumstances the Dutch lent 
them assistance, and brought them back to Batavia.^ 
On the coast of Coromandel some feeble efforts were 
continued. The Company had established factories 
at Masulipatam and Pullicat ; but the rivalship of 
the Dutch pursued and obliged them to relinquish 
Pullicat., In 1624^5, they projected an establish- 
ment in the kingdom of Tanjore, but were opposed 
by a new rival, the Danes. At Armegum, however, 
situated a little to the south of Nellore, they pur- 
chased, in the succeeding year, a piece of ground 
from the chief of the district ; erected and fortified a 
factoiy; and, suiTering oppression from the native 
government at Masulipatam, they withdrew the fac- 
tory in 1628, and transferred it to Armegum.^ 

Shortly after the first application to James on 
account of the injiiiy at Amboyna, that monarch 
died. In 1627--8, the application was renewed to 
Charles; and three large Dutch Indiamen from 
Surat, which put into Portsmouth, vrere detained. 
The Company, watching the decline of the royal 
authority, and the growing power of the House of 
Commons, were not satisfied with addressing the 
Ring, but in the year following presented, for the 

1 Bruce, i. 368^ S64, 368. « BrucA, i. 964, 269, 390. 



54 ' Disputed with the Dutch. 

BOOK I. first time, a memorial to the Commons. They re* 
^°*ri!l presented that, by their failure in the spice trade, and 
1628 ^^^ difBculties they experienced in opening a trade 
for wove goods on the coast of Coromandel, they 
were nearly driven from all their factories; and 
assigned as causes, partly the opposition of the native 
powers, but chiefly the hostility of the Dutch. The 
narrowness of their own funds, and their unskilful 
management, by the negligent Directors of a joint- 
stock, far. more powerful causes, they overlooked or 
suppressed. They set forth, however, the merits of 
the Company, as towards the nation, in terms re- 
peated to the present day : they employed many sea- 
men : they exported much goods, as if the .capital 
they employed would have remained idle ; as if it 
would not have maintained seamen, would not have 
exported goods, had the East India Company, or 
East India traffic, never existed.^ 

The detention of the ships, and the zeal with which 
the injury seemed now to be taken up in England, 
produced explanation and remonstrance on the part 
of the Dut^h : They had appointed judges to take 
cognizance of the proceedings at Amboyna, even be- 
fore the parties had returned from Europe: Delay 
had arisen, from the situation of the judges on whom 
other services devolved, and from the time required 
to translate documents written in a foreign tongue : 
The detention of the ships, the property of private 
individuals altogether unconcerned with the transac* 
tion, might bring unmerited ruin on them, but could 
not accelerate the proceedings of the judges ; on the 
other hand, by creating national indignation, it woul4 
only tend to unfit them for a sober and impartial in- 

1 Bruce, i. 276, 277, 282. Anderson in Macpberson's Annals, ii* 
551. 



Company's Trade. 5S 

quiry : And were the dispute alldwed, unfortunately, BOOK I. 
to issue in war, however the English in Europe might '^'' ^' 



detain the fleets of the Dutch, the English Company leis. 
must suffer in India far greater evils than those of 
which they were now seeking the redress. At last, 
on a proposal that the States should send to England 
commissioners of inquiry, and a promise that justice 
should be speedily rendered, the ships were released. 
It was afterwards recommended by the ministry, that 
the East India Company should send over witnesses 
to Holland to affoird evidence before the Dutch tribu- 
nal ; but to this the Company objected, and satisfac- 
tion was still deferred.^ 

In 1627-28, the Company provided only two ships 
and a pinnace for the outward voyage. They deemed • 
it necessary to assign reasons for this diminution ; 
dreading the inferences which might be drawn: They 
had many ships in India which, from the obstructions 
of the Dutch, and the state of their funds, had been 
unable to return : Though the number of ships was 
small ; the stock would be large, 60,000/. or 70,000/1 
in money and goods : And they hoped to bring home 
all their ships richly laden the following year. In 
1628-29, five ships went out ; two for the trade with 
India, and three for that with Persia ; and though 
no account is preserved of the stock with which they 
were supplied, a petition to the King remains for leave 
to export 60,000/. in gold and silver in the ships 
destined to Persia. In the succeeding year four ships 
were sent to Persia, and none to India. Of the stock 
which they carried with them no account is pre* 
served.* 

As the sums in gold and silver^ which the Com* 
paoy had for several years found it necessary to ex* 

I Brace, i. 285, Sa7. < Ib.i. 978, 993. 



56. Factory at Bantam, 

BOOlti. port, exc^eeded the Emits to which they were con- 
^^^^' ^' fined by the terms of their charter, th^ had pror 
1629 <^6^^ annually upon a petition to the king, and a 
special permission. It was now, however, deemed 
adviseaible to apply for a general license, so large, as 
would comprehend the greatest amount which on 
any occasion it would be necessary to send. The 
sum for which they solicited this permission was 
80,000/. in silver, and 40,000/ in gold ; and they re- 
. commended, as the best mode of authenticating the pri- 
vilege, that it should be incorporated in a fresh renewal 
of their charter ; which was accordingly obtained.^ 

Notwithstanding the terms on which the English 
stood with the Dutch, they were allowed to re- 
^ establish their factory at Bantam after the failure 
of the attempt at Lagundy: a war in which the 
Dutch were involved with some of the native 
princes of the island lessened, perhaps, their disposi- 
tion or their power to oppose their European rivals. 
As Bantam was now a station of inferior importance 
to Surat, the government of Bantam was reduced to 
an agency, dependent upon the Presidency of Surat, 
which became the chief seat of the Company's govern- 
ment in India. Among the complaints against the 
Dutdi, one of the heaviest was, that they sold European 
goods cheaper, and bought Indian goods dearer, at 
Surat, than the English; who were thus expelled 
from the market. This was to complain of competi- 
tion, the soul of trade. If the Dutch sold so cheap 
and bought so dear, as to be losers, all that was neces- 
sary was a little patience on the part of the English. . 
The fact was, that the Dutch, trading on a larger 
capital, and with more economy, were perfectly able 
to outbid the English both in purchase and sale. 

> Bruce, 998. 



Contests with the Portuguese. BfJ 

The English at Surat had to sustain at this time BOOK I. 
not only the commercial rivalship of the Dutch, but ^°^^* ^^' 
also a powerful effort of the Portuguese to regain i^^^ 
their influence in that part of the East. The Viceroy 
at Goa had in April, 1630, received a reinforcepient 
£rom Europe of nine ships and 2,000 soldiers^ and 
prqjected the recovery of Qrmus. Some negotiation 
to obtain the exdusive trade of Surat was tried in 
vain with the Mogul Governor ; and in September an 
English fleet of five ships endeavoured to enter the 
port of Swally. A sharp, though not a decisive, ac- 
tion, was fought. The English had the advantage ; 
and, after sustaining several subsequent skirmishes^ 
and one great effort to destroy their fleet by fire, suo* 
ceeded in landing their cargoes*^ 

Bruce i. 296, 304, 300, 308. 



5S^ New JoitU'Stock. 



CHAP- III. 



From the Formation of the third Joint-stock, in 
16S2, till the Coalition of the Company with the 
Merchant Adventurers in 1657. 

fiOOKi.lN I6Sl-32^ a subscription was opened for a third 
^"^''•^ joint-stock. This amounted to 420,700// StiU we 
1632. ^^^ ^^^ ^^ darkness with regard to some important 
circumstances. We know not in what degree the 
capital which had been placed in the hands of the 
Directors by former subscriptions had been repaid ; 
not even if any part of it had been repaid, though the 
Directors were now without funds .to carry on the 
trade. 

With the new ^bscription, seven ships were fitted 
out in the same season ; but of the money or goods 
embarked no account remains. In 1633-34, the fleet 
consisted of five ships; and in 1634-85, of no more 
than three, the money or goods in both cases un- 
known.^ 

During this period, however, some progress was 
made in extending the connexions of the Company 
with the eastern coast of Hindustan. It was thought 
' adviseable to replace the factory at Masulipatam not 
long after it had been removed; and certain privi- 
leges, which afforded protection from former griev- 
ances, were obtained from the Eang of Gk>lconda, the 
sovereign of the place. Permission was given by the 
Mogul Emperor to trade to Fipley in Orissa ; and a 

1 Papers in the Indian Register Office. Sir Jeremy Sambroofke's 
Report on the East India Trade. Bruce^ i. 306. 
* Bruce,!. 306,320, 323. 

2 



Treaty with the Fortuguese. 59 

factor was sent from Masulipatam. For the more BOOKI. 
commodious government of these stations. Bantam ^"^'''^' 
was again raised to the rank of a Pi'esidency, and the ^^^ 
eastern coast was placed under its jurisdiction. Des- 
pairing of success in the contest with the Dutch for 
the trade of the islands, the Company had, for some 
time, dispatched their principal fleets to Surat; and the 
trade with this part of India and with Persia now 
chiefly occupied their attention. From servants at a 
vast distance, and the servants of a great and negli- 
gent master, the best service could not easily be pro- 
cured. For this discovery the Directors were indebted, 
not to any sagacity of their own, but to a misunder- 
standing among the agents themselves ; who, betray- 
ing one another, acknowledged that they had neg- 
lected the affairs of their employers to attend to their 
own ; and, while they pursued with avidity a private 
trade for their private benefit, had abandoned that of 
the Company to every kind of disorder.^ 

As pepper was a product of the Malabar coast, a 
share was sought in the trade of that commodity, 
through a channel, which the Dutch would not be 
able to obstruct : A treaty was concluded, between 
the English and Portuguese, in 1634-35, and con- 
firmed with additional articles the following year, in 
which it was ordained that the English should have 
free access to the ports of the Portuguese, and that 
the Portuguese should receive from the English fac- 
tories the treatment of friends.^ 

The Company, like other unskilful, and for that 
reason unprosperous, traders; had always competitors, 
of one description or another, to whom they ascribed 
their own want of success. For several years they 
had spoken with loud condemnation of the clandestine 

t Bruce, i. 306, 320, 324, 32r. < lb. 325, 334. 



60 Courten's AssociatiQn. 

BOOK I. trade carried on by their own servants; whose profits, ' 
°^^' they said, exceeded their own. Their alarms, with 
1645. regard to their exclusive privilege, had for some time 
been sounded ; and would have been sounded much 
louder, but for the ascendancy gained by the senti* 
ments of liberty, the contentions between Charles and 
his parliament being already high ; and the fear that 
their monopoly would escape the general wreck, with 
which institutions at variance with the spirit of li- 
berty were threatened, only if its pretensions were 
prudently kept in the shade. The controversy, whe- 
ther monopolies, and among others that of the Com- 
pany, were injurious to the wealth and prosperity of 
the nation, had already employed the press : but, 
though the Company had entered boldly enough into 
the lists of argument, they deemed it their wisest 
course, at the present conjuncture, not to excite the 
public attention, by any invidious opposition to the in- 
fringements which private adventure was now pretty 
frequently committing on their exclusive trade. 

An event at last occurred which appeared to involve 
unusual danger. A number of persons, with Sir 
William Courten at their head, whom the new ar- 
rangements with the Portuguese excited to hopes of 
extraordinary profit, had the art', or the good fortune, 
to engage in their schemes Endymion Porter, Esq., a 
gentleman of the bedchamber to the King, who pre- 
vailed upon the sovereign himself to accept of a share 
in the adventure, and to grant his license for a new 
association to trade with India. The preamble to the 
license declared that it was founded upon the miscon- 
duct of the East India Company, who had accomplish- 
ed nothing for the good of the nation, in proportion 
to the great privileges they had obtained, or even to 
the funds of which they had disposed. This was 
probably, the general opinion of the nation ; nothing 



CdurteiCs Association^ 61 

. less seeiBing necessary to embolden the King to such BOOKL 
a violation of their charter. Allowing the contrariety to ^^^' ^' 
the interests of the nation, the consequences were not 1645. 
so ruinous, but that the stipulated notice of three yean 
might have been given, and a legal end been put to 
the monopoly. The Company petitioned the King» 
but without success. They sent, however, instructions 
to their agents and factors in India, to oppose, the 
interlopers^ at least indirectly. An incident occurred 
of which they endeavoured to avail themselves to tht 
utmost One of their ships from Surat reported that , 
a vessel of Courten's had seized and plundered two 
junks belonging to Surat and Diu, and put the crews 
to the torture. The latter part at least oi the story 
was, in all probability, forged ; but the Directors be- 
lieved, or affected to believe, the whole. In coose^ 
quence of the outrage, the English President and 
Council at Surat had been imprisoned, and the pro- 
perty of the factory confiscated to answer for the loss. 
A memorial was presented to the King, setting forth 
in the strongest terms, the injuries which the Com* 
pany sustained by the license to Courten*s Association, 
and the ruin )j(rhieh threatened them unless it were 
withdrawn. The Privy Council, to whom the me* 
morial was referred, treated the facts alledged, as 
little better than fabrication, and. suspended the inves- 
tigation till Courten's ships should return.^ 

The arrival of Courten's ships at Surat seems to 
have thrown the factory into the greatest confiision. 
It is stated as the cause of a complete suspension of 
trade on the part of the CiMnpany^ for the season, at 
that principal seat of their commercial operations.^ 
The inability early and constantly displayed by the 

1 Bnic«, L dd9, 387. * lb. 944. 



52 C6urterC$ Associatiofu 

BOOK I. Company to sustain even the slightest competition is 

^^^^' ^' a symptom of inherent infirmities. 
1637. In 1637-88, several of Courten's ships returned, 
and brought home large investments, which sold with 
an ample profit to the adventurers. The fears and 
jealousite of the Company were exceedingly raised. 
They presented to the crown a petition for protection ; 
placing their chief reliance, it should seem, on the 
lamentable picture of their own distresses. Their 
remonstrance was, however, disregarded; a new li- 
cense was extended to Courten's Association, continu- 
ing their privileges for five years ; and, to form a line 
between them and the Company, it was ordained, that 
neither should they trade at those places where the 
Company had factories, nor the Company trade at any 
places at which Courten's Association might have 
erected establishments.^ 

The Directors, as if they abandoned all other 
efforts for sustaining their affairs, betook them- 
selves to complaint and petition.* They renewed 
their addresses to the throne: They dwelt upon 
the calamities which had been brought upon them 
by competition; first, that of the Dutch, next 
that of Courten's Association: They endeavoured 
to pique the honour of the King, by reminding him 
that the redress which he had demanded from the 
- States General had not been received: And they 
desired to be at least distinctly informed what line of 
conduct in regard to their rivals they were required to 
pursue. The affairs of the King were now at a low 
ebb ; and this may account in part for the tone which 
the Company assumed with him. A committee of 
the Privy Council, was formed to inquire into their 

1 Bruce, i. 345, 349. « lb. 340^ 350, 353. 



Courten's As^ociatiotu ^ 63 

complaints ; and had instructions to inquire among BOOK L 
other particulars, into the means of obtaining repara- ^"^'*' ^* 
tion from the Dutch, and of accomplishing a union 1638. 
between the Company and Courten's Association* . 
One thing is remarkable, because it shows the un-^ 
favourable opinion, held by that Privy Council, of the 
mode of trading to India by a joint-stock Company : 
The committee were expressly instructed, ** to form 
regulations for this trade, which might satisfy the 
npblemen and gentlemen who were adventurers in it ; 
and to vary the principle on which the India trade 
had been conducted, or that of a general joint-stock, 
in such a manner as to enable each adventurer to em« 
ploy his stock to his own advantage, to have the trade 
under similar regulations with those observed by the 
Turkey and other English Companies."^ 

The committee of the Privy Council seem to have 
given themselves but little concern about the trust 
with which they were invested. No report from them 
ever appeared. The Company continued indefatiga* 
bly pressing the King, by petitions and remonstrances. 
At last they affirmed the necessity of abandoning the 
trade altogether, if the protection was not afforded for 
which they prayed. And now their importunity pre- 
vailed. On the condition that they should raise a new 
joint-stock, to carry on the trade on a sufficient scale, 
it was agreed that Courten's license should be with- 
drawn.* 

On this occasion we are made acquainted inciden- 
tally with an important fact ; that the Proprietors of 
the third joint-stock had made frequent but unavail- 
ing calb upon the Directors to close that concern, and 
bring home what belonged to it in India.^ For the 
first time, we learn that payment was demanded of 

1 Bruce, 85S, 854. « lb. i, 355, 361, 369. ^ lb. 363, 



64 Separate Joint-Stocks. 

BOOK I. the capital of those separate fiinds» called the joint* 
^^' stocks of the Company. Upon this occasion a difficult 
1638. question might have presented itself It might have 
been disputed to whom the immoveable property of 
the Company, in houses and in lands, both in India 
and in England, acquired byparts indiscriminately, of 
all the joint-stocks, belonged. Amid the confusion 
which pervaded all parts of the Company's affiurs, 
this question had not begun to be agitated : but to 
encourage subscription to the new joint-stock, it was 
laid down as a condition, ^ That to prevent incon^ 
venience and confusion, the old Company or adven- 
turers in the third joint-stock should have sufficient 
time allowed for bringing home their property, and 
should send no more stock to India, after the month 
of May." ^ It would thus appear, that the Proprietors 
of the third joint-stock and by the same rule the Pro- 
prietors of all preceding stock, were without any scru« 
pie, to be deprived of their share in what is technically 
called the dead stock of the Company, though it had 
been wholly purchased with their money. There was 
another condition, to which inferences of some import- 
ance may be attached; the subscribers to the new 
stock were themselves, in a general courts to elect the 
Directors to whom the management of the fund should 
be committed, and to renew that election annually.^ 
As this was a new Court of Directors, entirely be- 
longing to the fourth joint-stock, it seems to follow 
that the Directors in whose hands the third joint-stock 
had been placed, must still have remained in office^ 
for the winding up of that concern. And, in that 
case, there existed, to all intents and purposes, two 

1 Preamble to a snbBcriptioQ for a new joint-stock for trade to the 
East Indies, 28th January, 1640, (East India Papers in the State Paper 
Office,) Bmce, i. 364. 

• lb. 

s 



King taka the Compaiu/^i Pqtper. Q^ 

East India Compmies, two aepwate bodies of Pro- boor l 
prietors, and two sepiMrate Courts. of Dirwtors^ midor ^»^''- ^^ 
one charter* 1542. 

So low, however^ was the credit of East India ad- 
venture> under joint-iBtock maQagement* now reduced, 
that the project of a new subscription almost totalljr 
&iled. Only the small sum of 2S,500/« was ru^ed. 
Upon this a memorial was presented to the King, but 
in the name of whom ; whether of the new subscribers, , 
or the old ; whether of the Court of Directors beloa^- 
ing to the old joint-stock, or of a Court of Direcjhm 
chosen for tb9 new, does not appear. It set forth a 
number of unhappy circumstances, to which wajs as* 
cribed the distrust which now attended: jointctodc 
adventures to Iqdia ; and it in^imatedf but in very 
general terms, the necessity of encourflgemeiU, to satie 
that branch of covfn^^ce.lrovi total de9truction« 

In the mean time a taedvy calamilby feU^upon the 
Propiietcprsof th^ third Joint-stock. Tlie King having 
resolved to draw the sword for ternmatupg the dis- 
putes between \im and Ins pepple ; a^d iftndii^ him* 
self destitute of moqey ; flmd his eyes^ as oil the 
most convenient mass of propei^y within his seaot^ on 
th^ magazixtes of the East India, Company^ Apri^ 
bouig^ named, wha^h wns prcMMy a Mgh oq^he 
bought upon credit the whole of their /pepper,, and 
sold it again at a lover price for ready money .^ Bondfc 
four in nmnbett one of which was.piv<Hniiedto be paid 
every six months, were ^ven by tbe fwmers of tite 
customs and l4>rd Ccittington fwr the amount; of 
which only a small portion aeems ever to hav^ been 
paid. On a pxeasing application^ ahiut the Ugimiinf 
of the year 1642, it was stated, that 1S,000/. had 

> See Bruce, i. S71. The quantity, wa^ 607> 522 bags, boaght at 
'*2#. Id, per pound, total 63,283/. 111. td,} sold at Is. Sd.pfr pound; 
to^ 50,626/. 17f. td. 

VOL, I. F 



^OCHt'i.-fceen allowed them out of Ifce dtt<9M Ifcdjr owed ; the 
€sAF. ^- remaiBder the farmepi^ declaimed it to be out of then* 
power to advance. A prayer was presented that thte 
custM)9, now due l>y them, amounting to 12,000/., 
might be apj^ed in liquidation ^the deM; but for 
this they were i^erwards preiteed by the parlkment. 
The King exerted himsielf to protect the parties irho 
stood responnble for him; kt^ *#ha* the Company 
were oUij^ to pay to the ptarMMtfeVit, eft what they 
-Succeeded in getting from the Kinrg or his sureties, nb 
where appears.* 

About the period of this abofrtive attempt to fbrm 
a new joint^ock, a settlement was 6nrt eflbcted at 
Madras; the only station as yet chosen, which was 
destined to make a figure in the future history of the 
Ompany. The desire of a {dace of strength on the 
coast of Goromandel, as a security both to the pro- 
perty of the Company and the persons of their ag^ts, 
had sug^^efted, some years ago^ the to^Bcation of 
Atmeguim. On experieiiee, Armegum was notfound 
A convenient tuition fef providing Che piece goods,^ 
Cm- which chie%^ tfie trade to the coast of Corbman- 
ll 'del Wto poh«ed< In 1^(40*41, the permission of the 
^ locaU hative chief to erect a fert at Madraspatam vras, 
tlierefbre, eigfrly ' embnfced^ The works were begun^ 
^liid the plad^ named Fort St. George ; but 'the mea- 
-rare was not approved by the Directors.^ 
' MeanwMIe the trade was languisMng, te» want of 
flmds. Th^ agents abroad endeavoured to supply, by 
ifoans, the faUu^ of receipts from home.^ 
• An effort was made in 1943^43 to aid the weakness 
of the finiitb joiit^Mdck by a new subscription. The 

» Bruce, i. 879, 380. 

« Piece goods is the term which^ latterly at least, has been chiefly em- 
ployed by die Company and their agents to denote the muslins and wov* 
'goods of India and China in general. 

3 Bruoe, i. 377 , 393. « lb. 385. 

3 



fM prospermis, #y 

m>Tn produced was lOS^OObl. ; but whet)ier incIikKn^ BOOK I. 

■ ~ CuAP. 3. 



or not includhig the previdus subeeription does not 
i^pear. TH« was deemed no mart then what wds . 
requisite for a single voyage : erf which the Company 
thought the real cirromstances might be concealed 
under a new nasia. They called it, the First General 
Voyage} Of «he amount, however, of the ships, or 
the distribution of the ftinds, there is no informatian on , 
record. For several years, from this date, no account 
whatever is preserved of the annual equipmetrts of the 
Company. It would appear from instructions to the 
agents abroad, that, each year, funds hod beeti sup- 
plied ; but from what source is altogether unknown. 
The instructiona sufficiently indicate that they were 
smdl ; and for this the unsettled state of the coantty, 
and the distrust of Indian adventure, will sulfHeiently 
aceount. 

In 1644, the Dutch followed the example of the 
Biigiish in forming a tonvention wiHr the Portuguese 
at Goa. Though it is not pretended Uiat in this any 
partiality was shown to the Dutch, or any privilege 
granted to them which was withheld from theEnglisb, 
the Compaiqr found themselves, as usual, unable to 
sustain competitiodf and ooroplaaned of this conventioB 
4ia an additional source of mkfortune.^ 

In 1647-48, when the power of the parfiament was 
aupreme^ and the King a prisoner in the Isle of Wight, 
a new subscription "was undertaken, and a pretty 
obvious poKcy was pursued Endeavours were used 
to get as many as possible of the members of parKa- 
jnent to subscribe* If the members of the ruling body 
Jbad a personal IntereeA in the gains iA the Company, 
its privileges would not fsdl to be both protected and 
leidafged. An advertisement, wliich fixed the tipue 

I Bruce, $S9, 800. « lb. 407, 412; 4^3. 

r 2 



0g Umon with 

BOOK I. beyond which oidinary subscribers would not be re- 
^°^^' ^' ceived, added, that, in deference to members of parlia- 
1650. ™^°^» ^ further period would be allowed to them, to 
consider the subject, and make their subscriptions.^ 

It appears not that any success attended this effort.; 
and in 1649-50, the project of completing the fourth 
joint-stock was renewed, partly as a foundation for 
an Implication to the Council of State^ partly in hopes 
that the favours expected from the Council would 
induce the public to subscribe.^ 

In the memorial, presented on this occasion to the 
ruling powers, Courten's Association was the prin- 
cipal subject of complaint. The consent of the King, 
in 1639, to withdraw the license granted to those 
rivals, had not been canied into effect; nor had the 
condition on which it had been accorded, that of 
raising a respectable joint-stock, been fulfilled. The 
destrqction, however, to which ^the Association of 
Courten saw themselves at that time condemned, 
deprived them of the spirit of enterprise : with the 
spirit of enterprise, the spirit of vigilance naturally 
disappeared : their proceedings from the time of this 
condemnation had been feeble and unprosperous : bat 
their existence was a grievance in the eyes of the 
Company; and nn application which they had re- 
cently made for permission to form a settlement on 
the island of Assada, near Madagascar, kindled anew 
the Company*s jealousies and fears. What the 
Council proposed to both partly was, an agreement. 
But the Assada merchants, so Courten's Association 
were now denominated, regarded joint-stock manage- 
ment with so much aversion, that, low as the oondi* 
4ion was to which they had fallen, they preferred a 
separate trade on their own funds to incorporation 

> Bruce, i. 438. « lb. 434. 



Courten's Association. 69 

with the Company.^ To prore, howerer, their de- BOOK i. 
sire of accommodation, they proposed certain terms, "^^^ ^' 
on which they would submit to forego the separate u^sq^ 
management of their own affairs. 

Objections were offered on the part of the Com<» 
pany ; but, after some discussion, a union was effected, 
nearly on the terms which the Assada merchanta 
proposed.^ Application was then madie for an act to 
confirm and regulate the trade. The parliament 
passed a resolution, directing it to be carried on by 
a joint^tock; but suspending for the present dk 
further decision on the, Company's affahrs. ' A stock 
was formed, which, from the Union recently accom-' 
plidied, was denominated the united Join t*stock ; but 
in what manner raised, or how great the sum, is not 
disdosed. All we know for certain is, that two shipsi 
were fitted out in this season, and* that they carried 
bullion with them to the amount of 60,000// 
. The extreme inconvenience and embarrassment 
which arose firom the management, by the same 
agents, in the same trade, of a number of separate 
c^)itals, belonging to separate associations, b^an 
now to make themselves seriously and formidably 
felt. From each of the presidencies complaints ar-^ 
rived of the difficulties^ or rather the impossibilities, 
which they were required to surmount ; and it was 
urgently recommended to obtain, if it were practi- 
cable, an act of parliament to combine the whole of 
these separate stocks*^ Under this confusion, we 
have hardly any information respecting the internal 
transactions of the company at home. We know 
not so much as how the Courts of Directors were 
formed ; whether there was a body of Directors for 
eadi separate fund, or only one body for the whole : 

1 Bruce, i. 435. 436. « lb. 437; 436. ^ Tb. 439. 440. 

« lb. 440. » lb. 441. 



70 Ucenee Id Trdde in Bengal. 

BCNDK L m& a txiiy om Court ef Directora, whether thtj" 
^^^'^' were chosen by the veiees 0f the contributors to all 
l^gjg^ tile aeparatift stoeks, er the contributors to one onlj;. 
whether, when a Court of Proprietors was held, tite 
ownets of $li the separate funds met in one body, or 
the ownera of each sqiahite fund niet by theotisdveat 
lor khereguktioB of their own particular concern/ 

In l«dl-58, the English obtained in Bengal th^ 
first of tbose peculiar priTileges, which were the fore^ 
rutinerd (i their 8iib$equent power. Amwig iko 
persQw helongtog to the factories, n^hom there waa 
ocdoiofi t6 send to the Ioq)erial Court, it happened 
that some wene sui^eons ; one of whom is paMicuf 
hu^ nikinedf a gentleman of the name of Boughtdn, 
Obtainyi^ great influence, by the cures which thcg^ 
effbctad> they ettiployed their int^^t in promotinig 
the views of the Company. Favourable drqum** 
stances were so weU improved, that» ' on the payment 
of 2000 rupees, a govamment Ucense for an unlir 
mited trade, without payment of customs, in the 
richest province of Indi^ was happily obtained.^ 

On the Coromandel coast, the wars, which then 
rilged among the datives, r^idfered commerce difficult 
m^l uncertain ; aikd the Directors were urged by the 
«^nt at Madras, to Add to the fortifications. This 
they refused, on the grcHind of expense. A^ it was 
inconvenient, however^ to keep the business of this 
coast dependant on the dbtant settlement of Bantam, 
Fort St. George was erected into a presidency in 
16-58.54.^ 



» If we hear of committees of the several stocl«s; the bodies of Di- 
' restore were deDOminatdd committees. And if there were oommittees 
of the sevenl stocks, how were they ceostituted^ were they oomniktees 
of Proprietors, or committees of Directors? And were there aoy ma- 
nagers or Directors besides ? 

« Bruce^ i. 406, 463; ' 9 lb. 454, 462, 484. 



Iiiicm?iQM4 mth the IhUck. 71 

When the ^iiputes began, which ended in ho9» booki. 
tilities between Ciomwell and tihe Dtttch» the Com- ^^ ^' 
|iai^ deemed it a fit opportuoity to bring forward j^^/ 
those d^ms of the^^ which, amid the distractions of 
the governments had lain dormant for several fears. 
The war which sucqeededj fovourabk to the British 
scniip in Europej was extremely dangerous^ and not 
a lltljie injurious^ to the feeble Company in ' Indii^ 
On the appearance of a Dutch fleet of eight large 
ships off Swally, in 1653-54, the fJQgUsh trfide at 
Suvat was suspended. In the Qplf of jPersi^i three 
of the Compmy's ships were taken, and one de- 
stroyed. The whole of the coasting trade of the 
English, cojtsisting of the interchange qf goods froni 
one of their statipns to anotb^sr^^ became, ynder the 
naval superiority of the Dutch, so hagardous, as to be 
nearly suspended ; and at Bantam, traflk seem$» to 
have been rendered wholly impracticable/ 

As Cromwell soon reduced the Dutch to the ne- 
cessity of desiring peace ; and of submitting to it on 
terms nearly such as he thought proper to dictate ; 
a clause was inserted in the treaty concluded i^t 
Westminster in 1654, in which they engaged t9 con- 
form to whatever justioe might prescribe regarding 
the massacre at Amboyna. It was agreed to name 
commissioneis, four on each ^de, who should meet 
at London, and mal^e an adju^tipent of the claims 
of the two nations. One remarkable, and not an 
iltcontrived condition was, that if the appointed 
commissioners should, within a specified time, be un- 
able to agree, the differeaaces in question shiiuld be 
submitted to the judgment and arbitration of the 
Protestant Swiss Cantons.^ 

The Commissipners met on the 30th of August, 
1654. The English Company, who have never 

t Brace, i. 458, 489, 484^ 4e^. . « lb. 48. 



7a Settlement with the Dutch. 

BOOK I. foirad themselves at a loss to make out heavy claims 
^^__^^ for Compensation, whether it was their own govern- 
1654. inent, or a foreign, with which they had to deal, 
stated their damages, ascertained by a series of ac- 
counts, from the year 1611 to the year 1652, at the 
vast amount of 2,695,999/. 15*. The Dutch, how- 
ever, seem to have been at nlatch for them. They 
too had their claims for compensation, on account of 
joint expenses not paid, or injuries and losses sus- 
tained, amounting to 2,919361/. 3*. 6d. It is im- 
possible to pronounce with accuracy on the justice, 
comparative oi^ absolute, of these several demands. 
There is no doubt that both were excessively exag- 
gerated. But if we consider, that, under the domi- 
neering ascendancy which the Protector had acquired, 
it was natural for the English to overbear, and expe- 
dient for the Dutch to submit; while we observe, 
that the award pronounced by the Commissioners, 
allotted to the English no more than 85,000/., to be 
paid by two instalments, we shall not iind any reason, 
distinct from national partiality, to persuade us, that 
the balance of extravagance was gi-eatly on the side of 
the Dutch. All the satisfaction obtained for the 
massacre of Amboyna, even by the award of the isame 
Commissioners, was 3,615/., to be paid to the heirs 
or executors of those who had suffered.' Polaroon 
was given up to the English^ but not worth receiv- 
ing- • 

Various occurrences strongly mark the sense which 
appears to have been generally entertained, of the 
unprofitable nature of joint-stock. That particular 
body of proprietors, including the Assada merchdnts, 
to whom the united joint-stock belonged, presented 
to the Council of State, in 1654, two separate peti- 
tions; in which they prayed, that the East India 

> Brace, i. 491. 



DtHMssians on Jtrint^Stoek. 73 

Company should no longer proceed exdustrelj on boort. 
the principle of a joint-stock trade, but that the ^'"^''•^' 
owners of the separate funds should have authority ^^^^ 
to employ their own capital, servants, and shipping, 
in the way which they themselves should deem most 
to their own advantage.^ The power and conse- 
quence of the Directors were threatened ; and they 
hastened to present those pleas, which are used as 
their best weapons of defence to the present day. 
Experience had proved thcf necessity of a joint-stock ; 
since the trade had been carried on by a joint-stock 
during forty years : Such competitions as those with 
the Portuguese and the Dutch could only be sup- 
ported by the strength of a joint-stock : The equip- 
ments for the India trade required a capital so large 
as a joint-stock alone could afford : The failure of 
Courten's experiment proved that voyages on any 
other principle' could not succeed: The factories 
requisite for the Indian trade could be established 
only by a joint-stock, the East India Company hav* 
big factories in the dominions of no less than* fourteen 
different sovereigns : The native princes required en* 
gagements to make good the losses which they or 
their subjects might sustain at the hand of English- 
men : and to this a joint-stock company alone was 
competent. 

On these grounds, they not only prayed that the 
trade by joint-stock should be exclusively continued ; . 
but that, as it had been impracticaUe for some time 
to obtain sufficient subscriptions, additional encou- 
ragement should be given by new privileges; and, 

X The reasons 00 vbicb t)iey tupporlMl their requeftt, as stated in 
their petitioo, exhibit su just a view of the infirmities of joint-stock 
maoagemeDt, as coiofared with that of iDdhridaals pursuing their own 
inteiests, that they are highlj worthy of inspectioD as a specimen of 
the talenu and knowledge of the men hj whom joint-stock was now 
opposed. See Bmcei L 618. 



1654. 



74 Dkcumom oh the 

dooKL ill paitiedi^, that awttance dioidd be granted, wfV 
^^^' ^' fident to enable thrai to recover and retain the Sjaoe 
Islands.^ 

In their reply, the body ef petitioners, who wen 
now distiDguished by the name of Merdumt Ad* 
venturers, clnefly dwelt upon the signal want of suo 
cess which had attended Ae trade to India, during 
forty years of joint«tock management. They as* 
sorted, that private direction and separate voyage 
would have been &r more pn^taUe ; as the prospe- 
rity of those €|^n Con^anies, the Turkey, Muscovy, 
and Eastland Companies, sufficiently iH*oved. Th^ 
claimed a right, by agreeoent, to a share in the £eu> 
tories and privileges of the Campany in India ; and 
stated, that they were fittii^ out fourteen ships for 
^e trade.^ They might haye still further repre^ 
seated, that every one of the arguments advanced by 
the Directors, without even a single exception, wa^ 
a mere assumption of the thing to be proved. That 
the trade had, during forty years, or four hundred 
years, been earned 'on by a j(Hnt-stock, proved not 
that, by a different mod^ it would not have yielded 
much greater advantage : if the trade had been in 
the highest deigree unprosperous, it rather proved 
that the mani^ment had been proportionally de^ 
fective. The Directors asserted, that in meeting 
competition, {urivate adventure would altogether &il ; 
though with their joint-stock they had so ill sustained 
competition, that Courten's Assodatton had threat- 
ened to drive them out of every mai^et in which 
they had appeared: and th^ themselves had 
repeatedly and solemnly declared to government, 
that unless the license to Courten were withdrawn, 
the ruin of the East India Company was sure. 

I Bruce, i. 493, 49^. * lb. i. 494. 



WiA regafd, to meroantile ocMnpetkion, at any rate» B(K» i. 
ike skill Awd v^itamoe of indhidnab transacting for ^^^ ^* 



their amn interest was sure to be a more powerfid 1554^ 
instittnent than the imbedfitj and negfigence of joint- 
Aock manageavent : and as to warlike competition, 
a few sh^s ti£ wm, with a few companies of marinet^ 
oiqiloyed by the gerenuneiyt, WMid have yidded far 
more security than all the efforts which a feeble 
joiiit-atock could make. The failure of Coiirteii% 
Association was suflkiently aoooanted for by the ope- 
ifeitioii of particular causes^ altogether distinct from 
the geneml ctrcumstanoes of liie trade; tiie situation, 
in fabt, in which the jealousy and inflvence of the 
Company had placed them. Factories were by no 
means so secessary as the CcNmpany ignoiantly siip«* 
posed, and interestedly strove to make others be^* 
Ueire ; as th^ shortly after feiind to their cost, when 
tfaey were glad to reduce the greater number of those 
which ib^ had established. /Where fiEUtories were 
iieally useful^ it wouM be for the interest of all the 
traders to support them. And all would join in aa 
^fb^ect of oommon utility in India, as they joined in 
every other quarter of the globe. As to the native 
princes, there was no sudi difficidty as the Company 
pmtended: nor would individual merchants have 
been less successftd than the directors of a joint^stodc, 
in finding the means of prosecuting the trade. 
. These contending pretensions were referred to a 
comndttee of the Council of State ; and they, without 
eoming to a dedsion, remitted the sub|ect to the Pro-> 
tector and Council, as too diflkult and important fiir 
the judgment of any inferior trftunal.^ 

NotUng could exceed the confiision which, from 
the dashing interests of the owners of the separate 

I finioe^ L dOS. 



76 'Disputes among the Owners 

BOOR I. stock, now raged in the Company's itfairs. There 
^^^'^' were no less than three parties who set up daims to 
1655. ^^ Island of Polaroon, and to the compensation 
money which had heen obtained firom the Dutdi ; 
the respective proprietors of the thirds fourth, and 
united joint-stocks. The proprietors of the third 
joitit^stock claimed the whole, as the fourth joint* 
stock and the united stock were not in existence at 
the time when the debt obtained from the Dutch was 
incurred ; and they prayed that the money might be 
' lodged in safe and responsible hands, till government 
should determine the question. The owners of the 
two other stocks demanded that the money should be 
^vided into three equal shares, for the three several 
stocks, and that they should all have equal rights to 
the Island of Polaroon. 

Five arbitrators, to whom the dispute was referred^ 
were chosen by the Council of State. In the mean 
time Cromwell proposed to borrow the 85,000/. which 
had been paid by the Dutch, and which could not 
be employed till adjudged to whom it belonged. 

The Direetorsi however, had expected the finger* 
ing of the money, ^nd they advanced reasons why it 
should be immediately placed in their hands. The 
pecuniary distresses of the Company were great: 
The different stocks were 50,000/» in. debt; and 
many of . the proprietors were in difficult dicum- 
stances i From gratitude to the Protector, however, 
they would make exertions to spare him 50,000/. to 
be repaid in eighteen months by instalments, pro- 
vided the remaining 35,000/. were immediately as* 
signed them, to pay their most pressing debts, and 
make a dividend to the Proprietors.^ It thus ap* 
pegrS) that these Directors wanted to forestall the 

1 Bmce, i. MS, 504. 



of the difftreni Stocks. ^rj 

deciaion of the quegtion ; i«d to distribute the money BOOK t 
at their ovm pleasure, before it was known to whom ^^^^' ^! 
it belonged. At the same time, it is matter of 1555. 
curious uncertainty, who these Directors were, whom 
they represented, by what set or sets of Proprietors 
they were chosen, or to whom they were responsible. 

While this dispute was yet undecided, the Mer- 
chant Adventurers, or Proprietors of the united stock, 
obtained a commission from the Protector to fit out 
four ships for the Indian trade, under the manage^ 
ment of a committee.^ We are made acquainted 
upon tMs occasion with a very interesting fact. The 
news of this event being carried to Holland, it w^ 
interpreted^ and understood, by the Dutch, as being 
an abolition of the exclusive charter, and the adop- 
tion of the new measure of a free and open trade. 
The interests of the Dutch Company made them see, 
in this supposed revolution, consequences very diffe- 
rent from those which the interests (^ the English 
Directors made them behold or pretend that they 
beheld in it* Instead of rejoicing at the loss of a 
joint-stock in England, as they ought to have done, 
if by joint-stock alene the trade of their rivals could 
be successfully carried on ; tliey were fiUed with dis- 
may at the in*oppect of freedom, aa likely to proditee 
a trade with which competition on their part would 
be vain«^ 

Meanwhile the Company, as well as the Merchant 
Adventprers, were employed in the equipment of a 

> Brace, i. 508. 

• Thorloe's State Papers, iii. 80. Anderson says, " Tlie merchants 
of Amsterdam having heard that the Lord Protector would dissolve the 
East India Company at London, and declare the navigation and oom' 
merce to the Indies to be free and open, were greatly alarmed, consider- 
ing such a measure as ruinous to their own East India Compauy.*' 
Anderson's History of Commerce, in Macpherson's Annals, ii. 469. 
Bee Bruce, i. 518. 



78 . Jaint'SHwk prefernd. 

C^i fleet. The petition of tke ComiMiiiy to the Protector 
for leave to export bullion, ^cified the som of 
1656* 1:5,000/.: and the fleet consisted of three shifis. 
They continued to press the government for a decision 
in favour of their exclusive privileged ; and in a peti- 
tion which they presented in October, 1656, affirmed, 
that the great nunvber of ships sent by individuals 
under licenses, had raised the price of India goods 
flrom 40 to 50 per cent, and reduced that of English 
commodities in the same proportion. The Council 
resolved at last to come to a decision. After some 
inquiry, they gave it as their advice to the Protectm' 
to continue the exclusive trade and the joint-stock ; 
and a committee of the Council was in consequence 
iippointed, to consider the terms of a charter.^ 

While the want of funds almost annihilated the 
operations of the Company's agents in every part of 
India ; and while they complained that the competi- 
tion of the ships of the Merchant Adventura^ ren- 
dered it, as usiml, impracticable for them to trade 
with a profit in the markets of India, the Dutch 
pursued their advantages against the Portuguese. 
They had acquired possession of th^ island of Ceylon, 
and in the year 1656-57, blockaded the port of Goa, 
after which they meditated an attapk upon the small 
island of Diu, which commanded the entrance into 
the harbour of Swally. From the success of these 
plans they expected a complete command of the 
navigation on that side of India, and the power of 
imposing on the English trade duties under which 
it would be unable to stand.^ 

> Bruce, i, 514—616. « lb. 528— 5«<>. 



C^mlition with the Merehani'' Adventurers. yg 



CHAP. IV. 

lVo7n the Coalition between the Company and the 
Merchant Adventurers, till the Project for a 
new and a rival East India Company. 

After the decision of the Council of State in favour book I. 
of the joint-stock scheme of trading to India, the ^"^^' *• 
Company and the Merchant Adventurers effected a "T^IT^ 
coalition. On the strength of this union a new sub- 
scriptiou, in 1657-58, was opened, and filled up to 
the amount of 786,000/.* Whether the expected 
charter had been actually received is not ascertained* 
The first operation of the new body of subscribers 
was the very necessary one of forming an adjustment 
with the owners of the preceding funds. A nego- 
tiation was opened for obtaining the transfer of the 
factories, establishments, and privileges in India. 
After the lofty terms in which the Directors had 
always .spoken of these privileges and possessions, 
when placing them in the list of. reasons for opposing 
an open trade, we are apt to be surprised at the small- 
ness of the sum wbich, after all> and ^* though situ- 
ated in the dominions of fourteen different sovereigns,** 
they were found to be worth. They were made over 
in full right for 20,000/., to be paid in two instal- 
ments. The ships, merchandise in store, and other 
trading commodities of the preceding adventurers 
were taken by the new subscribers at a price ; and it 
was agreed that the sharers in the former trade, who 
on that account had property in the Indies, should 

1 Bruce, i.5S9. 



80 A new Joint-Stock, 

BOOK I. not traffic on a separate fund, but, after a specified 
Chap. 4. term, should carry the amount of such property to 
the account of the new stock.* There was, in this 
manner, only one st^ock now in the hands of the 
Directors, and they had one distinct interest to pur* 
sue : a prodigious improvement on the preceding con- 
fusion and embarrassment, when several stocks were 
managed, and as many contending interests pursued, 
at once. 

Some new regulations were adopted for the con- 
duct of affairs. The whole of the factories and pre- 
sidencies were rendered subordinate to the President 
and Council at Surat. The presidencies, however, at 
Fort St. George and at Bantam were continued ; the 
factories and agencies on the Coromandel coast and 
in Bengal being made dependent on the former, and 
those in the southern islands on the latter.^ 

As heavy complaints had been made of trade car- 
ried on, for their own account, by the agents and ser- 
vants of the Company, who not only acted as the 
rivals, but neglected and betrayed the interests, of 
their masters, it was prohibited, and, in compensation, 
additional salaries allowed.^ 

After these preliminary proceedings, the first fleet 
was dispatched. It consisted of five ships ; one for 
Madras carrying 15,500/. in bullion; one for Bengal; 
and three for Surat, Persia, and Bantam.* The fol- 
lowing year, that is the season 1658-59, one ship was 
consigned to Surat, one to Fort St. George, and two 
to Bantam. The latter were directed to touch at 
Fort St. George to obtain coast clothes for the is- 
lands,* and to return to Bengal and Fort St. George 
to take in Bengal and Coromandel goods for Europe. 



» Bruce, i. 599, 5«0. « Brace, i. 532. 

^ lb, 4 lb. 533. 



State of the Trade. 81 

Instructions were given to make great efforts for re- BOOR I. 
covering a share of the spice trade.* Bantam, how- ^^^^' ^' 
ever, was at this time blockaded by the Dutch, and ^eei. 
no accounts were this year received of the traffic in 
the southern islands.^ 

The operations of the new joint^stock were not 
more prosperous than those of the old; Trans- 
actions at the several factories were feeble and un« 
successful. For two years, 1659-60, and 1660-61, 
there is no account of the Company's equipments ; 
and their . advances to India were no doubt small»^ 
*^ The embarrassed state of the Company's funds at 
this particular period," says Mr. Bruce, " may be 
inferred from the'resolutions they had taken to relin- 
quish many of their out-stations, and to limit their 
trade in the Peninsula of India to the presidencies of 
Surat and Fort St. George, and their subordinate 
factories/** 

Meanwhile Cromwell had died, and Charles IL 
ascended the throne. Amid the arrangements which ^ 
took place between England and the continental 
powers, the Company were careful to press on the 
attention of government a list of grievances, which 
they represented themselves as still enduring at the 
hands of the Dutch ; and an order was obtained^ em- 
powering them to take possession of the island of 
Folaroon. They afterwards complained that it was 
delivered to them in such a state of prepared desola- 



1 Brace, 539, 540. The state of interest, both in India and England, ap- 
pears incidentally in the accounts received by the Company from the 
agents at Sarat, in the year 1^58-59. These agents, after stating the 
narrowness of the funds placed at their disposal, recommend to the 
Directors rather to borrow money in England, which could easily be 
done at 4 per cent., than leave them to take up money in India at 8 or 
9 per cent. lb. 543. 

« lb. 544. 3 lb. .M9— 551. * * lb. 555. 

VOL. I. G 



82 New Charter. 

BOOK!, tion, as to be of no value/ The tnHh is, it wai 

Chap. 4, pf Kttle value at beat 

JQ61 . ^^ every change in the government of the country, 
it had been an important oi^ject with the Company to 
obtain a confirmation of their e)i;clusive privileges* 
The usual policy was not neglected, oU the accession 
of Charles II. ; and a petition was pre^nted to him 
for a renewal of the East India charter. As there 
appears not to have been, at that time, any body of 
opponents to make interest or importunity for a WS^^ 
traryi measiu^, it was far easier to grant without 
inquiry, than to inquire and refuse ; «nd Charles and 
tiis ministers had a predilection for easy rules of go^ 
vemment. A charter, bearing date the dd of April, 
1661, was accoi*dingly granted, confirming the aiiaent 
privileges of the Cdmpany, and vesting in them au- 
thority to make peace and war with any prince or 
people, not being Christians ; and to seize unUoensed 
persons within their limits, and send them to JBng- 
land.^ The two l£^t were important privileigos; and» 
with the right of administering justice, consigned 
almost all the powers of government to the discretioB 
of the Directors and their servants. 

It appears not that, on this occasion^ the expedient 
of ^ new subscription for obtaimoig a capital was 
attempted. A new adjustment with regard to the 
privileges and dead stock in India would l^ave been 
required. The joint-stock was not as yet a definite 
and invariable sum, placed beyond the power of re- 
sumption, at the disposal of the Company, the shares 
only transferable by purchase and sale in the market. 
The capital was variable and fluctuating ; formed by 
the sums whicht on the occasion of each voyage^ the 

1^ Bruce, i. 558^ 554. « lb. 557. 



"State of thi Trade. 83 

iadiyiduab^ who W€re free of, the Cotnpanyy chose Id book i. 
poj into the hands of the Directors, recdTiBg; cfedit ^^^^' ^' 
for the aniountt hi the Company's books, and propcnr- TIIgT^ 
tional dividends on the profits of tl|e voyage* Of 
this stock 900/. entitled a proprietor to a rote in the 
general courts ; and the shares were transferable, eroi 
to such as were not free of the Company, upon pay- 
ing SL for admission.^ 

Of the amount either (tf the shipinng oc sttock of 
the first voyage upon the renewed dharter we have 
no account ; but the iBStructaons sent to India pre- 
scribed a reduction of the circle of trade* In the 
following year, 1668*69, two ships sailed for Surat, 
with a cargo in goods and bulMon, amounting to 
65,000/., of wfaidi it would appear that 38,800/. w«s 
omsigned to Fort St. Geoige. Next season there 
is no account of equipaients. In 1664«66, two riiips 
were sent out with the very limited valne of 16,000/. 
The following season the dame number onty of ships 
was Quipped; and the vahie in mcmey and goods 
Consigned to Surat was 20,600/^ ; whether any thing 
ki addition was afRorded to Fort St. George doe^ not 
iqipear; there was no oonsigtnnent to BantHm. Iti 
1666*67, the equipment seems to have consisted but 
of one vessel, constgned to Surat urith a vahie of 
16,000/.* 

With these inadequate ratens, the operations of the 
Company in India were by necessity languid and 
humble. At Surat, the out-factories and i^ncies 
were suppressed. Instructions were given to sell the 
En^idi goods, at k^ rates, for the purpose of rtdning 
the interlopers. The Dutch, however, revenged the 
jhAvate traders;, aad^ by tiie conipetitkm of their powafr- 

> Andenon's Hist, of Commerce inMaq>henoD's Annals, ii. 495, 60S. 

Q 2 



-84 Biifnh}/ 

BOOK I. ftil capital, rendered the Company's busiaess diflScuft 
'*'■'*' and unprofitable.^ On the Cofomandel coast the 



1662<i^7. ^^'^ among, the native chiefs, and the overbearing 
influence of the Dutch, cramped, and threatened to 
extinguish the trade of the English. And at Bantam^ 
where the Dutch power was most sensibly felt^ the 
feeble resources of their rivals hardly sufficed to keep 
their business alive.^ 

During these years of weakness and obscurity, 
several events occurred, which by their consequences 
proved to be of considerable importance. The island^ 
of Bofnbay was ceded to the King of England as pai*t 
of the dowry of the Infanta Catharine ; and a fleet of 
five men of war commanded by the Earl of Marl- 
borough, with 500 troops commanded by Sir Abra- 
ham Shipman, were sent to receive the possession. 
The armament arrived at Bombay on the 18th Sep- 
tember, 1662 ; but the Governor evaded the cession. 
The Engfish understood the treaty to include Salsette 
and the other dependencies of Bombay. As it was 
not precise in its terms, the Portuguese denied that it 
refared to any thing more than the island of Bom- 
bay. Even Bombay they refused to give up, till fur- 
ther instructions, on the pretext that the letters or 
patent of the King did not accord with the usages of 
Portugal.- The commander of the armament applied 
in this emergency to the Company's President to 
make arrangements for receiving the troops and ships 
at Surat, as the men were dying by long confinemoit 
on board. But that magistrate represented the dan- 
ger of incurring the suspicion of die Mogul govern- 
ment, which would produce the seizure qf the Cpm- 
pan/s investment, and the expulsioa of thek servants 
from the country. In these circumstances the Earl 

> Bruce, 110, 138, 157, 158, 174. ^« lb. ii. 130, XW. 



gmnted t6 the Company. 85 

f^ Marlborough took his resolution of returning with BOOK i. 
the Kiifg*s ships to England ; but Sir Abraham Ship- ^"^'''^' 
man, it was agreed, should land the troops on the |^g.gg 
island of Angedivah, twelve leagues distant from 
Gk)a. On the arrival of the Earl of Marlborough in 
England in 1663, the King remonstrated with the 
government of Portugal, but obtained unsatisiactorf 
explanations ; and all intention of parting with the 
dependencies of Bombay was denied. The situation 
in the mean time of the troops at Angedivah proved 
extremely unhealthy; their numbers were greatly 
reduced by disease ; and the commander made offer 
to the President and Council at Surat, to cede the 
King's rights to the Company. This offer, on con- 
sultation, the President and Council declined; as 
well because, without the authority of the King, the 
grant was not valid, as because, in their feeble condi- 
tion, they were unaMe to take possession of the place. 
After Sir Abraham Shipman and the greater part of 
the troops had died by famine and disease, Mr. Cooke, 
on whom the command . devolved, accepted of Bom- 
bay -on the terms which the Portuguese were pleased 
to prescribe ; renounced all claim to the contiguous 
islands : and allowed the Portuguese exemption from 
the payment of customs. This ccNQvention the Kioff 
refused to ratify, as contrary to the terms of his 
treaty with Portugal; but sent out Sir Gervase Lucas 
to a^ume:the government of the place. As a few 
years' experience showed that tlie government of 
Bombay cost more than it produced, it was once 
more offered to the Company : and now accepted. The ' 
grant bears date in 1668. Bombay was '' to be held 
of the King in free and common soccage, as of the 
manor of East Greenwich, on the payment of the 
annual rent of 10/. in gold, on the 30th of September, 
in each year ;" and with the plj^cc itself was conveyed 



g^ Polatoon rettored to the Dutch. 

BOOK I. authority to exercise all political powers, necessary 

Chap. 4. f^j, -^.g d^jg^ce and government.* 

1663-68. Subterfuges of a simOar kind were invented hj the 
Dutch to evade the cession of the island of Polaroon. 
The Governor pretended that he could not deliver up 
the island without instructions from the Gvovemor of 
Banda ; and the Governor of Banda pretended that 
he couM not give such instructions without receiving 
authority from the Governor-General of Batavia. 
After much delay an4 negotiation the cession was 
made in 1665 ; but not, if we believe the English 
accounts, till the Dutch had so far exterminated the 
inhabitants and the spice trees, that the acquisition 
was of little importance. On the recommencement, 
however, of hostilities between England and Holland, 
the Dutch made haste to expel the English, and to 
re-occupy the island. And by the treaty of Breda, 
both Polaroon and Damm, on which the English had 
attempted an establishment, were linatty ceded to the 
Dutch.^ 

In the beginning of 1664, Sevagee, the founder of 
the Mharatta power, in the course of his predatory 
warfare against the territories of the Mogul Sovereign, 
attacked the city of Surat. The inhabitants fled, and 
the Governor shut himself up in the castle* The 
Company's servants, however, ticking shelter in the 
factory, stood upon their defen(«, and having called 
in the ships* crews to their aid, made so brave a re- 
sistance that Sevagee retired after pillaging the town* 
The gaUantry and success of this enterprise so pleased 
the Mogul government, as to obtain its thanks to the 
President, and new privileges of trade to the Com- 
pany. The place was again approached by the same 

1 Brace, ii. 104, 101^ 196, 134> 141, 152^, 168^ 199. • Ifccphenon's 
Annals, ii. 503. 
« Bruce, ii, 132, 161, 184, 198, 



Sirtfants di$oheiitnt. g7 

destnictiTe enemy in 1670» when the principal part cf BOOK I. 
the Company's goods weie transported to Swaily, and ^"^'•^' 
lodged on board the ships. The English again de- i^^ft^^g^ 
fended themselYet sucdessfully, though some Uves were 
lost^ as vnSl as some property in their detached ware* 
bouaes.^ 

At this period dccurred ooe of the first instances of 
refractory and disobedient conduct on the part of the 
Company's senrants* This is a calamity to wbidi 
they have been much less frequently exposed, than, 
ftom the distance and employment of these servants^ 
it would have been reasonaUe to expect The efforU 
of the Directors to suppress the trade, which their 
agents carried en for their own account, had not been 
very Mccedaflil. Shr Edward Wititer, the chief servant 
at Fort St. GecN'ge, was suspected of this delinquency, 
and in consequence recsdled. When Mr. Foxcroft, 
howevei*, who was sent to supersede hihi, arrived at 
Fort St. George, in June, 1665, Sir Edward, instead 
of resigning, placed his intended successor in confine- 
BDlenty wider n piretext wliidi it was easy to mahe» 
that he had uttered disloyal expressions against the 
King's g0vemment. Notwithstanding remonstrances 
and commands, he maintained himself in the govern- 
ment of the place till two ships arrived, in Angost, 
1668, with peremptory orders from the Company, 
strengthened by a conunand from the King» to resign ; 
when his courage failed him» and he complied. He 
retired to Masulipatam, a station of the Dutch* till 
the resentment excited against him in England should 
cool: and his name appears no more in the annals df 
the Company.^ 

In Bengal the English factory at Hoogley had 
been inv<dved in an unhappy dispute with the Mogul 

1 %«ce/144, 145| $84. « lb. ii. 179, t45. 



88 ^ Dispute bettoeen 

BOOK I. gOTernment, on account of a junk which they impni- 
^°^^' ^' dently seized on the river Ganges. For several years 
166d-68. ^^^ incident had been used as a pretext for molesting 
them. In 1662-63, the chief at Madras sent an agent 
to endeavour to reconcile them with Meer Jumlah, 
the Nabob of Bengal ; and to establish agencies at 
Balasore and Cossimbuzar.^ The Company's funds, 
however, were too confined to push to any extent 
the trade of the rich province of Bengal. 

The scale was very small on which^ at this time^ 
the Company's appointments were formed. In 1662» 
Sir George Oxenden was elected to be " Piesident 
and chief Director of all their affairs at Surat, and all 
other their factories in the north parts of India, from 
Zeilon to the Red Sea,'' at a salary of 300/. and with 
a gratuity of 200/. per annum as compensation for 
private trade. Piivate trade in the hands of the 
servants, and still more in those of others, the Com- 
pany were now most earnestly labouring to suppress. 
Directions were given to seize all unlicensed traders 
and send them to England ; and no exertion of the 
great powers entrusted . to the Company was to be 
spared, to annihilate the race of merchants who 
trenched upon the monopoly, and to whom, under the 
disrespectful name of interlopers, they ascribed a great 
part of their imbeciUty and depression.^ 

Their determination to crush all those of their 
cmmtrymen who dared to add themselves to the list 
of their competitors, failed not to give rise to instances 
of great hardship and calamity. One was rendered 
fieimous by the altercation which in 1666 it produced 
between the two houses of parliament. Thomas 
Skinner, a merchant, fitted out a vessel in 1657. 
The agents of the Company seized his ship and meit- 

1 Bruce, i. 560; ii. 110, ISl. • lb. ii, 101^109. 



thf two Hottm bfPnrliament. 89 

chaiidize in India, his house, and the island of Barella, BOOK L 
which he had bought of the King of Jambee. They ^'^^' ^' 
even denied him a passi^ home ; and he was obliged 15^2^9. 
to travel over land to Europe. The sufferer failed not 
to seek redress, by presenting his complaint to the 
govemment,and after some importunity it was referred 
first to a committee of the Council, and next to the 
House of. Peers. When the Company were ordered 
to answer, they refused to acknowledge the jurisdic^ 
tion of the Peers, on the ground that they were only 
a court of appeal, and not competent to decide in the 
first resort. The objection was over-ruled. The 
Company appealed to the House of Commons ; the 
Lords. were highly inflamed; and, proceeding to a de« 
cision, awarded to the petitioner 5,000/. The Com- 
mons were now enraged in their turn ; and being 
udabfe to gratify their resentments, upon the House 
of Peers, which was the cause of them, they were 
{deased to do so upon the unfortunate gentleman who 
had already paid so dearly for the crime (whatever its 
amount) of infringing the Company's monopoly. He 
tras sent a prisoner to the Tower. The L(»^s, whom 
these proceedings fiUed with indignation, voted the 
petition of the Company to the Lower House to be 
false and scandalous. Upon this the Commons re*- 
solved that whoever should execute the sentence of 
the other hcmse in favour of Skinner, was a betrayer 
of the rights and liberties of the Commons of England, 
and an infiinger of the privileges of their house. To 
such a height did these contentions proceed, that the 
King adjourned the parliament seven times; and when 
the controversy after an intermission revived, he sent 
for both houses to Whitehall, and by his personal per- 
suasion induced them to erase from their journals all 
tl^eir votes, resolutions, and other acts relating to the 
subject. A contest, of which both parties were tired. 



90 Rench Ea$t India Company. 

BOOK I. being ihM ended, the sacrifice and ruin of an indi- 
^J^^^^ viduai appeared, as usual^ of little importance : Skiimer 

leeSf^S. 1^ ^^ redress.^ 

Another class of competiton; excited the fears and 
jealousies of the Company. CdUbert, - the Frendi 
minister of finance, among his projects for rendering 
his country commercial and opulent^ conceived, in 
1664, the design of an East India Company. The 
report which reached the Court c^ Directors in London 
represented the French as fitting out eight armed 
vessds for India, commanded by Hubert Hugo, whom 
in their instructions to the settlements abroad, the 
Directors described as a Dutch pirate. The hostiKtiei 
ef the Company were timid. They directed their 
agents in India to afford these rivals no aid or pro* 
tedion, but to behave towards them with drcmnspe&- 
tion and delicacy. The subservience of the English 
government to that of France was already so iqspaienty 
as to make them afiraid of disputes in which they wwe 
likd^ to have their own rulers i^auist them.^ 

The war whidi took place with Holland in 1664^ 
and which was followed in 1665 by a temporary 
quarrel with France, set loose the powers of both 
nations against the Company in India. The French 
Company, however, was too mudi in its infancy to be 
fimmdaUe ; and the Dutch, whose mercantile com* 
petition pressed as heavily during peace as during war, 
added to the difficulties of the English, chiefly by rei^ 
dering their navigation more hazardous and expensive. 

A fact, an enlightened attentioB to which would 
probably have been productive of important conse- 
quences, was at this time forced upcm the notice of 

> Macplierson^B Annals, H. 493* 

« Raynal, Uist. Philos. et Polit. des Eubliss. &c. dans les Deux Indes, 
ii. 183. £d. 8vo. Geneve, 1781. Brace ii. 197, 150, 167. Macpher- 
fon^s AnnaTs, ii* 516. 



Too many Faciorie». 9I 

the Company. One grand sotnfce of the expenses book l 
which devoured the profits of their trade was their ^^^' ^' 
factories, with all that mass of dead stock which they '[IITII 
reqtdred, houses, lands, fortifications, and equipments. 
The Dutch, who prosecuted their interests with^ 
vigilance and economy, carried on their trade in a 
great many places without factories. Upon receiving 
instructions to make preparations and inquiry for 
opening a trade with Japan, Mr. Quarles Brown, the 
Company's agent at Bantam, who had been at Japan, 
repoited to the Court, that it would be necessary, if a 
trade with Japan was to be undertaken, to follow the 
plan of the Dutch ; who procured the commodities in 
demand at Japan, in the countries of Siam, Cambodia^ 
and Tonquin, not by erecting expensive factories, 
but by forming contracts with the native merchants* 
These merchants, at fixed seasons, brought to the 
ports the commodities for which they had contracted, 
and though it was often necessary to advance to them 
the cajHtal with which the purchases were effected, 
they had regularly fulfilled their engagements.' Even 
the Company itself, and that in places where their foe* 
tones cost them the most, had made experiments, and 
with great advantage, on the expediency of employing 
the native merchants in providing their investments* 
At Surat, in 1665-66, ^the investments of the season 
were obtained by the employment of a native merchant^ 
who had provided an assortment of pepper at Ms own 
risk, and though the Dutch had obstructed direct pur- 
chases of pepper, the agents continued the expedient 
of employing the native merchants, and embarked a 
moderate assortment." * Factories to carry on the 
trvflSe ^ Asia, at any rate on the scale, or any thing 

> Letters from the Agent and Council of Bantam (in the East India 
Register Office)^ Bruce ii. 1S3. 
« Bruce ii. 178, from a letter from the President and Cousicil of SuraV 

6 



93 Too many Factcria. 

BOOK L approaching to the scale, of the East India Company^ 
^^^^' ^' were the natural offspring of a joint-stock ; the 
1663-68. ^^°^^^^ or -Directors of which had a much greater 
interest in the patronage they created, which was 
wholly their own ; than in the profits of the Company, 
of which they had only an insignificant share. Had 
the trade to India been conducted from the beginning, 
on those principles of individual adventure and free 
coQipetition, to which the nation owes its commercial 
grandeur, it is altogether improbable that many fac* 
tories would have been established. The agency of 
the native merchants would have performed much ; 
and ^here it was not suflSdent, the Indian trade 
would have naturally divided itself into two branches. 
One set of adventurers would have established them- 
selves in India, by whom investments would have been 
provided for the European ships, and to whom the 
cargoes of the European goods would have been con- 
signed. Another class of adventurers, who remained 
at home, would have performed the business of export 
and import from England, as it is performed to any 
other region of th^ globe. 

The time, however, was now approaching when the 
weaknesis which had so long characterized the opera- 
tions pf the English in India was gradually to dis* 
appear. Notwithstanding the imperfections of the 
government, at no period, perhaps, either prior or 
posterior, did the people of ,ihi8: country advance so 
rapidly in wealth and prosperity, as during the time, 
including the years of civil war, from the accession of 
James I. to the expulsion of James 11.^ We are not 



1 Sir WtlUam Petty, who wrote bis celebrated work, entitled PolitiGal 
Arithmeticy in 1C76, says ; 1. The streets of London showed that city to 
be double what it was forty years before ; great increase was also mani- 
fested at Newcastle, Yarmouth, Norwich, Exeter, Portsmouth, and 
Cowes; and in Ireland, at Dublin, Kinj;sa1e, Coleraine, wi4 Londonderry. 



Increased .Resources. 9S 

informed of the particular measures which were pui> fiooK t. 
sued by the Directors for obtaining an extension of ^"^p-*- 
futids ; but the increase of capital in the nation was iggg.74^ 
probably the principal cause which enabled them, ki 
the year succeeding the acquisition of Bombay; to 
provide a grander fleet and cargo than they had evef 
yet sent forth. In the course of the year l667-6»8, 
six ships sailed to Surat, with goods and bullion to the 
value of 130,000/. ; five ships to Fort St. George, with 
a value of 75,000/. ; and five to Bantam, with a stodc 
of 40,000/. In the next season we are informed that 
the consignments to Surat consisted of 1,200 tons of 
shipping, with a stock of the value of 75,000/.; to 
Fort St. George, of five ships, and a stock of 103,000/. ; 
and to Bantam, of three ships and 35^000/. In the 
year 1669-70, 1,500 tons of shipping were sent to 
Surat, six ships to Fort St. George, and four to 
Bantam, and the whole amount of the stock was 
281,000/. The vessels sent out in 1670-71 amounted 
to sixteen, and their cargoes and bullion to 303,500/. 
In the following year four ships were sent to Surat, 
and nearly 2000 tons of shipping to Fort St. George ; 
the cargo and bullion to the former, being 85,000/., 
to the latter, 160,000/.: shipping to the amount of 
2,800 tons was consigned to Bantam, but of the value 
of the bullion and goods no account seems to be pre- 
served. In 1672-73, stock and bullion to the amount 
of 157,700/. were asent to Surat and Fort St. George. 
On account of the war, and the more exposed situation 
of Bantam, the consignment to that settlement was 

3. With respect to shipping, the navy was triple, or quadruple what it was 
at that time ; the shipping of Newcastle wa« 80,000 tons, and could not 
then have exceeded a quarter of that amount. 3. The number and 
splendour of coaches, equipages, and fiiniiture, had much increased since 
thiit period. 4. The postage of letters had increased from one to twenty* 
5. The King's revenue had tripled itself. See too Macpherson'a Annals, 
ii 580. ' 



94 State of Trade. 

BOOK I. postponed. In the following year, it iq^pears tbat 
Chap. 4. caigoefi and bullion were consigned, of the value of 
jg^^^^ 100,000/. to Surat ; 87,000/. to Fort St. George ; and 
* 41,000/. to Bantam.^ 

Other events of these years were of consideridde 
importance. In 1667-68, appears the first order of 
the Company for the importation of tea.^ Attempts 
were now recommended for resuming trade viith 
Sumatra.^ In 1671-72, considerable embarrassment 
was produced at Surat by the arrival of a French fleet 
of twelve ships, and a stock computed at 130,000/. 
The inconsiderate purchases and sales o£ the French 
reduced the price of European good^ and raised tbat 
of Indian ; but so little did these adventuna*s exhibit 
€i the spirit and knowledge o£ commerce^ as to con- 
vince the Company's agents that they would not 
prove formidable rivals.^ 

As England and France were now united in alliaooe ^ 
against the Dutch, the Company might have exulted 
in the prospect of humbling their oppressors, but the 
danger of a new set of competitors seems effectually 
to have repressed these triumphant emotions. In 
167S» the island of St. Helena, which had several 
times changed its masters, being recaptured from the 
Dutch, was granted anew and confirmed to the Com- 
pany by a royal charter.^ 

The funds which^ in such unusual quantity, the 
Directors had been able to supply fi)r the support of 
the trade in India, did not suffice to remove, it woidd 
appear that they hardly served to lighten, the pecumsoy 
difficulties under which it laboured. To an order to 



i Bruce ii. 201, SOa> S09— dS4, 9^7, 330—256, 258, t59-H»8, 281, 
282, 283—293, 296, 297—312, 313—327, 328, 331. 

* lb. ii. 2 10. The words of this order are curious, << to send home bgr 
l2Mse ships 100 lb. waight of the best te j that jou ceo gett.'' 

3 lb. ii, 211. « lb. 302. » lb. 232,334. 



Exaggeration. 95 

provide a large investment* tbe President and Council WOK i. 
at Sunt, in l67*-74, rqdied, that the funds at their ^^' _ 
disposal were only 88,228/L and their debts 100,000/. i674. 
besides interest on tbe same at 9 per cent. ; and in 
November, 1674» they represented that the debt arose 
to no less a sum than 1S5,000/. ; and that all returns 
must in a great measure be suspended tiU, by the 
application of the funds received from Europe, the 
CcMnpany's credit should be revived.^ 

Of the sort of views held out at this period to excite 
the favour of the nation towards the East India Com- 
pany, a specimen has come down to us of considerable ' 
value. Sir Josiah Child, an eminent member of the 
body of Directors, in his celebrated Discourses on 
Trade, written in the year 1665, and puUished in 
1667» represents the trade to India as the most bene- 
ficial branch of English commerce ; and in proof of 
this opinion asserts, that it employs from twenty-five 
to thirty sail of the most warlike mercantile ships of 
the kingdom, manned with mariners from 60 to 100 
each; that it supplies the kingd<Mn with saltpetre^ 
which would otherwise cost the nation an immense 
f urn to the Dutch ; with pej^r, indigo, calicoes^ and 
drugs, to tbe value of 150,000/. or 180,000/. yearly, 
fer which it would otherwise pay to the same people 
an exorbitant price; with materials for export to 
Turkey, France, Spain, Italy, and Guinea, to the 
anmmt of 300,000/1 or 300,000/. yearly, countries 
with which, if the nation were deprived of these com- 
modities, a profitaUe trade could not be carried on. 

These statements were probably made with an in- 
,tentieii to deceive. The imports, exclusive of saltpetre, 
4are asseted to exceed 400,000/. a year; thou^ the 

I Bhue» ii. 387, S43, SM. 



96 Exaggerdiiari, 

BOOK I. stock which was annually sent to effect the purchases;^ 
^^^' \ and to defray the whole expense of factories and forti* 
1674. fications abroad, hardly amounted in any number of 
years preceding 1665, to 100,000/., ofteta to much less ; 
while the Company were habitually contracting debts, 
and labouring under the severest pecuniary difficulties. 
Thus early, in the history of this Company, is it found 
necessary to place reliance on their accounts^nd state- 
ments, only when something very different from the 
authority of their advocates b found to constitute the 
basis of our belief. 

It will be highly instructive to confront one exag- 
gerated statement with another. About the same 
time with the discourses of Sir Josiah Child, appeared 
the celebrated work of De Witt on the state of Hol- 
land. Proceeding on the statement of Sir Walter 
Raleigh, who in the investigation of the Dutch fishery, 
mad^ for the information of James I. in 160S, affirmed, 
that ^^ the Hollanders fished on the coasts of Great 
Britain with no fewer than 8,000 ships, and 50,000 
men ; that they employed and set to sea, to transport 
and sell the fish so taken, and to make returns thereof, 
9»000 ships more, and 150^000 men ; and that twenty 
busses do, one way or other, maintain 8,000 people ; *' 
he adds, that from the time of Sir Walter Raleigh to 
the time at which he wrote, the traffic of Holland in 
all its branches could not have increased less than one 
third. Allowing this account to be exaggerated in 
the same proportion as that of the East India Director, 
which the nature of the circumstances, so much better 
known, renders rather improbable ; it is yet evident, 
to what a remarkable degree the fisheries of thb British 
coasts, to which the Dutch confined themselves, con- 
stituted a more important commerce than the highly 
vaunted, but comparatively insignificant business of 



State of Trade. 97 

the Edst India Company.* The English fishety, at BOOK I. 
the single station of Newfoundland^ exceeded in value ^°^^' ^' 
the trade to the East Indies. In the year 167P, no j 675.32. 
fewer than 102 ships^ carrying twenty guns each, and 
eighteen boats, with five men to each boat, 9,180 men 
in all, were employed in that traffic ; and the total 
value of the fish and oil was computed at 386,400/.^ 

The equipments, in 1674-75, were, five ships to 
Surat with 189,000/. in goods and bullion ; five to 
Fort St. George with 202,000/. ; and 2,500 tons of 
shipping to Bantam with 65,000/.: In 1675-76, to 
Surat, five ships and 96,500/. ; to Fort St. George, 
five ships and 2S5,000/. ; to Bantam, 2,450 tons of 
shipping and 58,000/.: In 1676-77, three ships to 
Surat and three to Fort St. George, with 97,000/. 
to the one, and 176,600/. to the other ; and eight 
ships to Bantam, with no account of the stock. The 
whole adventure to India, in 1677*78, seems to have 
been seven ships and 352,000/. ; of which a pdrt, to 
the value of 10,000/. or 12,000/., was to be for- 
warded from Fort St. George to Bantam: In 1678-79, 
eight ships and 398,950/. : In 1679-80, ten ships and 
461,700/. : In 1680-81, eleven ships and 596,000/. : 
And, in 1681-82, seventeen ships, and 740,000/.^ 

The events affecting the East India Company were 
still common and unimportant. In 1674-75, a mu- 
tiny, occasioned by retrenchment, but not of any 

J An anonymous author, whom Anderson in his History of Commerce 
quotes as an authority, says, in 1679, that the Dutch herriog and cod 
fishery employed 8,000 vessels, and 200,000 saiI(A% and fishers, whereby 
they annually gained five millions sterling ; besides their Iceland, Green- 
land, and Newfoundland fisheries, and the multitude of trades and people 
employed by them at home. Macpherson's Annals, ii. 596. See in the 
same work, ii. 547 and 552, a summary of the statements of Child and De 
Witt. For ampler satisfiiction the works themselves must be consulted. 

« Anderson's Hist, of Commerce, Macpherson's Annals, ii. 579. 

3 Bruce, ii. 856,360,361—375,379—392,398,395—406,409,410— 
435, 438, 439—446, 451, 453—459,465, 468. 
VOL. I. H 



98 State of Trade. 

BOOK I. serious magnitude, was suppiessed at Bombay. In 
^^^^' ^' trying and executing the ringleaders, the Company 
1675^82. ^3^^<^d the formidable powers of martial law. The 
trade of Bengal had grown to such importance, that, 
instead of a branch of the agency at Fort St. George, 
an agency was now constituted in Bengal itself* 
Directions were forwarded to make attempts for open- 
ing a trade with China; and tea, to the value of 100 
dollars, was, in 1676-775 ordered on the Company's 
account Beside the ordinary causes of depression 
which affected the Company at Bantam, a particular 
misfortune occurred in 1667* The principal persons 
belonging to the factory having gone up the river iu 
their prows, a number of Javanese assassins, who had 
concealed themselves in the water, suddenly sprung 
upon them, and put them to death.' 

In 1677-78, •* the Court,'" says Mr. Bruce, ** re- 
commended temporising expedients to their servants, 
with the Mogul, with Sevagee, and with the petty 
Rajahs; but at the same time they gave to President 
AuBgier and his council discretionary powers, to 
employ armed vessels, to enforce the observation of 
treaties and grants : — ^in this way, the Court shifted 
from themselves the responsibility of commencing 
hostilities, that they migfat be able, in any questions 
which might arise between the King and the Com- 
pany, to refer such hostilities to the errors of their 
servants."'^ This cool provision of a subterfuge, at 
the expense of their servants, is a policy ascribed to 
the Company, m this instance, by one of the most 
unabashed of their eulogists. We shall see, as we 
advance, in what degree the precedent has been 
followed. 

The difficulties which now occurred in directing 

' Bruct, ii. S€7, 466» 396, 4(M; « lb. 40ft. 



Promotion by Seniority. 9Q 

the operations of the various individuals employed in BOOK i. 
the business of the East India Company began to be ^'^^' ^ 
serious. The Directors, from ignorance of the cir- i^^^. 
cumstances in which their servants were placed, often 
transmitted to them instructions which it would have 
been highly imprudent to execute. The functionaries 
abroad often took upon themselves, and had good 
reasons for their caution, to disregard the orders 
which they received. A door being thus opened for 
discretionary conduct, the instructions of the Direc- 
tors were naturally as often disobeyed for the con- 
venience of the actors abroad, as for the benefit of 
the Company at home. The disregard of their 
authority, and the violation of their commands, had 
been a frequent subject of uneasiness and indignation 
to the Directors. Nor was this all. From discordant 
pretensions to rank and advancement in the service, ' 
animosities arose among the agents abroad. Efforts 
were made by the Directors for the cure of these 
troublesome, and even dangerous, diseases. Seniority 
was adopted as the principle of promotion ; but no- 
mination to the important office of a Member of 
Council at the Agencies, as well as Presidencies, was 
reserved to the Court of Directors.* 

1 Bruce, ii. 855, S74, 449, 453. 



lU 



100 Project of a rival Company. 



CHAP. V. 

From the Project of forming a new and rival Com- 
pany, till the Union of the two Companies by the 
Award of Godolphin, in the year 1711- 

BOOK I. The Company were now again threatened by that 
5. cQmpetition with their fellow-citizens which they 
1683. ^^^^ always regarded as their greatest misfortune. 
From the renewal of their charter, shortly after the 
accession of Charles II., their monopoly had not been 
disturbed, except by a few feeble interlopers, whom 
they had not found it difficult to crush. In the year 
1682-8S, the design was disclosed of opening a sub- 
scription for a new joint-stock, and establishing a 
rival East India Company. The scheme was so 
much in unison with the sentiments of the nation, 
and assumed an aspect of so much importance, that 
it was taken into consideration by the King and 
Council. 

It had so much eflTect upon the views of the Com- 
pany, though for the present the Council withheld 
their sanction, that, in Mr. Bruce's opinion, it intro- 
duced into their policy of 1682-83 a refinement, cal- 
culated, and intended, to impose upon the King and 
the public. It induced them to speak of the amount 
of their equipments, not, as usual^ in terms of exact 
detail, but in those of vague and hyperbolical esti- 
mate. What we know of their adventure of that 
year is only the information they forwarded to their 
Indian stations, that the stock to be sent out 

> Bruce, ii. 475. 



Trade and Debts. 101 

would exceed one million sterlings In the ooimie BOOKf. 
of the next season they equipped four.ships to Sutat. *" 



Of that year we only further know that 100,000/. in i^es^j. 
bullion was intended for Bengal. In 1684-85, in- 
formation was forwarded to Surat, in general terms^ 
that the tonnage and stock would be considerable: 
Fire ships sailed for Fort St. George and Bengal, 
with 140,000/. in bullion : Of other circumstances 
nothing is adduced : And for several succeeding years 
no statement of the tonnage and stock of the annual 
voyages appears.^ 

Under the skill which the Court of Directors have 
all along displayed in suppressing such informaUon 
as they wished not to appear, it is often impossible 
to odlect more than gleanings of intelligence respect- 
ing the Company's debts. At the present period, 
however, they aj^iear to have been heavy and dis* 
tressing. In 1676, it was asserted by their oppo* 
nents in England that their debts amounted to 
600,000/.;^ and we have already seen that, in 1674^ 
the debt of Surat alone amounted to 135,000/.^ In 
1682-83, the Directors authorised the Agency in 
Bengal to borrow 200,000/., and, in 1683-84, it is 
stated that the debt upon the dead stock at Bombajr 
alone amounted to 300,000/.^ It seems highly pro- 
bable that at this time their debts exceeded their 
capital. 

In a war between the King of Bantam and his son^ 
in which the English sided with the one, and the 
Dutch with the other^ the son prevailed ; and expelled 
the English from the place. The agents and aer- 
vants of the factory took shelter at Batavia, and 
the Dutch Governor made offer of his assistance to 

1 Bruce, ii. 476, 481—496, 506— 528, 531. 

« Anderson's HUt. of Commerce, Macpherson's Annals, ii. 579, 

3 Supra, p. 95. * Bruce, ii. 482, 499«. 



10ft Measures against Interlopers, 

fiOOK 1. bring the property of the Company irom Bantam. 
Cbap. 5. ^^ ^^^ English, however, accused the Dutch of 
1^3-S^. being the real authors of the calamity, they declined 
the proposal, as precluding those claims of redress 
which the Company might prosecute in Europe* 
Various efforts were made to regain possession ct 
]bantam, but the Dutch from this time remained Mk 
masters of Java.* 

Upon the loss of Bantam, th6 Presidency for the 
government of the Eastern Coast, which had hithertc^ 
with a fond desire for the traffic of the islands, been 
stationed at that place, was removed to Fort St. 
George.^ 

The nation becoming^ gradually more impatieitt 
linder the monopoly, the numbers multiplied of those 
who ventured to break through the restraint wUk^h 
it imposed upon the eommercial ardour of the times. 
The Company, not satisfied with the power which 
they had already obtained of common and martial 
law, and of seizing, with their property, and sending 
to England, as many of their countrymen as their 
interests or caprice might direct, still called for a 
wider range of authority ; and, under the favour of 
government which they now enjoyed, obtained the 
powers of Admiralty jurisdiction, for the purpose 
of seizing and condemning, safe from the review of 
the courts of municipal law in England, the ships of 
the interlopers.® The servants of the Company were 
now invested with unlimited power over the British 
people in India. 

Insurrection again appeared at Bombay, and as- 
sumed a very formidaUe aspect. The causes were 
such as have commonly, in the Company's affiurs, 
been attended with similar eflfects. Efforts had been 

1 Brace, n. 49S. • lb. 509. s |b. 496; 



Jnsurreetion ui Bombay. lOS 

miide to retrench expenses^; unpleasant to the Com- book i. 
pany's servants. The earliest experiment of the ^"'"'' ^' 
Company in territorial sovereignty agreed with the ie8S-85. 
enlarged experience of succeeding times : the expense 
of the gc^emment exceeded the revenue which the 
population and territory could be made to yield The 
Directors, new to the business of government, were 
disappointed ; and having first laboured to correct the 
defidt by screwing up the revenue, they next at^ 
tempted the same arduous task by lessening the 
expense. By the two operations together, all classes 
of their subjects were afienated : Rrst, the people, 
by the weight of taxation ; next the instruments of 
government, by the diminution of their profits. Ac« 
cordingly Captain Keigwin, commander of the gar- 
rison at Bombay, was joined by the troops and the 
great body of the people, in renouncing the authority 
of the Company, and declaring by proclamation, 
dated December 27, 1683, that the island bdonged 
to the King. Keigwin was by general consent 
appointed Governor; and immediately addressed let- 
ters to the King and to the Duke of York, stating 
such reasons as were most likely to avert firom 
his conduct the condemnation to which it was ex- 
posed*^ 

Tiie President and Council at Surat, conscious of 
their inability to reduce the island by force, had 
recourse to negociation. A general pardon, and 
redress of grievances were promised. First three 
commissioners were sent; afterwards the President 
repaired to Bombay in person. But neither en- 
treaties nor threats were of any avalL^ 

1 Brace, ii. 512. Governor Child is accused by Hamilton of wanton 
and intolerable oppressions; and that author states some facts which 
indicate excessive tyranny. New Account of the East Indies, i . 187*«199. 

« Brucei ii. 515. 



104 Insurrection at Bombay. 

BOOK I. As soon as inteUigence airived in England, the 
^^^'^^ King's command was procured, directing Captain 

1685-87. ^^^g^ui to deliver up the island : and instructions 
were forwarded to proceed against the insurgents by 
force. When Sir Thomas Grantham, the commander 
of the Company's fleet, presented himself at Bombay^ 
invested with the King's commission, Keigwin of* 
fered, if assured of a free pardon to himsielf and 
adherents, to surrender the place* On these terms 
the island was restored to obedience. For the more 
effectual coercion of any turbulent propensities^ the 
expedient was adopted of removing the seat of go- 
vernment from Surat to Bombay. Nor could the 
humble title and pretensions of a President and 
Council any longer satisfy the rising ambition of the 
Company. The Dutch had established a regency at 
Batavia and Columbo* It was not consistent with 
the grandeur of the English Company to remain 
contented with inferior distinction. In 1687, Bom- 
bay was elevated to the dignity of a Regency, with 
unlimited power over the rest of the Company's set- 
tlements. Madras was formed into a corporation, 
governed by a mayor and aldermen.^ 

The English had met with less favour, and more 

1 oppression, from the native powers in Bengal, than 

in any other part of India.^ In 1635-86, the resolu- 

' Bruce, ii. 5^6, 540, 584, 591. It was debated iu the Privy Council, 
Mrhether the charter uf incorporation should be under the King's or the 
Company's seal. The King asVed the Chairman his opinion, who re- 
plied, " that no person in India should be employed by immediate com- 
mission from bis Majesty, because, if they were^ they would be preju- 
dicial to our service "by their arrogancy, and 'prejudicial to themselves, 
because the wind of extraordinary honour in their heads wotrid probably 
make them so haughty and overbearing, that we should be forced to 
' remove them.** Letter from the Court to the President of Fort St. 
George, (lb. 591). Hamilton, ut supra, (189—192). Orme's Historical 
Fragments, 185, 188, 192,. 198. 
» Mr, Orrae is not unwilling to ascribe part of the hardships they ex* 

7 



Disturbatices in Bengal. 105 

tion was adopted of seeking redress and protection by book l 
force of arms. The greatest military equipment the ^"^' ^' 
Company had ever provided was sent to India. Ten i6g5.8*t. 
armed vessels^ from twelve to seventy guns, under 
the command of Captain Nicholson, and six com- 
panies of infantry, without captains, whose places 
were to be sdpplied by the Members of Council in 
Bengal, were dispatched, with instructions to seize 
and fortify Chittagong as a plaoe of future security, 
and to retaliate in such a manner upon the Nabob 
aqd Mogul as to obtain reparation for the injuries 
and losses which had been already sustained. In 
addition to this force, the Directors, in the following 
year, made application to the King for an entire 
company of regular infantry with their officers ; and 
power was granted to the Governor in India to select 
firom the privates such men as should appear qualified 
to be CQmmissioned officers in the Company's service. 
By some of those innumerable casualties, inseparable 
from distant expeditions, the whole of the force 
arrived not at one time in the Ganges; and an insig- 
nificant quarrel, between some of the English soldiers 
and the natives, was imprudently allowed to bring on 
hostilities, before the English were in a condition to 
maintain them with success. They were obliged to 
retire from Hoogly, after they had cannonaded it 
with the fleet, and took shelter at ChutanOttee, afterr 
wards Calcutta, till an agreement with the Nabob) 
or additional forces, should enable them to resume 
their stations. The disappointment of their ambi- 
tious schemes was bitterly felt by the Court of 
Directors. They blamed their servants in Bengal in 

perienced to the interlopers, who, seeking protection against the oppres- 
sions of the Company, were more sedulous and skilful in their endea- 
vours to pletise the native goTeraors. Hist. Frag. 185. 



106 Bengal abandoned. 

BOOK I. the severest terms, not onlj for timidity, but bretoh 
Chap. 5. ^^ ^j^^ ^s having turned the resources of the Com- 
1665-87. P^"y> which ought to have been effectually employed 
in obtaining profitable and honourable terms from the 
Nabob and Mogul, to their own schemes of private 
avarice and emolument. A hollow truce was agreed 
to by the Nabob, which he only employed for pre- 
paring the means of an effectual attack. The English, 
under the direction of Chamock, the Company's 
agent, made a gallant defence. They not only re* 
pulsed the Nabob's forces in repeated assaults, but 
stormed the fort qS Tanna, seized the island of In* 
jellee, in which they fortified themsdves, and burnt 
the town of Balasore, with forty sail of the Mogul 
fleet ; the factories, however, at Patna and Cossim-* 
buzar were taken and plundered. In September^ 
16879 an accommodation was effected, and the Eng- 
lish were allowed to return to Hoogley, with their 
ancient privileges. But this was a termination of 
the contest ill-relished by the Court of Directors. 
Repeating their accusations of Chamock and their 
other functionaries, they sent Sir John Child, the 
governor of Bombay, to Madras and Bengal, for the 
purpose of reforming abuses, and of re-establishing, 
if possible, the factories at Cossimbuzar and other 
places, firom which they had been driven by the war. 
A large ship, the Defence, accompanied by a frigate, 
arrived from England under the command of a captain 
of the name of Heath, with instructions for war. 
The Company's servants had made considerable pro- 
gress by negodation in regaining their ancient ground; 
when Heath precipitately commenced hostilities, 
plundered the town of Balasore, and proceeded to 
Chittagong, which he found himself unable to subdue. 
Having taken the Company's servants and effects on 
6 



Diuaien of the English. 107 

doard, agreeably to fais orders, he sailed to Madras ; f^ooKl. 
and Bengal was abandoned.^ ^"^^'^: 

These proceedings, with the rash and presump- j^^^ 
toous bdianonr oi Sir John Child on the wertert 
side of India, exasperated Aureng25ebe, the moat 
powerftil of all the Mogul sovereigns, and exposed 
the Company's estabiishnients to ruin in emy part 
of India. The ibctory at Surat was sei^sed; tht 
island of Bombay was attacl(ed by the fleet oC the 
Siddees ; the greater part of it was taken, and the 
governor besieged in the town and castle. Aiireng>i- 
29ebe issued orders to expel the English fipom Us 
dominieiRs. The factory at Masidipatam was seized; 
as was also that at Visigapatam, wbeuft the Company*s 
agent and sereral of their wrvants wew slain, llie 
English stooped to the most abject snbmisiions* 
With much difficulty they obtained an order for the 
restorationtof the factory at Surnt, and the removal 
of the enemy irom Bombay. Negotiation was com 
tinued, with earnest endeavours, to eiect a recon* 
GiKation. The trade of the strangers was felt in the 
Mogul treasuries; and rendered the Emperor, as 
well as his deputies, not averse to an accommoda- 
tion. Bat the interruption and delay sustained by 
the Company made them pay dearly tor their pre* 
mature amtatkyn, and for the unseasonable insolence, 
or the imprudence of their secants.* 

> These erenCs occurred under the foverameat of the celebrated ii^ 

perial deputy Shaista Khan j <' to the character of whom (says Mr. 
Stewart, Hist, of Bengal, :$00.) it is exceedingly difficalt to dojasUce. 
By the Mohammedaii bistoriaut he b dee9ribed aft the pattern of esoilk 
lence; hut by the English be is vilified aa the oppressor of the huoM* 
race. Facts are strongly on the side of the Mohammedans.'* 

« Brace, ii. 558, 569, 57B, 594, (K)8, 6S0, 630, 639, 641, 646, 650. 
The lively and intelligent Captain Hamilton represents the conduct of 
Sir John Child at Surat as exceptionable in the highest degree. But 
the Captain was an interloper, and though his book is strongly stamped 
with the marks of veradty, his testimony is urJbe received with the 



] 08 Dominion desired. 

BOOK I. During these contests the French found an inter- 

^^^^' ^' rel, in which they improved their footing in India. 

1(589-98. "^hey had foormed an establishment at Pondicherry, 

where they were at this time employed in erectii^ 

fortifications.^ 

The equq)ments for 1689-90 were on a redueed 
scale ; consisting of three ships only, two for Bombay, 
aiid one for Fort St. George. They were equally 
small the succeeding year. We are not informed 
to what the number of ships or yalue of cargo 
amounted in 1691*2. In the following year, how- 
eyjer, the number of ships was eleven'; and was 
increased in 1698-4, to thirteen. In the fidlowing 
year there was a diminution, but to what extent does 
not appear. In each of the years 1695-6 and 1696-7, 
the number of ships was eight. And in 1697-8 it 
was only four. ^ 

It was now laid down as a determinate object of 
policy, that indepehdance was to be established in 
India ; and dominion acquired. In the instructions 
forwarded in 1689» the Directors expounded them- 
selves in the following words : ** The increase of our 
revenue is the subject of our care, as much as our 
trade : — ^'tis that must maintain our force, when 
twenty accidents may interrupt our trade ; 'tis that 
must make us a nation in India ;— 'Without that we 
are but as a great number of interlopers, united by 
his Majesty's royal charter, fit only to trade where 
nobody of power thinks it their interest to prevent 
lis ; — and upon this account it is that the wise Dutch, 
in all their general advices which we have seen, write 
ten paragraphs concerning their government, their 
civil and military policy, warfare, and the increase 

tame caution on the one«ide as that of the Company on the other. 
New Account of India, i. 199-- 238. 

i Bruce, ii, 6^5. « lb. iii. 75, Q7, 122. 1S9, lai,^ 203, 231. 



Armetnans, \QQ 

of their revenue, for one paragraph they write con- book r. 
ceming trade."* It thus appears at how early a ^^^^' ^' 
period, when trade and sovereignty were blended, the j 689.93. 
trade, as was abundantly natural, became an object 
of contempt, and by necessary consequence, a sub- 
ject of neglect. A trade, the subject of neglect, is 
of course a trade without profit. 

This policy was so far gratified, about the same pe- 
riod, that Tegnapatam, a town and harbour on the 
Coramandel coast, a little to the south of Pondi- 
cherry, was obtained by purchase, and secured by 
grant firom the country powers. It was strengthened 
by a wall and bulwarks, and named Fort St. David.^ 

A fact of much intrinsic importance occurs at this 
part of the history. Among the Christians of the 
East^ the Armenians, during the power of the suc- 
cessors of Constantine, had formed a particular sect. 
When the countries which they inhabited were over- 
run by the Mahomedan arms, they were transplanted 
by force, jn great numbers, into Persia, and dis- 
persed in the surrounding countries. Under oppres- 
sion, the Armenians adhered to their faith ; and, 
addicting themselves to commerce, became, like the 
Jews in Europe, the merchants and brokers in the 
different countries to which they resorted;^ A pro- 
portion of them made their way into India, and, by 
their usual industry and acuteness, acquired that share 
in the business of the country which was the custo- 
mary reward of the qualities they displayed. The 
pecuniary pressure under which the Company at this 



« Bruce, iii. 78. « lb. 120. 

' 3 See, in Gibbon, viii. 357 to 360, a trajn of allusions, as usual, to 
tbe history of the Armenians ; and in bis notes a list of its authors. — 
The principal facts regarding them, as a religious people, are collected 
with his usual industry and fidelity by Mosheim, Ecclesiast. Hist. iii. 
493, 494, 495, and 412, 413. 



IIQ I%e Mompoljf challenged. 

900KL time labouredf and undsT which, without ruinous 
^"^•^- consequences, the increase of patronage could not be 
r^^JJ^pureued, constrained the Directors to lode out for 
' economical modes of conducting th^ trade. They ac- 
cordingly gave instructions, that, instead of multiply* 
uig European agents in India, natives, and ecqpedally 
Armenians, should be employed : ** because," to use 
the words of Mr. Bruce, copying or abridging the let- 
ters of the Court, <^ that people could vend English 
wooUens, by carrying small quantities into the inte- 
rior provinces, and could collect fine muslins, and 
other new and valuahle articles, suited to the Euro- 
pean demands, better than any agents of the Com- 
pany could effect, under any phirmaund <hp grant 
which might be eventually purchgsed."^ 

The prosperity which the nation had enjoyed, 
since the death (k Charles I., having rendered capital 
more abundant, the eagerness of the maKsantile popu- 
lation to enter into the channel of Indian enterprise 
' and gain had proportionably increased ; and the prin- 
ciples of liberty being now better understood, and 
actuating more strongly the breasts of Englishmen, 
not only had private adventure, in more numerous 
instances, surmounted the barriers of the Company's 
monopoly, but the public in general at last disputed 
the power of a royal charter, unsupported by PAr- 
liamentary sanction, to limit the rights of one part of 
the people in &vour of another, and to debar all but 
the E^st India Company from the commerce of 
India. Applications were made to Parliament for a 
new system of management in thisjbranch of national 
affairs ; and certain instances of severity, which were 
made to carry the appearance of atrocity, in the ex* 
crcise of the powers of martial law assumed by the 

J Bruce, iii, 88. 



Liter topers. Ill 

Company » m St. Helena and other places, served to BOOKI. 
augment the unfavourable opinion which was now ^"^^-^* 



rising against them/ 1689-98* 

The views of the House of Commons were hostile 
to the Company. A committee, appointed to inves- 
tigate the subject, delivered it as their opinion on the 
l6th January, 1690, that a new Company should 
be established, and established by Act of Parliament ; 
but that the present Company should carry on the 
trade ^exclusively, till the new Company were esta^ 
Uished.^ The House itself in 1691, addressed the 
King to dissolve the Company, and incorporate a 
new one ; when the King referred.the question to a 
committee of the Privy Council.^ 

In the mean time the Company proceeded, in a 
spirit of virulence, to extinguish the hated competi- 
tion of the general traders* *^ The Court," says 
Mr. Bruce, transcribing the instructions of I691f 
*^ continued to act towards their opponents, interlo- 
pers, in the same manner as they had done in the 
latter years of the two preceding reigns ; and granted 
commissions to all their captains, proceeding thi« 
season to India, to seize the interlopers of every 
deeipription, and to bring them to trial before the 
Admiralty Court at Bombay ; — explaining, that, m 
they attributed all the differences between the Com- 
pany and the Indian powers to the interlopers, if 
tbey continued their depredations on the subjects of 
the Mogul or King of Persia, they were to be tried 
for their lives as pirates, and sentence of death pass- 
ed; but execution stayed till the King's pleasure 
should be known/ 

1 Bruce, iii. 81; Maqybenon's Annals, ii. 618; and Adam Smith, 
Wealth of Nations, iii. 132, who with his usual sagacity brings to view 
the causes of the principal events in the history of the Company. 

s Bruce, iii. 83. ^ Macpherson's Annals, ii. 648. 

-» Bruce, iii. 102. 



112 Inter topets, 

BOOK!. The cruelty which marks these proceedings is 
^^^' ^' obvious ; and would hardly be credible if it were less 

I egg.9g strongly attested. The Company seized their oppo- 
nents, and carried them before their own Admiralty 
Courts, that is, before themselves, to judge and pass 
sentence in their own cause, and inflict almost any 
measure of injury which it suited minds, inflamed 
with all the passions of disappointed avarice and am- 
bition, to perpetrate. They accused their competi- 
tors of piracy, or of any other crime they chose ; 
tried them, as they pleased, . and sentenced them 
even to death : as if it were an act of mercy that 
they did not consign them to the executioner before 
the royal pleasure was known ; — ^as if that pleasure 
could be as quickly known, in India, as it could in 
England; — as if the unfortunate victim might not 
remain for months and years in the dungeons of the 
Company, in a climate, where a sentence of im- 
prisonment, for any length of time, to a European 
constitution, is a sentence of almost certain death ; 
and where he could hardly fail to sufier the pains of 
many executions, beside the ruin of his affairs, in a 
land of strangers and enemies, even if his wretched 
life were protracted till his doom, pronounced at the 
opposite side of the globe, could be known. Mr. 
Bruce, with his usual alacrity of advocation, says, 
•' This proceeding of the Court rested upon the 
opinion of the twelve Judges, which was, that the 
Company had a right to the trade to the East Indies, 
according to their charter."^ Because the Judges 

1 lb. iii. 103. Sir Josiab Child, as chairman of the Court of Direc- 
tors, %vrote to the Governor of Bombay, to spare no severity to crush 
their coantrymen who invaded the ground of the Company's pretensions 
in India. The Governor re plied, by professing his readiness to omit 
nothing which lay within the sphere of his power to satisfy the wishes 
of the Company ; but the laws of England unhappily would not let him 
proceed so far as might otherwise be desirable. Sir Josiah wrote back 



King's Charter. US 

said tbey had a right to the trade to the East Indies, BOOK i. 
they assnmed a right to be judges and execu- ^°^^ '^' 
tioners of their feUoW^ subjects, in their own cause, i^^. 
This was a bold conclusion. It was impossible that^ 
under any colour of justice, the powers of judicature 
entrusted to the Company, by kingty without pariia-* 
mentary authority, even if allowed, could be ex- 
tended beyond their own servants, who voluntarily 
submitted to their jurisdiction. Over the rest of 
their fellow-subjects, it was surely sufficient power, 
if they were permitted to send them to England,, 
to answer for their conduct, if challenged, before 
a tribunal, which had not an overbearing Interest 
in destroying them. 

The King of 1693, like the King of any other 
period, preferred power in his own hands to power in 
the hands of the parliament, and would have been 
{deased to retain without participation the right of 
making or annulling exclusive privileges of trade. 
Notwithstanding the resolution of the committee of 
the House of Commons, that pariiament should de- 
termine whatever regulations might be deemed expe- 
dient for the Indian trade, a new charter was granted 
by letters patent from the crown, as the proper mode 
of terminating the present controversies. The prin- 
cipal conditions were, that the capital of the Com- 
pany, which was 756fiOOL should be augmented by 



With anger :-— ^ That he expected his orders were to be his rules, and' 
not tb» laws of £ii|(i8ad, which were an heap of nonsenae, comjMled by 
a few ignorant country [gentlemen, who hardly knew liow to make hws 
for the good of their own private families, mucli less for the regulating 
of Companies, and for^gn commerce.'' (Hamilton's New Account of 
India, i. S88.) ** Ism the more particular,^ adds Captain Hamilton, 
*^ on this account, because I saw and copied both those letters in Anno 
1696, while Mr. Vaux [the GoTemor to whom the letters were ad« 
dressed] and I were prisoners at Surat, on account of Captain Evory'n 
robbing the Mogul's great ship, called the Gunsway." Bruce, iii. 233. 

VOL. I. I 



114 Pecuniary DiJicwHies. 

BOOK I. 744,000/,, SO as to raise it to 1,500,000/. ; that their 
^"^''' ^' exclusive privileges should be confirmed for twenty- 
1693 ^"^ years; that they should export 100,000/. of 
British produce annually ; that the title to a vote in 
the court of Proprietors should be 1000/. ; and that 
no more than ten votes should be allowed to any in'* 
dividual.^ 

The pretensions, however, of the House of Com-* 
mons brought this important question to a different 
issue. Towards the close of the very same season,, 
that assembly came to a vote, ^ that it was the right 
of all Englishmen to trade to the East Indies,, or 
any part of the world, unless prohibited by act of 
parliament:^ and William knew his situation too 
wen to dispute their authority. 

The Comjiany laboured under the most pressing' 
embarrassments. Though their pecuniary difficulties^ 
through the whole course of their history, have beea 
allowed as little as possible to meet the public eye» 
what we happen to be told of the situation at thiS' 
time of the Presidency at Surat affords a liv^ idea 
of the financial distresses* in which they were in* 
volved. Instead of eight lacks of rupees^ which it 
was expected would be sent from Bombay to Surat,. 
to purchase goods for the homeward voyi^, only 
three lacks and a half were received. The debt at. 
Surat already amounted to tweuty lacks ; yet it was 
absolutely necessary to borrow money to purchase a 
CBxgo for even three ships. A loan of one lack and 
80,000 rupees was necessary to complete this small 
investment. To raise this snm^ it was necessary to 
allow to individuals the privileges of the contract 
which subsisted with the Armenian merchants.^ And 

1 Bruce, iii. 133—135. Maq)heiso&'s Amuds, ii.649. * lb. 14i?« 
3 We know not the terms of that eontcact, nor how a pMliGipaition in 

its privileges could be granted to individuals without a bwach of faith 

toward the Armenian merchants. 



(Jreat Men bribed. 115 

after all these exerHons the money could only be ob- ttx>Ki. 
tained by taking it up on loans from the Company's ^^^^ ^' 
servants.^ 161>3*98; 

The Company meanwhile did not neglect the usual 
corrupt methods of obtaining favours at home. It 
appeared that they had distributed large sums of 
money, to men in power, before obtaining their char- 
ter. The House of Commons were, at the present 
period, disposed to inquire into such transactions. 
They ordered the books of the Company to be exa- 
mined ; where it appeared that it had been the prac- 
tice, and even habit of the Company, to give bribes 
to great ihen ; that, previous to the revolution, 
their annual expense under that head bad scarcely 
ever exceeded 1,S00/. ; that since the revolution it 
had gradually increased ; and that in the year 1698^ 
it had amounted to nearly 90,000/. The Duke of 
Leeds, who was charged with having received a bribe 
of 5,000/. was impeached by the Commons. But the 
principal witness against him was sent out of ther 
way, and it was not till nine days after it was de- 
manded by the* Lords that a proclamation was issued 
to stop his flight. Great men were concerned in* 
smotihering the inquiry ; parliament was prorogued ; 
and the scene was here permitted to close.^ 

As the science and art of government were still so 
imperfect as to be very unequal to the suppression of _ 
crimes, ttnd robberies and murders were prevalent 
even in the best regulated countries in Europe; so 
depredation was committed on the ocean under stiii 
less restraint, and pirates abounded wherever the 
amount of property at sea afforded an adequate temp- ^ 
tation. The fame of Indian riches attracted to the 

> Bruce, in. 167. 

< Maq>hersoii*s Annals, ii. 652, 662 ; 10,000/. is said to have been 
traced to the King. 

I 2 



116 Pirates, 

BOOK I. Eastern seas adventurers of all nations; some of 
^^^' ^' whom were professed pirates; others, men preferring 

1693-96. I^oi^^st trade ; though, when thej found themselves 
debarred from this source of profit, by the preten- 
sions and power of monopoly, they had no such 
averrion to piracy as to reject the only other source 
of which they were allowed to partake. The mo- 
deration which, during, some few years, the Company 
had found it prudent to observe in their operations 
for restraining the resort of private traders to India, 
had permitted an increase of the predatory adventu- 
rers. As vessels belonging to Mogul subject^ fdl 
occasionally into the hands of plunderers of the 
. English nation, the Mogul government, too i^orant 
atid headlong to be guided by any but the rudest ap* 
pearances, held the Company respo^siUe for the 
misdeeds of their countrymen ; and sometime pffoi- 
eeddied to such extremities as to oonfiacflt^ . their 
goods and confine their servants. The CompaDy^. 
who woold have been justified in requiriogaid at^he 
hands of government for the remedy of SK> re^ a 
^rievaince, made use of the occasion Hb a favourable 
one for accumulating odium upon the independent 
traders. They endeavoured to confound them with., 
the pirates. They imputed the piracies in general ta 
the interlopers as they called them. In their. c(Hn- 
plaints to government they represented the inter^o^: 
pers and the depredations of which they said they, 
were the authors, as the cause of all the calamities, 
to which, under the Mogul government, the Com* 
pany had been exposed. The charge, in truth, of 
piracy became a general calumny, with which .aU tbe 
different parties in India endeavcwed to blacken 
their competitors ; and the Company itself, when the 
new association of merchants trading to India began 
to rival them, were as strongly accused of acting the. 



Rival Association, 117. 

{lirates in India, as the individual traders had been BOOK I. 
by themselves.^ ' 



Such was the situation of the Company in England, legs. 
and in India, when the inflnenee of the rival associa- 
tion threatened them with destruction. In the year 
1698 both parties were urging, their pretensions with 
Hie greatest possible zeal, when the necessities of the 
^government pointed out to both the project of bribing 
it by the accommodation of money. The Company 
offisred to lend to government 700,000/. at 4 per cent, 
interest, provided their charter should be confirmed, 
and the monopoly of India secured to them by act of 
parliament. Their rivals, knowing on how effectual 
an expedient they had fallen, resolved to augment the 
temptadioii. They offered to advance 2,000,000/. at 
8 percent, provided they should be invested with the 
monopdy, free from obligation of trading on a joint* 
stodk, exc&pi as they themselves should afterwards 
desire.^ 

A hill was introduced into parliament for carrying 
the project of the new association into execution. 
And the arguments dt the two parties were brought 
forward in full strength and detail. ^ 
• On'thepart of the existing Company, it was re- 
presented; That they possessed charters; that the 
infringement of charters was contrary to good faith, 
contrary to justice, and in fact no less imprudent than 
it was immoral, by destroying that security of en- 

* Brace, iiS. 14(1, 18§.. ** Sir Nicokw Wiate [Consol of the Associa- ^ 
tM>a];a(U}f^sed a letler,^ says Mr. Bnioe, ^ to the Mogul, accusing 
the London Company of being sharers and abettors of the piracies, from 
which his subjects and the trade of his dominions had suffered, or, in 
the Consul's coaxwe language, of being thieva and amfederaie* with the 
pirates:' lb. 337. 

'^ Anderson's Uist. Macpherson's Annals, ii. 694. Bruce, iii. 25!J, 
2d3. 

3 Bruce, iii. 253. Macpherson, ii. 694. 



118 ' Bival Astociation. 

BOOK I. gagemento on which the industry of iodiTiduals and 
"^' the prosperity of nations essentially depend : That the 
1^3/ East India Company, moreover, had property, of which 
to deprive them would be to violate the very founda- 
tion on which the structure of society rests ; that they 
were the Lords^Proprietors, by royal grant, of Bom- 
bay and St. Helena ; that they had in India at their 
own expense, and by their own exertions, acquired 
immoveable property, in lands, in houses, in taxes and 
duties, the annual produce of which might be estima^ 
ted at 44,000/. : That at great expense they had 
erected fortifications in various parts of India, by whidi 
they had preserved to their country the Indian trade ; 
and had built fiu^tories and purchased [nrivil^es of 
great importance to the nation ; enterprises to wfaidi 
they could have been induced by nothing but the hope 
and prospect of national suf^rt : That the resources 
and abilities of the Company were proved, by the es* 
timate of their quick and dead stock ; and that a oapi* 

' tal of two millions would be raited immediately by 

subscription : That the prcyect, on the contjrary, of tl»B 
new asfiKKdation made no provision for a determinate 
stock ; and the trade, which experience proved to re* 
quire an advance of 600,000/. annually, might thus be 
lost to the nation, for want of suffident capital to carry 
it on : That justice to individuals, as well as to the 
publicj required the continuance of the charter, as 
the property and even subsistence of many femiUes, 
widows, and orphans, was involved in the fate of the 
Company : In short, that humanity, law, and policy, 
would all be equally violated by infringing the char- 
tered rights of this admirable institution.^ 

The new association replied; That it was no in- 



1 Bruce> iii. 253. Anderson's History iyi Commerce ; Macphcrson, 
ii. 694« 695. 



Rivai Associatioiu 119 

fiiageinent t>f good fisiith or justioe^ to annid, by a BOOK I. 
legislative act^ a charter Which was hostile to the in- ^^^' ^' 



t&es^ of tte nation ; because that would be to say^ i^gg^ 
if a govenuneut has once committed an error, that it 
is not lawful to correct itself; it would be to say that, 
if a nation has once been rendered miserabte;, by erro- 
neous institutions of govei^nmenty it must never try to 
rescue itself frokn its misery : That the practical rule 
d[ the British government, as many precedmts abun- 
•dantly testified, had been, to set at nought the pretend- 
ed inviolability of charters, as often as tbey were 
proved to be unjurofitable or injurious : That not only 
had charters been destroyed by act of parliament, but 
€ven the judges at law (so little in redity was the 
respect which had been paid to charters) had often 
set them aade, by their sole authority, on the vague 
and general ground that the King had been deceived 
in his grant : That, if any chartered body was entitled 
to complain of being dissolve, in obedience to the 
dictates of utility, it was certainly not the East 
India Company, whose chartcfr had been originally 
granted, and subsequently r^oewed, on the invariaUe 
<;Q9dition of being tenninated,aft;er three years' notice, 
if not productive of national advantage : To diqrfay 
the property which the Company had acquired in 
India, and to pretend that it gave them a right to 
perpetuity of chaHer, was nothing less than to insult 
the supreme authdrity of the state ; by telling it, that, 
be the fimitations what they nngfat, under whidi the 
legislature diould gratit a charter, it was at all times 
in the power of the chartered body to annul thoae 
limitations, and mock the legislative wisdom of the 
narion, simply by acquiring property : That, if the 
Company had erected forts and factories, the question 
still remained, whether they carried on the trade 
more profitably by their charter than the nation could 



120 Riwil Astociaiiou. 

BOOK I. carry it on if the charter were destrojed : That tlie 
"^^' ^ -natiop and its constituted authorities »were the sole 

.1698. J^^^ ^ ^^ contro^irersy ; of which the question 
whetheir the nation or the Company were most likely 
to fail in point of capital, no doubt formed a ^ part : 
That if inconvenience, and in some instances distress, 
should be felt by individuak, this deserved considera^ 
tioo, and, in the balance of goods and evils, ought to 
be counted to its fiiU amount; but .to bring forward 
the inconvenience of individuals, as constituting in 
itself acondusive ai^ument against a political arrange- 
ment, is as much as to say that no abuse should be 
ever remedied ; because no abuse is without its profit 
to somebody, and no considerable number of persons 
can be deprived of customary profits without incon* 
venience to most, hardship to many, and distress to 
some.^ 

The new assodators, though thus strong against 
the particular pleas of their qiponents, were debaited 
the use of those important arguments which bore upon 
the.prindple of exdusion; and whidi, even in that 
age, were urged with great force against UieCompany. 
They who were themselves endeavouring to obtain a 
monopoly could not prodaim the evils which it was 
the nature of monopoly to produce. The pretended 
rights of the Company to a perpetuity of their exdu- 
sive privileges, for to that extent did their arguments 
reach, were disregarded by. every body, and an act 
was passed, empowering the King to convert the new 
association into a corporate body, and to bestow upon 
them the monopoly of the Indian trade. The charters, 
the property, the privil^^es, the forts and factories of 
the Company in India^i and their claims of merit with 

> Bruce, iii. 553, 251. AndeFSOn's llibtorjr of Commerce 5 Macpher- 



Constituted an exclusive Company, 121 

the iMttion, if not treated with contempt, were at least BOOK L 
held inadequate to debar the legislative wisdom of ^"^''^ ^\ 
the community from establiidung for the Indian trade ^^^^ 
wiiaterer rules and regulations the interest of the 
public appeared to require.^ 

The following were the principal provisions of the 
dct : That the sum of two millions should be raised 
fay subscription, for the service of govemmenf : that 
this subscription should be open to nativesor foreigners, 
bodies politic or corporate: that the money so advanced 
4should. bear an interest of 8 per cent, per annum : 
that it should be lawful for his Majesty, by his 
letters patent, to make the subscribers a body politic 
and corporate, by the name of the ** General Society :"* 
that the subscribers severally might trade to the 
East Indies, each to the amount of his suhscrip- 
tion : that if any or all of the subscribers should be 
willing and desirous, they might be incorporated into 
a joint-stods: Company: that the subscribers to this 
fund should have the sole and exclusive right of 
traifing to the East Indies : that on three years* notice, 
alter the S^h of September^ 17I1» and the repaym^it 
of the cafNtal of 2,000,000/. this act should cease and 
determine: that the old or London Company, to whom 
diree years' notice were due, should have leave to 
trade to India till 1701 : that their estates should be 
chargeable with their debts : and that if any further 
dividends were made before the payment of ibeir 
debts, the memba*s who received them should be 
responsible for the debts with their private estates to 
the amount of the sums thus unduly received. 

,This measure, of prohibiting dividends while debt 
|s unpaid; or of rendering the Proprietors responsible 

1 Bruce, iii. 255. Macpfaenoo^ ii. 696. 



122 Called the EngUih Company. 

BOOK I. with tfaeir fortunes to the amount of the dindenda 
Chap. 5, ^^^^^ befitted the legislative justice of a nation* 
1698. ^ dause, on the same principle, was enacted wit)i 
regard to the New Company, that thej should not 
allow their debts at any time to exceed the amount 
of their capital stock ; or, if they did, that every pro- 
prietor should be responsible for the debts with hn 
private fortune, to the whole amount of whatever he 
should have received in the way of dividend or share 
after the debt^ exceeded the capital.^ 

This good policy was little regarded in the sequeL 
In conformity with this act a charter passed the 
great seal, bearing date the 3d of September, constitut- 
ing the subscribers to the stock of 3,000,000/. a body 
ccnrporate undar the name of the ^ General Society.'' 
This charter empowered the subscribers to trade, on 
the terms of a regulated Company^ each subscriber 
for his own account. The greater part, however, of 
the subscribers desired to trade upon a joint-stock : 
and another charter, dated the 5th of the same month, 
formed this portion of the subscribers, exclusive of the 
small remainder^ into a joint-stock Company, by the 
name of ^ the English Company trading to the East 
Indies."^ 

^ In all this very material affair," says Anderson, 
^ there certainly was a strange jumble of inconsisten- 
cies, contradictions, and diiScuItks, not easily to be ac- 
comited for in the conduct of men of judgment." ^ The 
London Company, who had a right by their charter 
to the exclusive trade to India till three years after 
I notice, had reason to complain of this injustice, that 

I Statote 9 & 10 W. III. c. 44. 

^ Macpherson's Annals, ii. 699. Brace, iii. 257, S58. Preanable to 
tbe Stat. 6. A. c. 17. 

^ Anderson's liist. of Commerce^ Macpberson^ ii. 700. 



Old^ or LofidaB Company. ^ 123 

the Eagliidi Company were empower^ to trade to BOOK L 
India immediately, wUle they had the poor oompensa- ^^'*^ 
tion of trading for three years along with them* j^^g^ 
There was pdlpable . absudity in abolishing one ex* 
xdusive company, only to erect another; when the 
former bad acted no Otherwise than the latter would 
act. Even the departure from joint-stock manage* 
ment, if trade on the principle of individual inspecticm 
and personal interest had been looked to as the souice 
of improvement, might have been accomplished, with* 
out the erection of two exclusive companies, by only 
abdishing the joint*stock r^^ulation of the old one. 
But the chief mark of the ignorance of pariiament, at 
that tune, in the art and science of government, was, 
their abstracting from a trading body, under the name 
of loan to government, the whole of their trading 
capital; and expecting them to traffic largely and 
profitably when destitute of funds* The vast acU 
vance to government, which they feeUy repaired by 
credit, beggared the English Company, and ensured 
their ruin, from the Ix^ning* 

The old» or London Company, lost not their hopes* 
They were allowed to trade for three years on their 
own charter ; and availing themselves of the clause 
in the act, which permitted corporations to hold stodt 
of the New Company, they resolved to subscribe into 
this fund as largely as possible; and, under the^vi- 
lege of private adventure, allowed by the charter of 
the English Company, to trade^ separately, and in 
their own name, after the thr^e years of their charter 
should be expired. The sum which they were ena< 
bled to appropriate to this purpose was 315,000/.^ 

In the instructions to their servants abroad they 

1 Bruce, iii. 2^6, 257. Macpherson, ii. 700. Smith's Wealth of Na- 
tions^ iiL 133. / 



124 English Company. 

BOOK I. represented the late measures of paiiiament as rather 
^^^^' ^ the result of the power of a particular partj than the 
1698*99.*"** ^ legislative wisdom: •* The Interlopers," so 
thej called the New Conspany, ** had prevailed by 
their offer of having the trade free, and not on a joint- 
stock ;" but they were resolved by large equipments 
^if their servants would only second their endeavours) 
to frustrate the speculations of those cq>poneiits: ''Two 
£ast India Companies in England,*' diese are their 
own words, ** could no more subsist without destroy* 
11^ one the other, than two Kings, at the same time 
regnant in the same kingdom: that nowadvil batde 
was to be fought between the Old and the New 
Company ; and that two or three years must end this 
war, as the Old or the New must give way: that, 
being veterans, if their servants abroad would do their 
duty they did not doubt of the victory : that if the 
world laughed at the pains the two Companies took 
to ruin each other they could not help it, as they were 
ongood ground and had a charter "^ 

When the time arrivetl for paying the instalments 
of the subscriptions to the stock of the New Company, 
many of the subscribers, not finding it ea^' to ftilffl 
their engagements, were under the neces^ty of selling 
tbeir shares. Shares fell to a discount ; and the des<* 
pondenoy, hence arising, operated to produce stUl 
greater depression.^ 

The first voyage which the New Company fitted 
out, consisted of three ships with a stock of 178,000/.* 
To this state of imbecitity did the absorption of their 
ciqiital4reduce their operations. The sum to which 
they were thus limited for commencing their trade but 
Mttle exceeded tfie interest which they were annually 
to receive from government. 

1 Bruce, iii. 257. » lb. 259, 260. ^ lb. UB5. 



Rival^kip cfihe Companiei. IfiS 

With such means the New Company prbved a book r. 
very unequal competitor with the Old. The Equip- ^*^^:^\ 
ments of the Old Company, fbr the same season^ ledS-dO 
1698«99» amounted to tldrteen sail of shipping, 5,000 
tons burthen, and stock estimated at 585,000/. Under 
the difficulties with which they had to contend at 
home, they resdved by the most submissive and re- 
spectful behaviour, as well as by offer of services, to 
cultivate the favour of the Moguls; Their Endea- 
vours were not unsuccessfuL They obtained a graxrt ci 
the towtis of Chuttanuttee, Govindpore, and Calcutta, 
and1)egan, but cautiously, so as not to alarm the native 
government, to construct a fort. It was denonunated 
Fort William; and the statiwi was constituted a 
Presidency.^ 

To secure advantages to which they locdEdd fiaoifr 
thdr subscription of 315,000/. into the stodc of the 
English Company, they had sufficient influence to 
obtain an act of parliament, by which they i were con- 
tinued a corporation, entitled, after the period of their 
own charter, to trade, on their own account^ under 
the charter of the New Company, to the amount of 
the stock they had subscribed.? 

The rivalship of the two Companies produced, in 
India, all those acts of mutual opposition and hos^^ ^ 

tifity, which naturally flowed from the drcumstancM 
in which they were placed* They laboured to sup- 
plant one another in the good opinion of the native 
inlttlMtants and the native governments. They de- 
jfomed one another. They obstructed the operations 
of one another. And at last .their animosities and 
contentions broke out into undissembled violence and 
oppression. Sir William Norris, whom the New 
Company, with the King's permission, had. sent as 

t Bruce, $64, £68, 300. « lb. iii. 993, 326, 350. 



1S6 Union proposed, 

BOQKL their Ambassador to the Mogul court, arrived at 
'^' Sarat in the month of December, 1700. After seve- 
I70Q, ral acts, insulting and injurious to the London Com<> 
pany, whom he accused of obstructing him in all his 
measures and designs, he seized three of the. Council^ 
and delivered them to the Mogul GovenuNr, who de« 
tained them till they found security for their appear* 
ance. The President and the Council were after- 
wards, by an order of the Mogul government, put in 
confinement; and Sir Nicholas Waite, the English 
Company's Consul at Surat, declared, in his cor- 
respondence with the Directors of that Company, 
that he had sdictted this act of severity, because the 
London Company's servants had used treasonable 
expressions towards the King ; and had made use of 
tinr interest with the Governor of Smtit to oppose 
the i»ivil^[es which the Ambassador of the English 
Company was soliciting at the court of the Mogul.^ , 
As the injury which these destructive contentions 
produced to the nation soon affected the public mind, 
and was depkned in proportion to the imaginary be* 
nefits of the trade, an union of the two Companies 
was generally desired, and strongly recommended. 
Upon the first depression, in the market, of the stock 
of the New Company, an inclination on the part of 
that Company had been manifested towards a coaE- 
tion. But what disposed the one party to such a 
HiOBSiire, suggested the hope of greater advantage, 
and more complete revenge, to the other, by holding 
bade from it. The King himself, when he recdyed 
in Mareh, 1700, the Durectors of the London Com- 
pany, on the subject of the act which continued them 
a corporate body, recommended to their serious con- 
sideration an union of the two Con^anies, as the 

I Bruce 260 to 370, 374 to 379, 4 10. 



r/jMon proposed. \^ 

measure whfeh would most promote^ what thef both boori. 
held out as a great national object, the Indian trade. ^■^'•*- 



So fiur the Company paid req)ect to the rojal autho- i*jqq^ 
rity, as to call a General Court of Proprietors for 
taking die subject into consideratioa ; but after tibia 
step they appeared disposed to let the subject loL 
Toward the dose, however, of the year, the King, by 
a special message, required to know what proceed*- 
ings they had adopted in consequence of his advioe. 
Upon this the Directors summoned a General Court, 
and the following evasive resolution was voted: 
^ That this Company, as they have always been, so 
are they still ready to embrace every opportunity by 
which' they may manifest their duty to his MajestTv 
and zeal for the public good, and that they are ded* 
rous to contribute their utmost endeavours for the 
preservation of the East India trade to this kingdom, 
^nd are wiHing to agree with the New Company 
upon reasonable terms.*' The English Company 
were more explicit; they readily specified the con- 
ditions on which they were willing to form a coati-^ 
tion ; upon which the London Company proposed 
that seven individuals on each side should be ap- 
pointed, to whom the negotiation should be entrusted^ 
and by whom the terms should be discussed.^ 

As the expiration approached of the three y^ars 
which were granted to the London Company to con- 
tinue trade on their whole stoi^, they became more 
indined to an accommodation. In their first proposal 
they aimed at the extinction of the rival Company. 
As a committee of the House of Commons had been 
formed, ** to receive proposals for paying off the 
national debts, and advancing the credit of the 

1 Bruce, iii. S90, 393, 355* 

6 



X23 Union proposed, 

BOORL ndtion,^ they made a proposition to pay off the 
^°^'' ^' 2,000^000/. which government had borrowed at usu- 
1701. nous interest from the English Company, and to hdd 
the debt at five per cent. The proposal, though en- 
tertained by the committee, was not relished by -the 
House; and this project, was defeated/ The distress, 
however, in which the Company were now involved, 
their stock having within the last ten years fluctuated 
from 300 to 37 per cent.,^ rendered some speedy re- 
medy indispensable. The committee of seven, which 
had been proposed in the Answer to the King, was 
now resorted to in earnest, and was empowered by a 
General Court, on the 17tfa of April, 1701> to make 
and receive proposals for the union of the two Com-^ 
panics. x 

It was the beginning of Januaiy, in the succeeding 
year, before the following general terms were adjusted 
and approved : That the Court of twentyrfour Ma^ 
nagers. or Directors should be composed of twelve 
individuals chosen by each Company ; that of the 
annual exports, the amount of which should be fixed 
by the Court of Managers, a half should be furnished 
by each Company; that the Court of Managers shcMtld 
have the entire direction of all matters relating to 
trade and settlements subsequently: to this union ; but 
tiiat the factors of each Company should manage 
separately the stocks which each had sent' out pre* 
viously to the date of that transaction ; that seven 
years should be allowed to wmd up the separate 
concerns of each Company; and that, after that 
period, one great joint-stock should be formed by the 
final union of the funds of both. This agreement 



» Bruce, 124. 

< Anderson's Hist, of Commerce^ Macpherson, ii. 706. 



V/dot^ effected* 120 

WAS ooDfirmed bj the General Cdulrta of both Com- boor t. 
patiies on the STth April, 1702.* ^''^^•^' 

An indentUjte tripartitet including the Queeti and ^^(^^ 
the two East India Companies, was the instrument 
adopted for giving legal efficacy to the transacdon. 
For equalizing the shares of the two Companies, the 
foUovring scheme was devised. The London Com- 
pany, it was agreed, should purchase at par as much 
of the capital of the English Company, lent to govern- 
ment, as, added to the 315,000/. which they had 
already subscribed, should render equal the portion 
of each. The dead stock of the London Company 
was estimated at 8S0,000/.; that of the Eng^h 
Company at 70,000/.; whereupon, the latter paid 
130,000/. for equalizing the shares of this part (rf* the 
common estate. On the 28d July, 1703, the inden- 
ture passed under the great seal ; and the two par- 
ties took the common name of The United Company 
of Merchants trading to the East Indies? 

On the foundation on which the affairs of the two 
Companies were in this manner placed, they conti- 
nued, wiMb^considerable jarrings and contention, 
especially between the functionaries in India, tall the 

1 Bruce, iii. 424 to 426. Of the subtleties which at this time entered 
bto the policy of the Compaoy, the foUowing is a specimen. Sir Basi) 
iSnbrace, or Firebraas, a notorious jobber who had been an interloper, 
and afterwards joined with the London Company, was now an intriguer 
for both Companies. At a General Coart of the London Company, on 
the 2dd April, 1701, this man stated, that he had a scheme to propose, 
which be doubted not woold accomplisb the union desired ; but requised 
to know what recompense should be allowed him, if he effected this im- 
portant end. By ah act of the Court, the committee of se^en were 
authorized to negotiate, with Sir Basil, the recompense which he ought 
to receife; and after repeated conferences with the gentleman^ thej 
proposed to the Court of Committees, that if he e£fected the union^ 
150,000/. of the stock of the Company should be transferred to him on 
hu paying 80/. per cent. In other words, he was to receite SO per ceo^ 
on 150y000/. or a reward of 30,000/. for the success of his intrigues* Ibid* 
See also Macpherson, ii. 663. 

• Bruce, iii. 486 to 401. 
VOL. L K 



1S9 Award of 

BOOKL sefi9Qpi 1707-8, when an event oocurred^ .which ne* 
^' ^' cessitated the accommodation of diffe^nces, and 



l'l(^ aooelerated the completion of the union. A loan of 
If^QQJQQQLy without interest, was exacted of the 
two Companies for the use of government. The re- 
collection of what had happened, when the body of 
private adventurers were formed into the English 
^^last India Coippany, n^ade them dread the offers of 
a new body of adventurers, should any difficulty be 
found OB their part. It was necessary, therefore, 
that the two Companies should lay aside all separate 
views, and cordially join their endeavours to avert the 
common danger. 

It was at last agreed, that all differences subsist- 
iqg between them should be submitted to the arbi- 
iiration of the Earl of Godolphin, then Lord High 
Treasi«^r of England; and that the union should be 
rendo^d complete and final upon the award which he 
should pronounce. On t^iis foundation, the act, 6th 
Amie» ch. 17> was passed ; enacting that a sum of 
1,200,0Q0/- without interest sl^ould be advanced by 
the United Company to government, ^i);|)^h, being 
added to the former advance of 2,000,000/. at 8 per 
cent, interest, constituted a loan of 3,200,000/. 
yielding interest at the rate of 5 per cent, upon the 
whole ; that to raise this sum of 1,200,000/. the Com« 
pany should be empowered to borrow to the extent of 
1,500,000/. on their common seal, or to call in 
monevs to that extent from the Proprietors; that this 
sum of 1,200,000/. should be added to their capital 
stock ; that instead of terminating on three years* no*- 
tice after the 29th of September, 1711, their privi- 
leges should be continued till three years notice after 
Ihe 9ffth of March, 1726, and till r^wijrmenl of theif 
capital ; that the stock of the separate adventures of 
the General Society, amounting to 7»200/.^ which had 



the Earl of Godoipbiu. 131 

never been inoarporated into the joint-^stock of the bqok tr 
English Company, mig^t be paid oflF, on three years' ^^' ^' 
notice after the 29th of September, 1711^ and merged i^q^^ 
in the joint-stock of the United Company ; and that 
the award of the Earl of Godolphin, settling the 
terms of the Union, should be binding andcondiuave 
on both parties.^ 

. The award of Godolphin was dated and published 
on the 29th of September, 1708. It referred solely 
to the winding up of the cohcarns of the two Compa* 
nies ; and the blending of their separate properties 
into one stock, on terms equitable to both. As the 
assets or effects of the London Company in India fell 
short of the debts of that concern, they were required 
to pay by instalments to the United Company the 
sum of 96,615/* 4^. 9d* : and as the effects of the 
English Company in India exceeded their debtb, they 
were directed to receive from the United Cooipasy 
the sum of 66,005/. 4s. 2d.; a debt, due by Sir Ed- 
ward Littleton in Bengal, of 80,437 rupees and 8 
anas, remaining to be discharged by the English 
Company on their own account. On these terms the 
whole of the property and debts of both Companies 
abroad became the property and debts of the United 
Company. With regard to the debts of both Compa- 
nies in Britain, it was in general ordained that they 
should all be discharged before the 1st of March, 
1709 ; and as those of the London Company amount- 
ed to the sum of 399,795/. 9*. Id. they were em- 
powered to call upon their Proprietors, by three se- 
veral instalments, for the means of liquidation.^ 

As the intercourse of the English nation with the 
people of India was now destined to become, by a 
rajnd progress, both very intimate, and very exten- 

1 Bruce, iii. 635 to 639 ; Stot. 6 A. c. 17. 
« lb. 667 to 679. I^acpherson, lii. 1, «. 



1391 Subfect of the next two Booh. 

BOOK L Ave, a fiill account of the character and drcumstanecs 
Chap. 5. ^ ^^ people is required for the understanding of the 
1708. ^I'^uent proceedings and events. . 

The population of those great countries consisted 
chiefly of two Races : one, who may here be called the 
Hindu ; another, the Mahomedan Bace. The first 
were the aboriginal inhabitants of the country. The 
latter were subsequent invaders ; and insignificant, in 
point of number, compared with the first. 

The next two Books will be devoted to the pur- 
pose of laying befq^ th^ reader all that appears to 
be useful in what is known 'concerning both these 
classes of the Indian people. To those who delight 
in tracing the phenomena of human nature ; and to 
those who desire to know completely the foundation 
upon which the actions of the British people in India 
have been laid, this will not appear the least inte* 
resting department of the work. 



BOOK IL 

OF THE HINDUS. 



CHAP. I. 

Chronology and Ancient History of the Hindus. 

fCrUDE nations seem to derive a peailiar gratifica* BOOK II. 
tion from pretensions to a remote antiquity.^ As a ^°^^' ^' 
boastful and tur^d vanity distinguishes remarkably """""'~' 
the oriental nations they have in most instances car- 
ried their claims extravagantly high. We are in- 
formed in a fragment of Cbaldaic history, that thape 
were written accounts, preserved at Babylon with 

1 Bflr. Gibbon remarks, (Hist. Dec!, and Fall of the Roman Empire^ 
p. 350,) that the wiM Irishman, as well as the wild Tartar, can point 
out the indi^dual son of Japhet from whose loins his ancestors were 
Rneally liesoended.— According to Dr. Keating (History of Ireland, IS), 
t4)e giant Partbolanus, who was the son of Seara, the son of Esra, the 
son of Srn, the son of Framant, the son of Fathaclan, the son of Ma- 
gog, the son of Japhet, the son of Noah, landed on the coast of Mans 
ter, the 14th day of May, in the year of the world 197Bw— The legends 
of England 'are not less instructive. A fourth or siith son of Japhet 
named Samothes, having first colonized Gaul, passed over into this 
island, which was thence named Samothia, about 200 years after the 
flood ; but the Samothians being some ages afVerwards subdued by Al- ^ 

Sion, a giant son of Neptune, he called the island after his own name, 
and ruled it forty-four years. See the story, with some judicious re- 
flections, in Milton's History of England (Prose Works of Milton, ir. 3. 
£d. 1806). ** The Athenians boasted that they were as ancient as the 
sun. The Arcadians pretended they were older than the moon. The 
Lacedemonians called tbemselres the sons of the earth, &c. such in 
general was the madness of the ancients on this subject 1 They loved to 
lose themselves in an abyss of ages which seemed to approach eternity.'' 
Goguet, Origin of Laws, v. i. b. 1. ch. 1, art. 5. See the authorieief 
there quoted. 



134 Ancient History 

BOOK II. the greatest care^ comprefaendiiig a term of fifteen 

^^^^* ^' myriads of years.* The pretended duration of the 

Chinese monarchy is stiU more extraordinary. A 

single king of Egypt was beKeved to have reigned 

three myriads of years.* 

The present age of the world, according to the 
system of the Hindus, is distinguished into four 
grand periods, denominated yugs. The first is the 
Satya yug, comprehending 1,728,000 years; the 
second the Treta yug^ comprehending 1,296,000 
years; the third the Dwapar yug, including 864,000 
years ; and the fourth the Call yug, which will extend 
to 482,000 years. Of these periods the first thiee 
are expired, and in the year 1817 of the Christian 
em, 4911 years of the last. From the comtAence- 
ment, tiierefore, of the Satya yug, to the present 
time, is comprehaided a space of 8,892,911 years, 
the antiquity to which this pec^le lay daim.^ 

I Eusebii Chnmioon, p. 5. SynoelU Chronograph, p. SB. Bryant's 
Aopieat Mythology, iv. 137. 8to. edit. 

ft Syncelli Chronicon, p. 51. Herodotus iofonns as, (lib. ii. c. 89) 
that tho Egyptiaaa considered theoueWes as the most ancient of man- 
kind, till an experiment made by Psanunetichus coovinoad them that 
the Phrygians alone preceded them. But the iabahitaats of the further 
Peninsula of India make the boldest incursions into the regions of past 
times. The Burmans, we are infonntd by Dr. Bachanan, (As. Aes. tL 
18 ly) beliere that the lives of ihe first inhabitants of their country lasted 
one msenchii, a period of time of which they thus communicate an 
idea : *' U* for throe years it should rain iaoessantly over the whole sur- 
face of this earth, which is l,803y400 jozana in diameter, the number 
of drops of rain fidling in such a space and time, although fkt exceed- 
ing human conception, would only equal the number of years contained 
in one assenchii.'' 

3 Sir William Jones's Discourse on the Chrooelogy of tiie Hindus, (As* 
Res.ii. Utf 8vo £d.) also that on the Gods of Greece, Italy, «id 
India, (Ibid. i. 291.) — See too Mr. Sentry's Remarks on the principal 
£ras and Dates of the aacieat Hindus, (Ibid. v. 315) ; and the Dis* 
co\urseof (Daptain F, Wilford on the Chronology of the Hindus, in the 
same volume^ p. 34. — Omsult also Mr. Marsden's Discourse on the 
Chronology of the Hindus, (Phil. Trans. Usx. 568.) These authors* 
having all drawn from the same sources, display an appearance of uni-» 



of the Hindus i 135 

The contempt with which judicious historians now BOOK ii. 
trebt the historical fables of early society, must be ^^''^' ^". 
indulged with caution when we explore the anci'ent 
condition of Hindustan ; because the legendary tales 
0^ the Hindus have hitherto, among European in« ' 
quirers, been regarded with particular respect ; and 
because^ without a knowledge«of them, much of what 
has been written in Europe concerning the people of 
India cannot be understood.^ It is necessary, there- 

fipnnity ilod c^ruuoty in this part of tlie Hindu syBtem. It is amastng 
to contemplate the wavering results of their predecessors. Mr. Halhed, 
in the preface to his Translation of the Code of Gentoo Laws, thas states 
the number of years, and thus spells the names of the epochs ; 1. The 
Suttee Jogofty 3,900,000 yean; S. TheTictah Jogne, 3y400/X)0 years; 
3. the Dwapaar Jogue, 1,600,000; 4. the Collee Jogue, 400,000.-^ 
Colonel Dow marks the Sattee Jogue at 14,000,000; the Tirtah Jogue 
at 1,080^000; the Dwapaar Jogue, 72)000; and the Collee Jogiiev 
36,000 years. (History of Hindostan, i. S.> — M. Bemier, whose know- 
ledge of India was so extensive and accurate, gives, on the infommtioQ 
of the Brahmens of Benares, the Satya yug at 1^500,000 years, the 
Trettt at l,e00,000| the Dwapar at. 864,000, and assigad no period to. 
' the Call yug. (VoyagiK, ii. lao.y^Messrs. Hogc^r and lie Gentil, who re» 
ceived their accounts from the Brahmens of the coast of Coromtindef, 
coincide, with Sir William Jones,' except that they specify no dnratioft 
for tiie C«li yug. (Porte Ouverte, p. 179 ; Mem. de TAcadem. des 
Scieuces poor 1779, torn. ii« part 1. p. 17'.)—*The account of AnquetU 
-Diiperron egrees in e^ery pardcular with that of Sir W. Jones ; Re^ 
cliecdtoe Hietoriques et Geographsque» sur llnde, Lettre sttr lee Aiitt*- 
quitie de nnde.-— The four iq^ of the Meoiicans bear a remarkable ret- 
eemUanoe to thoee of the liindus, and > of so many other nations. '' All 
thenAtiodsof Aikahuac(say3ClaTigero, History of Mexico, B. vi. sect. 
34,) dtstinguished four ages of tioM by as many suns. The first, named 
. ADenatinhy that ie, the sun (or the age) of water, commenced with the 
creation of the world, and continued until the time at which all mankind 
peiisbed in a general deluge along with the ftrst. san. The second, Tla)- 
tonetittb, the a(^ of earth, lasted frotb the deluge until the ruin of the 
giants, &c. The third, Bh^catomitiuh, the age of air, lasted from the 
destruction of the giants, till the great whirlwinds, &c. The (burtby 
Tlefcenattiih, commenced at the last-mentioned catastrophe, and is to latft 
till the earth be destroyed by iire. 

A The reader will by and bye be prepared to determine for himself 
how far the tales of the Brahmens deserve exemption from the senteaoe 
^hidv four great historians Jiave, in the following passages, pronounced 
on%hefaacifu3tradidons of early nations. <<The curiosity,'' says Mr. 



136 Ancient Histbry 

BOOK II. fora, to relate, that at the oommenoement of the 
,f!!lil Satya jug, or 8,89a>911 years ago, lived Sal^anata, 
otherwise denominated Vaivaswata, and also the 
seventh Menu. He had escaped with his family 
from an universal deluge, which had destroyed the 
rest of the human species.^ Of his descendants were 
two royal branches : the one denominated the child- 
ren of the sun ; the other the children of the moon. 
The first reigned at Ayodhya or Owde; the second 
at Pratisht'hana or Vitora. These families or dynas- 
ties subsisted till the thousandth year of the present 
or Call yug, at which time they both became extinct; 

Home, '* entertained bj ell dTiliied nations, of inquiring into the 
exploits and adventures of their anoestorsy commonlj excites a regret 
that the history of remote ages should always be so much involved in 
^ Dbscorityy uncenaintjy and contradiction. ^ • • The fables which are 
commonlj employed to supply the place of true history ought entirely 
to be disregarded ; or, if any exception be admitted to this general rule, 
it can only be in favour of the ancient Grecian fictions, which are so 
.celebrated and so agreeable, that they will ever be the objects of the 
attention of mankind." (Hume's History of England, i. ch. 1.)^ 
^ Nations,'^ says Robertson, *^ as well as men, arrive at maturity by 
degrees, and the events which happened during their infancy or eariy 
youth cannot be recollected, and deserve not to be remembered, ^ * * 
£very thing beyond that short period, to which well^ttested annak 
reach, is obscure; an immense space is left for invention to occupy; 
each naUon, with a vanity inseparable from human nature, hath filM 
that void with events calculated to display its own antiquity and lostro^ 
And history, which ought to record truth, and teach wisdom, often eels 
out with retailing fictions and absurdities/' (Robertson's History of 
Scotland, i. b. 1.)— Mr. Gibbon, speaking of a people (the Arabians) 
who in traditions and antiquity bear some resemblance to the Hindus, 
says, '* I am ignorant, and I am careless, of the blind mythology of 
the Barbarians." (History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman £a»* 
pi re. ix. 944, 8vo» edit,) Of a people still more remarkably resembling 
the Hindus, he says, '* We may observe, that after an ancient period 
of fables, apd a long interval of darkness, the modem histories of Persia 
begin to assume an air of truth with the dynasty of the Sassanides." 
(lb. i. 341.)—*' Que ante conditam condendamve urbem, poeticis magis 
decora fabuUs quam iucorruptis rerum gestarum monumentis traduntur, 
en pec a^rmare nee refellere in animo est lioia Prefat. 

1 The coincidence in the tradition respecting Sa^avrata and the 
kit tgry of Noah are very remarkable^ and will be (^mkv uoticed berenfteTt 



of tJk KtnduM. 137 

and a list of the names of the successive princes is BOOK IL 
presented in the Sanscrit books.^ ^"^''' ^' 

Satyavrata, the primitive siie^ prolonged his exis- 
tence and his reign through the whole period of the 
Satja yug, or 1,728»000 years.^ From this patri* 
archal monarch are enumerated, in the solar line of 
bis descendants, fifty-five princes, who inherited the 
sovereignty till the time of Rama. Now it is agreed 
amon^ all the Brahmens that Rama filled the throne 
of Ayodhya at the end of the Treta yug. The 
reigns, therefore, of these 55 princes, extending 
from the beginning to the end of that epoch, filled 
1,296,000 years, which, at a medium, is more* than 
28,000 years to eacJi reign. During the next, or 
Dwapar yug, of 864,000 years, twenly-nine princes 
are enumerated, who must, at an average, have 
re^ed each 29,793 years. From the beginning of 
the present, or Cali yug, to the time when the race 
of solar princes became extinct, are reckoned lOOO 
years, and thirty princes. There is a wonderful 
change, therefore, in the last age, in which only thirty* 
t^ree years, at a medium, are assigned to a reign.^ 



1 Sir Wm. Jones^ As. Res. ii. 119, 120, 147. 

• Sir Wm. Jones, 'lb. 1S6. He was the son of Sai7a, (or Soi)^ the 
foa of Casyapii (or l/rantii), the son of Maricfai (or Light), the son of 
Brahma, ^ which is clearly," says Sir Wm. Jones, " an allegorical 
pedigree.'' The Hindu pedigrees and fables, however, being very vari- 
able, he is, in the opening of the fourth book of the Gita, called, no( 
(he son of the Sun, but the Sun himself. Sir Wm. Jones, lb. 117. In 
a celestial pedigree the Hindus agree with other rude nations. There 
is a curious passage in Plato respecting the genealogy of the Persian 
kings. They were descended, he says, firom Adusmenes, sprung from 
Pejpseos the son of Zens (Jupiter.) Plat. Alcib. i. 

a Compare the list of princes in the several yugs, exhibited in the 
Discourse of Sir Wm. Jones, As. Res. iii. 188 to 136, with the assigned 
dnradoA of the yogs. The lineage of the lunar branch, who reigped 
in PraUsht'hana, or Vitora, during exactly the same period, is in ail 
respects similar, excepting that die nnmber of priooes, in the first two 
«ges, is in this line fewer by fifteen than in the line of solar princes. 



IS8 Ancient History 

BOOK n. Beside the two lines df solar and lunar kings, s 
^°^''' ^' different race, who reigned in Magadha, or Bahar^ 
Gonimence with the fourth age. Of these, twenty 
in r^ular descent from their ancestor Jarasapdha 
extended to the conclusion of the first- thousand years 
of the present jug, and were cotemporary with the 
last thirty princes of the solar and lunar race.^ At 
the memorable epoch of the extinction of those 
branches, the house of Jarasandha also faikfl; for 
the reigning prince was slain by his prime minister, 
who placed his son Pradyota on the throne. Fifteen 
of the descendants of this usurper enjoyed the 90Te-> 
rdgnty, and reigned from the date of his accession 
498 years, to the time of Nanda, the last prince of 
the house of Pradyota. He, after a reign of 100 
years, was murdered by a Bi^abmen, who raised to 
the throne a man of the Maurya race, named Chan- 
dragupta. This prince is reckoned, by our Oriental 
antiquarians, the same with Sahdracottos or Sand^ 
racuptos, the cotemporary of Alexander the Great* 
Only nine princes of his line succeeded him, and 
held the sceptre for 137 years. On the death of the 
last, his commander in chief ascended the throne, 
and, together with nine descendants, to whom he 
transmitted the sovereignty, reigned 112 years. 
After that period the reigning prince was killed, and 
succeeded by his minister Vasudev^. Of his family 
only four princes are enumerated ; but they are said 
to have reigned 345 years. The throne was next 

IVom this it has been supposed^ that a chasm mast exist in the gene- 
alogy of those princes ; But surely without sufficient reason ; since, if 
we cuii admit that eighty-five princes in the soiar line could ootlive 
.^ . V the whole thiol and fourth ages, amounting to 9,160,000 years, we mayy 
without much scruple, allow that seventy princes in the lunar ODi|ld 
extend tlirough the same period. 

i~ The reigns of those princes, therefore, must have been fifty yean at 
an average. 



of the Hindns. 13^ 

usurped by a race of Sudras, the first of whom slew BOOK It 
his master, and seized the government. Twenty- _J^^^^ 
one of this mce, of whom Chandrabija was the last, 
reigned during a space of 456 years.* 'The conclu- 
sion of the reign of this prince corresponds therefore 
with the year S648 of the Cali yug, and with the 
year 446 before the birth of Christ.* And with 
him, according to Sir William Jones, closes the 
authentic system of Hindu chronology.® 

It is a most suspicious circumstance, in the pre- 
tended records of a nation, when we find positive 
statements for a regular and immense series of years, 
in the remote abyss of time, but are entirely deserted 



1 As. Res. iL 137 to 142. 

* According to the Brabmens, 4911 years of the Cali yog were elaos* 
«d in the beginning of April, A. D. 1817, from whicfa deducting 964X^ 
the year of the Cali yug.in which the reign of Chandrabija terimnatad, 
you have S263, the number of years which have intervened since that 
period, and which carry it back to 446 years before Christ. 

9 Ai. Res. ii. 149, S.*--We have been likewise presented wkh a geo^ 
alogicai table of the great Hindu dynasties by Captain Wilford, (As. 
Res. V. S41,) which he says is faithfully extracted from the Vishau 
Purana, the Bhagavat, and other Puranas, and which, on the authori^ 
of namerouB MSS. which he had collated, and of some leaned PundtiB 
of Benores whom he had consulted, he exhibits as the only genuine 
^rooological record of Indian history which had yet come to his know- 
ledjse. But this difiers in iramerDoe particulars ffom that of the learoad 
Pundit Radbacant, exhibited by Sir William Jones, and which Sir Wil- 
liam says, *^ that Radhacant had diligently collected from several 
Pm-anas.^' Thus it appears that there is not even a steady and innn 
riable tradition or fiction on this snbieoft : At the same dme that the 
table of Captiiin Wilford removes none of the great difficulties which 
appear in that of Sir Wm. Jones. The most remarkable difference is 
exhibited in the Ime of the solar princes, whose genealogy Captain Wi^ 
ford has taken from the Ramayan, as being, he tliinks, consistent with 
the ancestry of Aijuna and Crishoa, , while that givell^by Sir William 
Jones aud RadhacaDt, he says, is not.— The reader may also compare 
the RajtUurungUf a history of the Hindus compiled by Mrityooojuyu, 
tbe head Sanscrit Pundit in the College of Fort William ; translated and 
published in the first volume of " An Account of tbe Writings, Religion, 
c^i\d Manners of the Hindus,'' by Mr. Ward, printed at Serampore, in 
(p\iT volumes 4to. IQU. 



140 Absurdtiif of 

BOOK II. by fhem when we descend to the ages more nearlj 
^^^' ^' approaching our own. Where annals are real» they 
""^ become circumstantial in proportion as they are 

recent ; where fable stands in the place of fact» the 
times over which the memory has any inflaence are 
rejected) and the imagination riots in those in which 
it is unrestrained. While we receive accounts, the 
most precise and confident, regarding the times of 
remote antiquity, not a name of a prince in after 
ages is presented in Hindu records. A great prince, 
named Vicramaditya, is said to have extended widely 
his conquests and dominion, and to have reigned at 
Magadha 896 years after Chandrabija. From that 
time even fiction is silent.^ We hear no more of the 
Hindus and their transactions, tiU the era of Ma- 
homedan conquest ; when the Persians alone become 
our instructors. 

After the contempt with which the extravagant 
claims to antiquity of the Chaldeans and Egyptians 
had always been treated in Europe, the love of the 
marvellous is curiously illustrated by the respect 
which has been paid to the chronology of the Hindus.^ 
We received indeed the accounts of the Hindu chro- 
nology, not fi*om the incredulous historians of Greece 
and Rome, but from men who had seen the people ; 
whose imagination had been powerfully affected by 
the spectacle of a new system of manners, arts, in- 
stitutions, and ideas ; who naturally expected to aug- 
ment the opinion of their own consequence, by the 
greatness of the wonders which they had been fa* 

1 Sir Wm. Jones, As. Res. ii. 149. 

* Mr. Halhed seems, in his pref. to Code of Gent. Laws, to be very 
nearly reconciled to the Hioda chronology: at any rate he thinks the 
believers in the Jewish accounts of patriarchal longevity have no reason 
tQ complain, p. xxxvii. He has sinbe, however, made a confession at 
« se^nd hand, of an ^Iteration in his belief as to the antiquity of th^ 
Hindus, See Maurice's Hist, of Hindostan, i. 86. 



the Huklu Statements. HI 

voured to behold f and whose astomshment, admira-BOOKiL 
tioD, and enthusiasm, for a time, successfully propa> '^^' ^' 
gated themselves. The Hindu statements, if they 
have not perhaps in any instance gained a literal 
beUef, have almost universally been regarded as very 
different from the fictions of an unimproved and 
credulous people, and entitled to a very serious and 
profound investigation. Yet they are not on]f carried 
tor the wildest pitch of extravagance, but are utterly 
inconsistent both with themselves and with other 
established opinions of the Brahmens. 

Of this a single specimen wiU suffice. The cha^* 
ractar which the Brahmens assign to the several yugs 
is a remarkable part of their system* The Satya 
yug is distinguished by the epithet of golden ; the 
Treta yug by that of silver ;. Tine Dwapar yug by 
that of copper ; and the Call yug is denominated 
earthen.^ In these several ages the virtue, the life, 
and the stature of man, exhibited a remarkaUe di* 
versity. In the Satya yug, the whole race were 
virtuous and pure; the life of man was 100,000 
years, and his stature SI cubits. In the Treta yug, 
one third of mankind were corrupt ; and human life 
was reduced to 10,000 years. One half of the 
human race were depraved in the Dwapar yug, and 
1000 years bounded the period of life. In the Cali 
yug, all men are corrupt, and human life is restricted 
to 100 years.^ But though in the Satya yug men 
lived only 100,000 years, Satyavrata, according to 

> See Sir Wm. Jones, Discourse on the Gods of Greece, Italy, and 
India, As. Res. i. 336. The similarity between the Hindu description 
of the four yogs, and that of the four ages of the world by the Greeks, 
cannot escape attention. We shall have occasion to notice many other 
very striking marks of affinity between their several systems. 

* I have followed Mr. Halhed in the number of years (see Preface 
to Code of Gentoo Laws), though a derivative authority, because his 
statement is the highest, and by consequence the least unfavourable to 
die consistency of the Hindu chronology. In the Institutes of Menu, 



14f UKndu tictiom 

BOOK IL the dirorida^cfd ficti(Hi^ reigned 1,*2^28,000 jem%\ 
^"""^^ ^' in the Treta yug, human life extended only to 10,000 
years, yet fifty-five princes reigned, each at a medium^ 
more than 23,000 years ; in the Dwapar yug, though 
the life of man was reduced to 1000 years, the dur* 
atton of the reigns was even extended, for twenty- 
nine princes held each the sceptre in this period for 
a»,798 years/ 

The wildness and inconsistency of the Hindu state^ 
ments evidently place them beyond the sober limits 
of truth and history ; yet it has been imagined, if 
tittir literal acceptation must of necessity be renounc- 
ed, tliat they at least contain a poetical or figurative 
delineation of real events, which ought to be studied 
lor the truths which it may disdose. The labour 
and ingenuity which have been bestowed upon this 
inquiry, unfortunately have not been attended with 
an adequate reward. No suppositions, however gra- 
tuitous, have sufficed to establish a consistent theory; 
Every explanation has foiled. The Hindu legends 
still present a maze of unnatural fictions, in which a 
aeries of real events can by no artifice be traced.^ 

(ch. i. 83,) human life ibr the Satya yug is stated at 400 years, for the 
Treta yug at 300, the Dwapar 900, and the Call yug at 100 years. 

1 There is a very remarkahle coinddence between the number of years 
specified in this Hindu division of time, and a period marked in a very 
curious fragment of the Chaldean History. The Caii yug, it appears 
from the text, amounts to 432,000 years, and the aggregate of the four 
yag9> which the Hindus call a Maha yug, or great yug, amounts to a 
period expressed by the saroefigures> increased by the addition of a 
cipher, or 4,320,000. Now Berosus informs us, that the first king of 
Chaldea was Alorus, who reigned ten sari, that a sarus is 3,600 .years ; 
that the first ten kings, whose reigns seem to have been accounted 
a great era, reigned ISO sari, which compose exactly 432,000 years« 
the Hindu period. See Eusebii Chronic, p. 5, where this fragment of 
Berosus is preserved ; Syncelli Chronograph, p. 38. See also Bryant's 
Analysis of Ancient Mythology, iii. 95 to 126, for a most learned and 
ingenious commentary on this interesting fragment. 

^ A learned author pronounces them inferior even to the legends of 
the Greeks, as evidence of primeval events, ^ Oriental learning is now 



Marh of a rude Ajge. 1 4t 

The uKternal evide|Kse wtiich these legexids^ dis-BOOKiL 
pifty, afforded indeed, from the beginning, the strong* ^°^^' ^ 
est reason to anticipate this resiilt. The offsfmng 
of a wild and ungov^ned imagination, ihej mark 
the state of a rude and, credulous people, whom the 
marvellous delights ; who cannot estimate the use ci 
a reccnxl of past events ; and whose imagination the 
real occurrences of life are too familiar to engage/ 



employed in unravelling the mythology of India, and recommending it 
as containing the seed of primeval history ; but hitherto we have eeea 
nothing that should induce us to relinquish the authorities we have been 
used to respect, or make us prefer the fables of the Hindus or Guebres, 
to the fables of the Greeks." Vincent, P^riplus <^ the £rithreaa Sea, 
Part i. 9. It.roay be added, that if the Greeks, the most accomplished 
people of antiquity, have left us so imperfect an account ofthejpnmi- 
tive state of their own country, little is to be expected fix)m nations 
confessedly and remarkably inferior to them. 

I That propensity which so universally distinguishes rude nations, and 
forms so remarkable a characteristic of uncivilized society — of filling 
the ages that are past with fabulous events and personages, and of swell- 
ing every thing beyond the limits of nature, mAj be easily accounted 
for. Every passion and sentiment of a rude people is apt to display itself 
in wild and extravagant effects. National vanity follows the example 
of the other passions, and indulges itself, unrestrained by knowledge, in 
such fictions as the genius of each people inspires. Datur fuse venia ~ 
antiquUatiy ut mitcendo humana divinity primordia urbium augustiora 
faciat. (Liv. Pr^.) Of an accurate record of antecedent events, yield- 
ing lesions for the fuCare by the experience of the past, uncultivated 
ijiinds are not sufficiently capable of reflection to know the value. The 
real occurrences of life, familiar and insipid, appear too mean and in- 
significant to deserve to be remembered. Hiey excite no surprise, and 
gratify no vanity. Every thing, however, which is extraordinary and 
marvellous, inspires the deepest curiosity and interest. While men are 
yet too ignorant to have ascerta%ied with any accuracy the boundaries 
of nature, every thing of this sort meets with a ready belief; it conveys 
uncommon pleasure; the faculty of inventing is thus encouraged; and 
hh\es aie plentifully multiplied. It may be regarded as in some degree 
femarkable, that, distinguished as all rude nations are for this propen- 
sity, the people of the East have far surpassed the other races of men 
in the extravagance of their l^ends. The Babylonians^ the Arabians, 
the Syrians, the Egyptians, have long been subject to the contempt of 
£uropeanSy for their proneness to invent and believe miraculous stories. 
JUioian deems it a sarcasm, the bittemesa of which would be universally 
ieltywhen be says of an author, infamous for the incredible stories which 



144 No huiortcal R^arJs 

BOOK n. To tlie monstrous period of jean which the teg^ncb 
^^^' ^' of the Hindus involve, they ascribe events the most 
extravagant and unnatural : events not^ even con* 
netted in chronological series ; a number of indepen- 
dent and incredible fictions. .This people, indeed, are 
perfectly destitute of historical records^ Their 
ancient literature affords not a single production to 
which the historical character belongs. The works 
in which the miraculous. transactions of former times 
are described, are poems. Most of them ture books 
of a religious character, in which the exploits of the 
gods, and their commands to mortals, are repeated 
or revealed. In all, the actions of men<and those of 
deities are mixed together, in a set of legends, more 
absurd and extravagant, more transcending the 
bounds of nature and of reason, less grateful to the 
imagination and taste of a cultivated and rational 
peofde, than those which the fabulous history of any 
other nation presents to us. The Brahmens are the 
most audacious, and perhaps the most unskilful fab- 
ricators, with whom the annals of fable have yet 
made us acquainted.^ 



he bad inserted in his history, that he had attained this perfection in lyings 
Uiough be had never associated with a Syrian. (Quom. Cons. Hist.) 
The scanty fragments which have reached us of the histories of those 
other nations, have left us but little acquainted with the particular tables 
of which they compose their early history. But our more intimate ac- 
quaintance with the people of southern Asia has afforded ut an ample 
assortment of their legendary stories. 

1 << There is no known history of Hindoostan (that rests on the found* 
atton oC Hindu materials or records) extant, before the period of the 
Mahomedan ccmquests.*' Rennel's Memoir, Introduction, zl. The 
Hindus have no ancient civil history, nor had the Egyptians any work 
purely historical. Wilford on Egypt and the Nile, As. Res. iii. 996. 

* If the authority of a Sanscrit scholar be wanted to confirm tliis 
harsh decisiou, we may adduce that of Captain Wilford, who, in hil 
Discourse on Egypt and the Nile, As. Res. iii. 89, thus expresses him» 
self: ^ The mythology of the Hindus is often inconsistent and contiadic^ 
tory, and the same ule is^related many different ways. Their physiology. 



Ancient Hi»tarj^. 145 

Tbe.peoide of Hindustan iat^d the ancirat nations BOOK u. 
of Europe came in contact at a single point, j^^^^^^-^^ 
expedition of Alexander tile Great began, and in 
some sort ended). their connexion* Even of this events 
so recent and remarkable, the Hindus have no record; 
they have not a tradition that can with any certainty 
be traced to it. Some particulars in their myth(do^ 
gical stories have by certain European inquirers been 
supposed to refer tb the transactions of Alexander, 
toit almost any part as well as another of these un* 
natural legends may, with equal propriety, receive 
the same distinction.^ The information which we 



•stionbmy, and hiitory, are i&voWed in allegoriM and enigmaa, wbldk 
cannot but seom extravagant and ridiculoiu ; nor could any thing render 
them supportable, but a belief that Inost of them have a recondite mean- 
ing; though many of them had, perhaps, no firmer basts than the heated 
tmagiimtion of dekoded fiwatios, or of hypociites interested in the wor- 
ship of some particular deity. Should 'a key to their eighteen Pnranas 
exist. It is more Uian probable that the wards of it would be too in- 
tricate, or too stiff with the rust of time, ibr any oselul purpose.^ 

** The Hindti syalem of geography, chronology, and history^ are aU 
equally monstrous and absurd.*' Wilford on the ChronoL of the Hindus, 
As. Res. V. 241. 

Another Oriental scholar of some emineooe, Mr. Soott Waring, says, 
in his Tour to Sheeraz, p. iv. ^ that the Hindu mythology and histoiy 
appear to be buried in impenetrable darlmess.'' 

1 Dr. Robertson (Disqtds. concerning Anc. India, note tlii. p. 301.) 
says, ** that some traditional knowledge of Alexander's invasion of India 
is still presenred in the northern provinces of the f^eninsola, is manifest 
from several circumstances." But these circumstances, when he states 
theift, are merely such as this, that a race of Rigahs chiim to be de- 
floedded fhim Porus, or rather from a prince of a name cfistBOtly resem- 
bling Porus, whi^ European inquirers conjecture may be the sam^. 
The other circumstance is, that a tribe or two, on the borders of ancient 
Bactria, are said to represent themselves as the descendants of some 
Greeks left there by Alexander. The modem Hindus, who make it a 
point to be ignorant of notliing, pretend, when told of the expedition of 
Alexander, to be well acquainted with it, and say, << That be fodght a 
great battle with the Emperor of Htndoostan near Delhi, an^, though 
victorious, retired to Persia across the northern mountains: so that the 
temarkable cireumstance of his sailing down the Indus, in which he. em- 
ployed many months, is sunk altogether/' Major Rennet, Memoir, p. xl. 

VOL. I. L 



Iil6 jjincient History 

BOOK u.haye cecm^ of the Gneek invasion firoib the Greeks 
GnAw -L ^jietnseli^s,. is totremeij acfmty and defective. The 
bte([ of; their writings on the sul^^ect have bee^ laa^t 
but we have no reason to wppose that their know- 
ledge of the Hindus was valuable* That of the 
modern Europeans continiied verj imperfect, after 
tbey had enjoyed a much longer and closer inter* 
course with them, than that of the Greeks. ^ In fact, 
it was not tUl they had studied the Indian languages, 
that they acquired the means of ^U and accurate 
information. But the Greeks, who despised every 
foreign language, made no exception in favour of the *- 
sacred dialect of the Hindus, and we may rest satis- 
fied that the writiilgs of Megasthenes and others 
contained few particulars by which our knowledge of 
the Brahmenical history could be improVed.^ 

From the scattered hints, contained in the writfaigs 
of the Greeks, the conclusion has been drawn, that 
the Hindus, at the time of Alexander's invasion, 
were in a state of manners, society, and knowledge, 
exactly the same with that in Which they were dis- 
covered by the nations of modem Europe ; nor is 
there any reason ferdiflering widely from this ojm- 
nion. It is certain that the few features of which 
we have any description from the Greeks, bear no 
inaccurate resemblance to those which are found to 
distinguish this people at the present flay. From 
this resemblance, from the state of improvement in 
which the Indians remain, and from the stationary i 
condition in which their institutions first, and then | 



1 ItafiRsrds a coofinnfttion of this^ tbat the Oreek» haye left, us no 
accounts, in- any degree la ti afitct ory, of the laaiinefB and- institutions of 
the ancient Pet^ians^ with whom they had to extended an intercourse; 
cr of the mannere and institotions of the £gyptians> w^m they adr 
miredi and to whom their philosophers resorted fer wisdom. 



of the Hindnf. 147 

thdrifiatiiiers and diameter, have a tendency tQ.fix BOOR n. 
ijhimyit is no itere^scmaUe sttf^ositioiii thJit they ^^^^- 
kave {iresciited a very iimfdrm BppetmjaeB'jimmg. jjie 
long interral from the visit of the Greeks t6 thato£ 
the English. Their annals, however, from that era. 
till the period of the Mahomedan. conquests, are a ' 
Mank. 

With regard to the ancient history of India, we 
are still not without resources. The meritorious re^ 
searches of the modem Europeans, who have eacn 
plored the instituticms, the laws, the manners^ the! 
arts, oerapationsand maxims of this ancient people^ 
have enabled philosophy to draw the pictune of so^ 
dety, which they have presented, through, a long re<^ 
volution cff years. We cannot describe the fives of 
their kings, or the circumstances and results of a traini 
of battles* But we can show how they lived together 
as members of the community, and of familJiea; hoiw 
they were arranged in sodety ; what arts they prac- 
tised^ what tenets they believed^ what maqners th^, 
Ae^layed; under what spedes of govemnftent Ubey 
existed ; and what character, as human beings, they 
possessed. This is by far the most useful and im* 
portant part of history ; and if it be true, as an acute 
and eloquent historian has remarked, *' that the^ 
1 sudden, violent, and unprepared revolutions incident 
to barbarians, are so much guided by caprice^ and 
terminate so often in crudty, that they disgust us by 
the uniformity of their appearance, and it is rather 
fortunate for letters that they are buried in silence 
and. oblivion,*'* we have perhaps but little to regtet 
in the tcftai absenoe of Hindu records.^ 



> Hume's Hist, of England, i.. 2, 

* Toute homme du bon enteiideiuent, sans voir une histoire,. peut 
pFe&(}ue iniagin«r d« quelle bumeur fut un pciu(»ie, lorsqu'il lit sea an- 

L 2 



14S Andmt Hntory 

Bcxxn. Whatever theory we adopt with regard to the 
1^' ^* origin of mankiad, and the first peopUng of the world, 
it is natural to suppose, that countries w^e at first 
inhabited by a very small number of people* When 
a very small number of men inhabit a boundless; 
country, and have intercourse only among them- 
selves, they are by necessary consequence barbarians. 
If one family, or a small number of families, are 
under the necessity of providing for themselves all 
the commodities which they consume, they can have 
but few accommodations, and these inqierfect and 
rude. In those drcumstances the exigencies of 
life are .too incessant, and too pressing, to allow time 
or inclination for the prosecution of knowledge. The 
very ideas of law and government, which sufqiose a 
large society, have no existence : men are unavoid- 
ably ignorant and unr^ned ; and if much pressed 
with difficulties, they become savage and brutal.^ 



ciens statuts et ofdonnances ; et d^anlneroe jtigenrnt peut firer en con- 
jediiK qvdies fireat tea lots yoyant sa maniere de Tivre. Etieone Pas- 
quier, Recherches da la France, liv. iv. ch^ 1. The sage President de 
Goguety-on a subject remarkably similar, thus expresses himself: — ^ The 
dates and duration of the reigns of the ancient kings of Egypt are sutgect 
to a thoQsand difficalties, which I shall not attempt' to resolve. 1» 
effisct, it is of little importance to know the number of their dynasties, 
and the names of their sovereigns. It is far more essential to under- 
stand the laws, arts, sciences, and customs of a nation, which all an* 
tiquity has regarded as a model of wisdom and virtue. These are the 
oljects I propose to examine, with all the care and exactness I am ca- 
pable of.'* Origin of Laws, Part I. Book I. ch. i. art. 4. 

> There, is a remarkable passage in Plato, at the beginning of the 
third book De Legibus, in which he describes the effects which would 
be produced on a small number of men, lefl alone in the world, or 
some micoltivated part of it. lie is describing the situation of a small 
number of persons left alive by a flood, which had destroyed the rest of 
mankind-^'Oi roxi ntpipr/ovrtf TH9 ^^fo» 0^ffSe» opffMi TiMf ctt titf w/uifff n 
MOp^tf^ug jrou a/juxpa ^amvpa tou row on^panriM yivoug hoiftffwfffuira.^Kcu 9i) rwg 
TMOVTOUf Y' ^ocyKfi irou ran oXXow earttpwg iacu ti^mmt, xou ra» n rotp af%ai irp^ 
aXXilXovf /<i|^atMw.-~Ot;xot;» opyna rt wcarra ajreXXvo^oi, xat n rt rtytnt i|v ty^twt 
rrouScMif hpyifutw, q xoXivfXfif , it nou 9«fMif Ti99f Wtpaf^ mm §pp9n rovrft o tif 



9f tie Hindus. 149 

If we suppose that lodia began to be inhabited at BOOK ii. 
a very early stage in the pending of the world» its ^^^'^* 



TOTi xp^^^n^^** (Plat. p. 804.) TheJ-Iindus appear tobave had simi- 
hir opinions, though without the reasons. 

"^ We read in the Mahad-himalaya-c'handa^ t^at after a deluge, from 
which rerj few of the homan race were presenred, mea became igoo- 
rant and brutal, without arts or sciences, and even without a regular 
language.'' Wilford on Egypt and the Nile, As. Res. iii. 394. 

lliere is nothing more remarkable in the traditions of nations, than 
their agreement respecting the origin of the present inhabitants of the 
globe. The account of the deluge in the religious books of the Jews 
may very well be taken as the arqlietype of the whole. On this subject 
I witliiigly content myself with a reference to a book of singular merits 
The Analysis of Ancient Mythology, by Jacob Bryant, in which, after 
making ample allowance for some forced etymologies, and much supcr- 
sCidon, the reader will find an extent of learning, a depth of research, 
fad an ingenuity of inference, unrivalled among the inquirers into the 
early history of the human race. Sir William Jones, who regretted 
that Mr. Bryant's knowledge of Oriental literature had not enabled him 
10 bring evidence more laigely from its stores, and thai he had not pur< 
fued a plan more strictly analytical, has prosecuted the same inquiry, 
in a series of Discourses, addressed to the Asiatic Society, on the Hindus, 
the Arabs,' the Tartars, the Persians, the Chinese, &c., and on the Origin 
and Families of Nations; and by a different plan, and the aid of his 
Oriental literature, has arrived at the same conclusions;. 

All inquirers have been struck with the coincidence between the 
story of Noah, and that of the Hindu primeval sire Satyavrata. We 
may suspect that there has been a little Bralimenical forcing to make 
it so exact as in the following passage : — ^Mr. Wilford says, ** tt is 
related in the Padma-Puran, that Satyavrata, whose miraculous pre- 
senratioa from « general deluge is told at length in the Matsya, had 
three sons, the eldest of whom was named Jyapeti, or Lord of the 
Earth. The others were C^arma and Sharma, which last are, in the 
vulgar dialects, usually pronounced Cham and Sham, as we frequently 
hear Kishn for Crishna. The royal patriarch (for such is his character 
in the Pttr&is), was particularly fond of Jyapeti, to whom he gave all 
the regions to the north of Himalaya, in the snowy mountains, which 
extend from sea to sea, «id of whidi Caucasus is a part. To Sharma 
he allotted the oovntries to the south of those mountains: But he 
cursed C^harma; because when the o4d Monarch was accidentally iue- 
briated with a strong liquor made of fermented rice, C'harma laughed : 
ttid it was in consequence of his fether's imprecation that he became 
a slave to the slaves of his brothers.'' (As. Res. iii. 312, 313.) The 
foUowing statement by the same enquirer is confirmed by a variety of 
aulhorities :•— *^ The ^rst descendants of Swayambhava (another name 
for Satyavrata) are represented in the Puranas as living in the mountains 



150 Ancient History 

BOOK II. first itihabitan^is must have been few, ignorant, and 
^^^'^' rude. Uncivilized and ignorant men, transported in 
small numbers, into an uninhabited country of bound- 
less extent, must wander for many ages before any 
great improvement canHake place. Till they have 
multiplied so far as to be assembled in numbers large 
enough to permit the benefits of social intercourse, 
and of some division of labour, their circumstances 
seem not susceptible of amelioration. We find, ac- 
cordingly, that all those ancient nations, whose his- 
toiy can be most depended upon,, trace themselves 
up to a period of rudeness. The families who first 
wandered into Greece, Italy, and the eastern regions 
of Europe, were confessedly ignorant and barbarous. 
The influence of dispersion was no doubt most bane- 
ful, where the natural disadvantages were the great- 
est In a country overgrown with forest, which 
denies pasture to cattle, and precludes husbandry, 
by surpassing the power of single families to clear 
the land for their support, the wretched inhabitants 
are reduced to all the hardships of the hunter's lifej 
and become sav^es. The difiiculties with which 



to the Dqrtli of India, toward the sources of the Ganges, find downward^ 
pis far as Serinagara and Hari-dwar. But the rulers of mankind lived 
on the summit of Meru,' towards the north : ^here.tliey appear to iiai<9 
established the seat of justice, as the |?^^8n|ls make, frequent mentioil 
of the oppressed repairing thither, fiar redress." .Wilford on Chron. of 
IJind.p As. ftes. V, 260. « The Moxicans," (sjnys Clavigdro, Hist of 
Mexico, b« vi. 9cct.,l.) " had. a. clear tradition, tJiopj^h somewhat coo* 
ruptcd by fabl-e, of tlie , creation of the wprld, of the universal, dekige^ 
pf tbo oonfusiou of tongues, and pf the dispersion of the people 5 and 
bad aotuaUy aU ^Iwpe. events r^rjesented i^ their pictures (their sub* 
stitute for writing), 'J.-hey said^ that when mankind, were ovelrwlielmed 
with .tJic, deluge, ikoije w^re preserv<;d but a man and woiaaQ> named 
Coxcoxajjd ^pcUiguebzal, who ^iivedfhefoseives in a little bark, Imd 
lanfding up^n. a nK>ui)£uifi, called Co^buacan, had tb^re 4 gr^at maii^ 
<:hildrmi, who ivqre.di bom,dmnli; but tjiat a cjove at l^t,.fi:oip ar lofty 
tree, imparted tp,tlieiAlai»gwij^(;s; all,. however, /diflfering-sa much, that 
tbtyT: ,904 W uiM .1^1 jdfliifiVw^ ovie ftHoUiei;,'; • . , , . . r ■ : 

7 



of the Iiindu$. 151 

tfaaae iamilaea had >to struggle who first came into jBDOk it. 
£uiJ!o|)e» iseem to have thrown them m/to a ffltnatjoa ^"^^-^ 
but 6sm degrees removed from the lowest stage of 
society. The advantages of India in soil and dimate 
aire so great, Uiat those by whoin it was originaUy 
peopled mi^t sustain no farther depression tlfan 
what seems inherent iii a state of dispersion. They 
wimdered probably £br a^s in. the immense plains 
and. valleys of that productive region, living on fruiisi 
and Ite produce of their flocks and herds, and not 
associated beyond the limits of a particular fiimij^* 
Until the country becaqae considerably peopled^ it is 
not even likdy that they would be formed into smaU 
tribes. As soon as. a young man becam^ in Ins turo^ 
the. heed of a SaeoHyj and the master of cattle, ht 
would find a more ple&tifiil subsistence beyond the 
MBge of his father's flocks. It could only happen, 
a&j&r all the most valuable .ground was occiqaed, that 
dis{tutes would arise, and that, the policy of defence 
would render it an object for. the different brancfaef 
of a family to remaia uktited together, and to msf 
knowlec^ a common head. ! 

When this arrangement takes place, we have ai> 
rived at a new stage in the progress of civil society. 
The condition of mankind, when divided into tribes, 
exhibits considerable variety,, from that patriarclia)i 
association wkioh is . exenipUfied in the history of 
Abraham,* to such combinations a? aire found among^ 
the Taiti^rs^ or that distribution iifto clans, whidi, at 
no distaM period, distinguished the people of Europe. 
Therapidky with which natiofns advance thirotigh 
th§s^ ^verul states of society chiefly i depends -on the 
circumstances which promote population. Where a 
small number of people range over extensive districts, 
a very numerous association is neither natural nor 
convenient. Some visible boundary, as a mountain 



15fi Ancient History, 

BOOK II. or a river, marks out the limits of a common interest; 

^"^^' ^' and jealousy or ^imitj is the sentiment with which 
every tribe is regarded by every other. When any 
people has multiplied so far as to compose a body, 
too large and unwieldy to be managed by the simple 
expedients which connected the tribe, the first rude 
form of a monarchy or political system is devised. 
Though we have no materials from the Hindus, which 
yield us the smallest assistance in discovering the time 
which elapsed in their progress to this point of ma- 
turity, we may so far accede to their claims of anti- 
quity, as to allow that they passed through this first 
stage in the way to civilization very quickly ; and 
perhaps they acquired the first rude form of a na- 
tional polity at ftilly as early a period as any portion 
of the race.^ It was probably at no great distance 
from the time of this important change that those 
institutions were devised, which have been distin- 
guished by a durability so extraordinary ; and which 
present a spectacle so instructive to those, who would 
understand the human mind, and the laws which, 
amid all the difierent forms of civil society, inva** 
riablv preside over its pp^i^ess. 

I Thf c^otiops ioquiper will ^ot probably be Indioef to can* j this 
fn, very far back. *^ The pe^ess of the world,'' says the judicious 
teoguet,'(voi. ill. dissert. 3,) 'disproved by the imperfection of many 
of the arts in the ancient world, and of all the sciences which depend 
upon length of time and experience.*' pj the newness of the world, he 
'ineai^s the newness of human society. In examining the remains of 
organised bodies which have been extricated from the bowels of the 
earth, vegetables aie found at the greatest depth; immediately above 
them small shell-fish, and some of the most imperfect specim^s of the 
animal creation; nearer the surface quadrupeds, and the more perfectly 
organized animals: lastly man, of* whom no remains have ever been 
found at any considerable depth. The inference is, that, compared with 
the other organized beings on this globe, man is a r^ent creation. See 
*f ^rkinson's Organic Remainst 



ChttificatioH. 1S$ 



CHAP. II, 

Classification and Distribution of the People. ^ 

The transition from the state of tribes to the more book it. 
regulated and artificial system of a monarchy and '^^'^ 
laws is not sudden ; it is * the result of a gradual 
preparation and improvement. That loose mdepen- 
deace^ which suits a small number of men, boimd to^ 
gether by an obvious utility, scattered over an exten- 
sive district, and subject to few interferences of in^ 
dination. or interest, is found productive of many in- 
conveniences, as they advance in numbers, as their 
intercourse becomes more dose and complicated, and as 
their interests and passions more firequently dasfau 
When quarrels arise, no authority exists to which the 
parties are under the necessity of referring their 
disputes. The punishment of delinquents is provided 
for by no preconcerted regulation. When subsistence 
by the multiplication of consumers, can no longer be 
d>tained without considerable labourj^ the desire to 
encroach upon one another adds extremely to the 
occasions of discord : and the evils and miseries, which 
prevail, exdte at last a desire for a better regulation 
of their common affairs. But slow is the progress, 
made by the human understanding, in its rude and ig- 
norant state. No little time is spent; first, in maturing 
the conviction that a great reformation is necessary ; 
and next, in conceiving the plan which the exigency 
requires. Many partial remedies are thought of and 
applied ; many failures experienced ; evils meanwhile 
jnprease^ and pfcs^ more severely ; at h&t men become 

6 



lAI Classijicaiion 

BOOK IL weary and disgusted with the condition of things, and 
^^^^' ^' prepared for any plausible change which may be sug- 
gested to them. In every society there are superior 
spirits, capable of seizing the best ideas of their times, 
and, if they are not opposed by circumstances, of ac- 
celerating the progress of the community to which 
they belong. The records of ancient nations give us 
reason to believe that some individual of this descrip- 
tkm^ exalted to authority by his wisdom and virtue, 
has generally accomplished the important ta^ of first 
establishing among a rude people a system of govern- 
ment andiaws» 

It may be regarded as a characteristic of this ^^ 
mary institution of government, that it is founded upon 
divine amthority. The superstition of a rude people 
is' peculiariy suited to such a pretension. Whil^ 
ignorant and solitary, men are perpetually haunted 
with the apprehension of superior powers ; and, as in 
this state only they can be imposed upon by the a»- 
jun^tion of a divine charactw and commission, so it 
is* evidently the most effectual means which a great 
Imaii, fuU of the spirit of improvement, can employ, to 
indnee a people, jealous and impatient of all restraiht, 
16 forego their boundless liberty, and submit to the 
«Urb of authority.* 



' 'Thene is' scarcely an exception to this rule. Minos often retired into 
dt cshe^ wheite lie boasted of having fttmiliar ooDv^rsatkms with Japit^rl: 
Mueues, the great legislator of Egypt, prbclai^ed Hermes as the apthor 
of Jiis laws : it was by the direction of Apollo that LycUrgus undertook 
*lhi reformatioVi of Spafta: Zaleucus, the legislator of the Locrians, gave 
9at thet^fi ms, ias]^ire$d by Minerva': Zathraipes^ among the ArimiM- 
.pians, prj^tended* that bis laws- w^re revealed to ^ivf, by oiie of their 
divinities : Zaipolxjs boasted to the Getes of his intimate communications 
ivhh the'^d^less S^ekkV tbcf pfetenaioiis of jJJulna among the Romans 
Sarewi^U. kpbwav ^Secr Gognst, Ongib V)f' Laws/fmrt 11. bodk I. ch. L 
art. 9.) The Pfuids, amo^g ^he.a^cieDt.BntDne and Gauls^ w^re at 
oiice tlie legislators, and the confidants of the Divinity. Odin, who 'was 
•hitii^elf « Di1/^Hl^)'asi<! Iiis desecbtlantSy iirfao pahoGfL of Ms- nature, were 



of the People. 155 

No where among' mankiiid haw the lairs mh1bO0K tl 
oidinanoe^ been ipore exckiavely lefo^red to the 5^^J^_^;, 
Divinity, thatn* by those who instituted the theocracy' 
of Hindustan. The plan of society and governmenit^ 
the rights of persons and things, even the custon^ 
arrangements, and manners of private and domestic ^ 

life; every thing, in short, is established l)y. divine 
prescription. The fin* legislator of the Hindus, whose 
name it is impossible io trace,. appears to have repte* 
sented himself as the repuUisher of the will of God* 
He informed his countrymen that, at the beginning of 
the world, the Creatca* revealed his duties to man, in 
four sacred books, entitled Vedas ; that during the 
first Bge, of immense duration, mankind obeyed them, 
and wei^ l^^ppy ; that during the second and third 
they only partially obeyed, and their happiness was 
proportionally diminished ; that since the commence- 
ment of the fourth age disobedience and misery had 
totally ]n*evai]ed, till the Vedas were forgotten arid 
ket;^ that now, however^ he was commissioned to 
reveal them anew t^ h» countrymen, and to daim 
their obediences •. - 

* The leacfing institutions o€ the Hindus bear evidbiiee 
thali they were devised at a very ^remote peridd, whefa 
sociiety yet retained it^ruotestahd simplest form. .86 
long as men roam in 'the pastoral state,^ noi£visipn of 
dasse!^ or of labour is known; Every individuBl is a 
shepherd, smd every fi^nily provides for itself 'the axa^ 
mbditieg With which it is snpidied* As isoon as ^tfail 

^Kq legit^at^s gf.the 3candipaviaQ9. ^' Tiie. legislators f^f the SCjfthipns,:' 
says Mallet (Introd, to tiist. ofDenniark^.ii.^S,) " represented God hira- 
is'eff as tlie author of iie laws tvhich they gave to their fellow-citizdns." ' 
, 1 This is a nmsstry supposition, as the geaeration to ttboni tfaeVedw 
were 6f>t presented must have knowu that th^y had no prK^io^s, ao- 
qualntance tvith them, and could not believe that they had remained 
fiMlHliar to mbrtalsfrom the p«nod of their ^rst reivelation; ' - 



156 Classification 

BOQKU, cultivation of land, which yields a move -secure and 
'*^'^' plentiftil subdstenoe, occupies a great share of the 
ocmimon attention, the inconvenience of this universal 
mixture of employments is speedily felt. The Labours 
of the fidd are neglected, while the cultivator is en- 
gaged at the loom, or repelling the incursions of an 
enemy. Hb clothing and lodging are inadequately 
provided for, while the attention of himself and his 
£Eunily are engrossed by the plough. Men quit not 
easily, however, the practices to which they have been 
accustomed; and a great change in their manners 
and affairs does not readily suggest itself as a remedy 
for the evils which they endure. When the Hindus 
were lingering in this uneasy situation, it would 
appear that there arose among them one of those su^ 
perior men, who are capable of accelerating the im- 
provement of society. Perceiving the advantage 
which would accrue to his countrymen from a division 
of employments, he conceived the design of overcom- 
ing at once the obstacles by which this regulation was 
retarded ; and clothii^ himself with a Divine charao 
ter, estaUished as a positive law, under the sanction 
of Heaven, the classification of the people, and the 
distribution of occupations. Nor was it enough to 
introduce this vast improvement; it was right to 
secure that the original members of the different 
classes should be supplied with successors, and that 
the conmiunity should not revert to its former con- 
fusion. The human race are not destined to make 
many steps in improvement at once. Ignorant that 
professions, when once separated, were in no danger 
of being confounded, he established a law, which the 
circumstances of the time very naturally suggested, 
but which erected a barrier against fiirther progress ; 
that the children of those who were assigned to each 



^ the People. \tff 

of the classes, into whieh he distributed the peojde, >00K fr. 
should invoriaUy follow the oocupoAion of their father ^°^^* ^ 
through all generations. 

The classification instituted hy the author of the 
Hindu laws is the first and simplest form of the divi^ 
sion.of labour and employments. The priest is a 
character found among the rudest tribes ; by whom 
he is always regarded as of the highest importance* 
As soon as men begin to have property, and to cul- 
tivate the ground, the necessity of defenders is power* 
fully felt ; a class,' therefore, of soldiers, as well as a 
dass of husbandmen, becomes an obvious urangement. 
Tha^ are other services, auxiliary to these, and ne* 
cessary to the well-being of man, for which it still 
remains necessary to provide. In a state of great 
simplicity, however, these oth» services are few, and 
easUy performed. We find accordingly that the 
Hindu legislator assigned but one class of the com- 
munity to this department. The Hindus were thus 
divided into four orders or castes. The first were the 
Brahmens or priests ; the second, the Cshatriyas or 
soldiers ; the third, the husbandmen or Vaisyas ; and 
the fourth, the Sudras, the servants and labourers.^ 

1 There is an instructive passage in Plato (De Repuh. lib. ii.) in 
which he ascribes the origin of political association and laws, to the 

division of labour ; Tirp%reu woXi;, wg tyiSfiou, tirttton rvy^oan fifum tnoircg wx 

avTopxitg^ aXXa iroKKujti ty9tiif. From this cause, he sayS) men are obliged^ 
to associate, one roan affording one accommodation, another another, 
and aU exchanging the accommodations which each can provide, for the 
different accommodations provided by the rest. It is curious that, in 
limiting the simplest form of a political association, he makes it to consist 
of four or five classes of men. AXX« /kcv ^fum yi xat fuytrn rw» )y**o», ^ -njc 
T^?f irtLpaeytmni, ^tvrtpa h otxnc»»s^ rptrn. fff^-nf kou ran rotouTW, • • • Eii| 
r«> jf Y« CMcyxduoTem) jroXif in Trrotpw ri fnrrt ai>8^b;».'— That SBgacious COntem- 

plator of the progress of society, Millar, describing the ancient state of i 
the Anglosaxons, remarks, that the people of England were then divided ) 
into four great classes, the artificers and tradesmen, hiisbandmen, those 
who exercised the honourable profession of anns, and the clergy. He 
adds, ^ From the natural course of things it should seem that, in ever; 



169 Ctassifitutiou. 

HOOK u. On this diritian 0f the peofle^ and the privileges or 
^^^^* ^ disiKlTatitfkfeft minexed to the seyeral cast^as, tfae whote 
frame of Hindu society so mudi depends, that it s 
ait (Ayect of primary importance^ aQd merits a full 
elud<ktion» 

country where reli^ou has had so much influence ^s to introduce a great 
body of eeclesiasticsy the people, upon the first advance made in agri* 
ciikttre and in nanufactpres, are usually distiiboted into the 8am« 
number of class^ or orders. This distribution is accordingly' to be 
found not only in all the European nations, formed upon the ruins of the 
Roman empire; but in odier ages^and in very distant parts of die globe* 
The andent inbabi(antft of Egypt are said to have been divided into the 
clergy, the military people, the husbandmen, aud the artificers. The 
establishment of the four great! castes, in the country of Indoitan, is pre- 
dsdy of the sane nelxiiv.'' (MiUar'» Historical View of the Bn^sh 
Government^ book L cfa. xi.) Jn Egypt the people wexie divided by law 
111 the saipe hereditary manner as iu Ilindostan. It is highly worthy of 
observation that, notwithstanding all the revoluti6ns and dirges to 
Ifhish Egypt has been. si4»jecl« aooie remains of^ the din^ion ijatofoastes 
arc yet visible. '' Ia distinction par families se retrouve encore dans 
les villes ; Texercice des arts et metiers est hereditaire^ le fils imite tes 
proced€9 d^ son peve, et ne les perfectionne pfts." (Le General Reynier, 
De yEgjf^,^* 59.) ' It is worthy of observation that the Golchians and 
Iberians were also divided into four castes, whose rank and office were 
hereditary and unchangeable. (Herodot. lib. ii. cap. civ. cv. Strabo, 
Kb. ii. J6L See also Bryant's Ancient Mythology, v. 102, 107.) le 
tome sitqetiotis this ^tep in dvilitetio*, natural and simple as it may 
appear, is' hot easily made. How long have the wandering Arabs re- 
mained without it ? What an improvement wnuW the bare institution 
of the Hindu classes be upon their condition ? and what merit would the 
legislature have, who should introdjice it ? The same observation is 
applicable to the Tartars. 

There is a passage in Herodotus which leads us to conclude, that the 
distinction of castes existed among the Medes, at the commencement 
of the monarchy. He says (lib. i. cap. ci.) Eci Mvt^ roo-oAt Yf>««, 

Bov^ou, ncifi|raxi)yos Sr^ov^arif, Api^avroi,D«/$<oi, Mayoi. He sayS nothing to fix 

the meaning of the word yivia. But we know that the Moyoi were the 
priestSy and hence there is matter of proof to make us suppose, that the 
other names, in like manner, express separate castes, or hereditary 
classes and professions. « 

The Persian Monarch Jemsheed is said to have divided the Persians 
into four classes. Malcolm's Hist, of Persia, i. SOS. 

In like manner among the Peruvians, *^ Les citoycns,'^ to use the 
language of Carli (Lettres sur TAmerique, let. xiii.) " furent distribucs 
en classes ou tribus. * * II n*etoit pas permis, ni par mariage, ni par 
changeme^t d*habitation^ dc coufondre une classe avec Tautre.'' Iu 



The BraAmem. l£9 

L The piifistlibod is gentaUy fbiiiid to mmp tlue* boor IL 
gsealmfc a«tthority^ in the lowest, state of « society, ^^^-^^ 
Knowledge^ abd refined omic^ptions of the' Divincf ^ 

nature^ are altogether incompatible vfiHb the ^suppo^ 
sition^ that the Deity makes favourites of aipaiiieular 
class of mankind, or is move .pleased with those whd 
perform a ceremonial service to himself, than witk 
those who^scharge with fidelity the various and di& 
ficult duties of life. It is only in rude and ignorant 
times that men are so overwhelmed with the power ' 
c£ superstition as to pay unbounded veneration and 
obedioBC^ to those who artfully clothe themselves with 
the tenrora of religion*^ The Brahmeiis* among the 
Ifindus have acquired; and maintained an. authority, 
more exalted, more commanding, and CKtensiy^ than 
the priests have been able to engross among any other 
portion of mankind. ' As great a distance as' there is 
between the Brahmen, and the Divinity^ 90 gieat.a 
distance is there between the Brahmen and the. Tcstt 
of his fpedes. According to the sacred books of the 
Hindus, the Brahmen proceeded fraia the mouth ci 

Let. xiv. it 18 added, '* L'education consistoit k apprendre anx enfans 
x&Uiriers le metier que cbaqna p^re de famiMe exercoit/'&c. Clavi- 
g»ro, too, respeeting the Mexicans; tells us, (ULst. of Mexico, book tii« 
sect. V.) *' The sons in general learned the trades of their fathers, and 
embraced their professions, &c. 

In PUta'ftllmsfis, (p. 1044» £d. Kciiu Fnuicof. 1003,) is a corious 
passage, which asserts that the same division of professions, which stiU 
existed among the Egyptians, existed, at a period long antecedent, 
0mong the Athenians : tl^ofrov /rnr ro rw> Uqwn yiMf, tan rw* aXXftw "xpaftf 
a^«M^7/RCfoi>* /tira Z* rwr9^ n tm* Sij^iv^yimr, ir« w9 hm ixcrw oXA^i It tat tn^ 
fuywfuwv Irifutigyti' ro ri row w/ihov xcu rmv ^Tugtvron* ^t rt run yicv^ciw* mat $i} r% 
fue)(tjM¥ yifCf, edto fraarrtm ran ytvan xrj(atgiff/jitwif, Stg «$(» aX\o irKnv ret vt£t Vov 

> It was in the dark ages that the Romish priesthood usurped so 
many privileges. Our ancestoni were barbaroos whea the Draidd ex- 
ercised over them an uaUmite^ authpiit^. . Tlie soothsayers and priests 
anpoft the Greeks, and Romaic lo«t their inftaence asikjBowkdgeiiw 
creased. Among the rude inhabitaQts of Mexico aad Peru, the ajitbo* 
rity of the priest equalled or superseded that of the king, atadiit'tts 
united in the same person. . ^ - ' * 



160 1^ Brahneni. 

BOOK ihtbie Creator^ which is the seat of wisdom ; the Csha* 
^^^' ^' trya proceeded from his arm ; the Vaisy^ from Us 
thigh» and the Sudira fircnt his foot ; th^efore is the 
Brahmen infinitely superior in worth and dignity to 
all other human beings.^ The Brahmen is dedared 
to be the Lord of all the dasses.^ He alone» to a 
0eat degree^ engrosses the regard and favour of the 
Deity ; and it is through him, and at Ins intercession^ 
that blessings are bestowed upon the rest of mankind. 
The sacred books are exclusively his ; the highest of 
the other classes are barely tolerated to read the 
word of God ; he alone is worthy to expound it. 
The first among the duties of the civil magistrate^ 
supreme or subordinate^ is to honour the Brahmeiis.^ 
l%e slightest disrespect to one of this sacred order is 
the most atrocious of crimes. ^ For ^xmtumelious Ian-* 
guage to a Brahmen,'' says the law of Menu,^ ^' a 
Sudra must have an ircm style, ten ' fingers long, 
thrust red hot into his mouth ; and for offering to 
give instruction to priests, hot oil must be poured 
into his mouth and ears.'' ^^ If," says Halhed's code 
of Gentoo laws/ ^^ a Sooder sits upon the carpet of a 
Brahmen, in that case the magistrate, having thrust 
a hot iron into his buttock, and branded him, shall 
banish him the kingdom ; or else he shall cut off his 
buttock." The following precept refers even to the 
most exalted classes : *' For striking a Brahmen even 
with a blade of grass, or overpowering him in ai*gu- 
ment, the offender must soothe him by falling pros- 
trate."^ Mysterious and awful powers are ascribed 
to this wonderful being. ^ A priest, who well knows 

1 Laws of Memi, ch. i. « lb. x. *« lb. vii. 

^ lb. viii. 971, 9. *^ From h\% higb birth alone, a Brahmen is air 
olject of veneration even to deities; his declarations to mankind are 
decisive evidence } and the Veda itself confers on bim that character.** 
' lb. xi. 85. 

* lb. X. 1. « lb. X. 90a. 



The Brahmens. 161 

the law, needs not complain to the king of any book if. 
grievous injury ; since, even by his own power, he "^^""^ ^' 
itaay chastise those who injure him : His own power is ^ 

mightier than the royal power ; by his own might 
therefore may a Brahmen coerce' his foes. He inay 
use without hesitation the powerful charms revealed 
to Atharvan and Angiras ; for speech is the weapon ^ 

of a Brahmen: with that he may destroy his op- 
pressors,*** " Let not the king, although in the 
greatest distress, provoke Brahmens to anger; for 
they, once enraged, could immediately destroy him 
with his troops, elephants, horses, and cars. Who 
without perishing could provoke those holy men, by 
whom the all-devouring flame was created, the sea 
with waters not drinkable, and the moon with its 
wane and increase ? What prince could gain wealth 
by oppressing those, who, if angry, could frame other 
words and regents of worlds, could give being to 
other gods and mortals? What man, desirous of 
life, would injure those, by the aid of whom worlds 
and gods perpetually subsist ; those who are rich in 
the knowledge of the Veda ? A Brahmen, whether 
learned or ignorant, is a powerful Divinity ; even as 
fire is a powerful Divinity, whether consecrated or^ 
popular. Thus, though Brahmens employ them- 
selves in all sorts of mean occupations, they must 
invariably be honoured ; for they are something tran 
scendently divine."^ Not only is this extraordinary 
respect and pre-eminence awarded to the Brahmens ; 
they are allowed the most striking advantages over ; 

all other members of the social body, in almost every 
thing which regaixls the social state. In the scale of 
punishments for crimes, the penalty of the Brahmen, 
in almost all cases, is infinitely milder than that of 

» LawBof Menu, ch. xi. 81, 32, 33. 3 lb. ix. 313—319. 

VOL. I. M 



163 Ciuiei. 

300K II. the inferior castes» AUhough puniahmeot is remark^ 
"^*^' ably cruel and sanguinary for the other classes of the 
Hindus, nather the life nor even the property ef a 
Brahmen can be brought into danger by the most 
atrocious offences. ** Neither shaU the king,** say» 
one of the ordinances of Menu,' ** slay a Brahmem 
though convicted of all possible crimes: Let him 

^ banish the offender from his realmi but with all hia 

property secure, and his body unhurt.*^ In regulatii^ 
the interest of money, the rate which may be taken 
from the Brahmens is less than what may be ex- 
acted from the other classes,^ This privileged order 
ei\joy the advantage of being entirely enempt from 
taxes : '' A king, even though dying with wanty 
must not receive any tax from a Brahmen learned 
in the Vedas.**^ Their influence over the govern- 
ment is only bounded by their desires, since they 
have impressed the belief that all laws which a Hindu 
is bound to respect are contained in the sacred books ; 
that it is lawful for them alone to interpret these 
hocks ; that it is incumbent on the king to employ 
thetn as his chief counsellors and ministers, and to 
be governed by their advice. •^Whatevo- order,'* 
says the code of Hindu laws^^ '* the Brahm^is shall 
issue conformably to the Piaster, the magistrate^ 
shiA take his measures accordingly."^ These pre- 
rogatives and privileges, important and extraordinary 
as they may seem, afford, however, but an imparfiM^t 

> Laws of MeDU, ch. viii. 380. « lb. viii. ' lb. vti. 133. 

^ Halhedy Preface to the Code of Gentoo Laws. 

3 The Dniidft among the aiKMt BHtotu, as there was ik striking eimt* 
larity ia many of tlie doctrines which they taaght, so possessed many 
similar privileges and distinctions to those of the Brahmens. Their 
persons ^ere inviolable; they were exempt fh}m taxes and military 
aarvice ; they exercised the legisUtiva, judicative, and, wit^ tin excep- 
tion of commanding armies in the field, almost the whole of the execu- 
tive powers of government. Csesar, De Bell. Oal. lib. vi. IS, 14. 
Henty'i Hiet. of Gveat Britain, i. 30S, 317. 

8 



The Srahmens. 16S 

idea of the influence of the Brahmens in the inter- BOOK n. 
course of Hindu Society. As the greater part of ^°^''' ^' 
life among the Hindus is engrossed by the perform- 
ance of an infinite and burdensome ritual, which 
extends to almost every hour of the day, and every 
function of nature and society, the Brahmens, who 
are the sole judges and directors in these complicated 
and endless duties, are rendered the uncontrolaM^ ^ 
masters of human life. Thus elevated in power and 
privileges, the ceremonial of society is no less re- 
raaiicably ift their favour. They are so much supe- 
rior to the king, that the meanest Brahmen would 
account himself polluted by eating with him, and death 
itself would appear to him less dreadful than the de- 
gradation of permitting his daughter to unite herself 
in marriage with his sovereign. With these advan* 
tages it would be extraordinary had the Brahmens 
ne^ected themselves in so important a circumstance 
as the command of property. It is an essential part 
of the religion of the Hindus, to confer gifts upon ^ 

the Brahmens. This is a precept m(»re frequently 
repeated than any other in the sacred books. Gifte 
to the Brahmens form always an important and 
essential part of expiation and sacrifice.^ When » 

\ 

I See the Laws of Menu, passim. ** The organs of sense and action, 
reputation, a heavenly mansion, life, a great name, children, cattle, arf 
all destroyed by a sacrifice offered frith trifling presents : let no man 
therefore ^ sacrifice without liberal gffts.* lb. xi. 40. " Let every man, 
according to his ability, give wealth to Brahmens detached firom the 
world and learned in scripture; such a giver shall attain heaven after 
this life." lb. xi. 6. ** Having feckoned up the persons whom the Brah- 
men is obliged to support, having ascertained his Divine knowledge and 
moral conduct, let the king allow him a suitable maintenance from his 
own household ; and, having appointed him a maintenance, let the king 
protect him on all sides, for he gains from the Brahmen whom he pro- 
tects a sixth part of his virtue." lb. xi. S2, 23. " Of that king iu 
whose dominions a learned Brahmen is afflicted with hunger, the whole 
kingdom will in a short time be afflicted with famine.'^ lb. vii. 1 14. 

M 2 



164 Castes. 

BOOK II. treasure is found, which, from the general practice 
°^'*' ^' of concealment, and the state of society, must have 
been a frequent event, the Brahmen may retain what- 
ever his good fortune places in his hands ; another 

The Brahmens are occasionally eihorted to oheerve some decorum and 
measure in their pursuit of gifts. Laws of Menu, iv. 186. ** Should th* 
king be near his end through some incurable disease, he must bestow on 
the priests all his riches accumulated firom legal fines; and, having doly 
committed his kingdom to his son, let him seek death in battle ; or, if 
there be no war, by abstaining from food." 

" The influence of priestcraft OTcr superstition is no where so visible 
as in India. All the commerces of life have a strict analogy with the 
ceremonies of religion ; and the Brachman has inculcated such a variety 
of strange persuasions, that the Gentoo finds himself every hour under 
the necessity of consulting his spiritual guide. The building of a pagoda, 
and maintaining within it a set of priests, is believed the best action 
which human virtue is capable of. Every offence is capable of being 
oTCpiated by largesses to the Brachmans, prescribed by themselves ac- 
cording to their own measures of avarice and sensuality.^ Onne, On the 
Government and People of Indostan, 433. 

" Since the Brahmen sprang from the most excellent part, since he 
was the first born, and since he possesses the Veda, he is by right the 
chief of tliis whole creation. 
' ** Kim, the Being, who exists of himself, produced in the beginning 
irom his own mouth, that having performed holy rites, he might present 
clarified butter to the Gods, and cakes of rice to the progenitors of 
mankind, for the preservation of this world : 

*' What created being then can surpass him, with whose moutli the 
Gods of the firmament continually feast on clarified butter, and the 
manes of ancestors, on hallowed cakes f 

*^ Of created things, the most excellent are those which are animated ; 
of the animated, those which subsist by intelligence; of the intelligent, 
mankind ; and of men, the sacerdotal class ; 

^< Of priests, those eminent in learning : of the learned, those who 
know their duty; of those who know it, such as perform it virtuously; 
and of the virtuous, those who seek beatitude from a perfect acquaintr 
ance with scriptural doctrine. 

" The very birth of Brahmens is a oonstaut incarnation of Dherma, 
God of Justice ; for the Brahmen is bom to promote justice^ and to 
procure ultimate happiness. 

*^ When a Brahmen springs to light, he is bom above the world, the 
chief of all creatures, assigned to guard the treasury of duties, religious 
and civil. 

<< Whatever exists in the universe is all in effect, though not in form, 
the wealth of the Brahmen ; since the Brahmen is entitled to it all by 
his primogeniture and eminence of birth.'' Laws of Menu^ i. 93-~>10O» 



Cslmtrii/as. 165 

nian jimist surrender it to the king, who is bound to BOOK n. 
driver one half to the Brahmens.^ Another source ^^^'^' 
of revenue at first view appears but ill assorted with 
the dignity and high rank of the Brahmens ; by their 
influence it was converted into a Aind, not only re- 
spectable but venerable, not merely useful but opulent. 
The noviciates to the sacerdotal office are commanded 
to find their subsistence by begging, and even to 
carry part of their earnings to their spiritual master.^ ^ 
Begging is no inconsiderable source of priestly powen 

The duties of fiie Brahmens may be summed up in 
a few words. They are, to read the Vedas ; to teach 
them to the young Brahmens; and to perform sa- 
crifices and other religious acts.^ 

IL Among the castes of the Hindus, the next in 
dignity and rank to the priestly tribe, is that of the 
Cshatriyas, or the military class. In the rude and 
early state of society, as man has provided few secu- 
rities against the evils with which he is assailed, and 
his wisdom has enabled him to draw few general 
rules respecting the order of their recurrence, he 
lives in a perpetual expectation of unhappy events, as 
wdl from nature, as from his fellow men ; and fear 
is the passion which chiefly usurps the government 

1 Laws of Menu, ch. viii. The law is laid down somewhat differently 
io Halhed's Code : when a man finds any thing belonging to another, 
the magistrate is to be informed, and if the finder is a Brahmen, he keeps 
the whole ; from others a part goes to the magistrate ; and from a Sooder 
.all but two twelfths. Halhed's Gentoo Laws, ch. Ql, sect. 3. 

« Laws of Menu, ch. ii.' TYte mendicity of the priests seems to have 
been a general instrument of priestly imposture. It was so among the 
Romans ; and no unproductive one. See Apuleius, Metam. 1. viii. p. 
269. Cicero, in his Book of Laws, proposes to restrain die -begging 
trade of the priests.^-^tipem sustulimus, nisi earn quam ad paucos dies 
propriam Ids Martis excepimus : Implei enim saperstitione antmos, 
exkaurit domos. Cic de Legib. 1. ii. 9, 16. The Popish mendicants 
are a notorioas instance. See Middleton's Letter from Ron^e^ in Works 
of Dr. Conyers Middleton, iii. 116. 

3 See the Laws of MtBu> paMinpu 



166, Castes. 

BOOK IL of his mind. The priest soothes his imaginatioii, in 
^ ^^^'^' regard to the first and most awful source of his ap- 
prehensionsy by undertaking to procure for him the 
favour of the mysterious powers of nature. The 
soldier, from whom he expects protection against the 
ravages of hostile men, is the second cbject of his 
veneration and gratitude; and in the history of so* 
ciety, it will be generally found, that the rank and 
influence of the military order are high, in propor** 
tion as the civilization of the people is low.^ To all 
but the Brahmens, the caste of Cshatriyas are an 
object of unbounded respect. They are as muchelevated 
above the classes below them, as the Brahmens stand 
exalted above the rest of human kind. Nor is 
superiority of rank among the Hindus an unavailing 
ceremony. The most important advantages are at* 
tached to it. The distance between the different orders 
of men is immense and degrading. * If a man of a su-r 
perior class accuses a man of an inferior dass, and 
his accusation proves to be unjust, he escapes not 
with impunity ; but if a man of an inferior dass ac- 
cuses a man of a superior doss, and fails in provipg 
his accusation, a double punishment is allotted him.^ 
For all assaults, the penalty rises in proportion 



' To this obsenration I know not that any exception can be adduced, 
which is not resolvable into the influence of a government pi^rely o» 
chiefly military. This, however, is the effect of art, or of ibrcod cir- 
cumstancesy not of nature, or of reason. It is Mandeville, I think, 
who remarks, that fear is the origin of the admiration which has been 
generally bestowed tipon the profession of anns ; and in confirmatioo of 
this observes, that it is the most timid sex by whom the military cha- 
racter is the most admired. Mr. Hume has remarked, that it is tha 
most timid sex, also, who are the most devoted to superstition, and the 
priests. 

' Ualbed*s Code, ch. xy. sect. 2. ^^If a man of. an inferior caste," 
aays the Qentoo code, ** proudly affecting ao equality with a pecyon of 
superior caste, should speak at the same time with him, the magislntt 
in that case shall punish him to the extent of his abilities,' W{^, 



V 



Vaisyat 4md Sudras. 1^7 

as the party oflending is bw, the pmrty complain- book n. 
ing high, in the bwier of the castes. It is, in- ^«^^-^ 
deed, a general and a remarkaUe pwrt of the jari&» |^ 
pradence of tfaM singidar people, that all crimes are 
more severely punished in the subonlinate classes; 
the penalty ascending^ by gradation, from the gentle 
correction of the venerable Brahmen, to the handi 
and saagninary dbasdsement of the degraded Sudra.^ 
Even in such an aflBur as the interest of money on 
loan, where the Brahmen pays two per cent., Uiree 
per cent, is exacted from the Cshatriya, four per 
cent, from ^e Vaisya, and fire per cent, from the # 
Sadra. The sovereign dignity, which usually follows 
the power of the sword, was originally appropriated 
to the militaiy dass, though in this particular it 
would appear that irregularity was pretty early io* 
trodttced. To bear arms is the peculiar duty af the 
Cshatriya caste, ahd their maintenance is derived from 
the provifflon made by the sovereign for his soldiers. 

III. The Vakyas are the third caste of the Hin- 
dus. Their duties are to tend cattle, to carry on 
merchandize, and to cultivate the ground. They 
are superior only to the Sudras, who owe to them, 
however, the same awful respect and submission, 
which it is incumbent on them to pay to the mifitary 
dass. 

IV. As much as the Brahmen is an object of in- 
tense veneration, so much is the Sudra an object of 
contempt, and even of abhorrence, to the other 
classes of his countrymen. The bunness of the Su- 
dras is servile labour, and <heir degradation inhu« 
man. Not onfy is the most abject and grovelling 



1 See die Iavb of Meno, and Ualbed's .Geetop Code^ pataiin. The 
case of theft is an exception for this, the higher classes being puni^ed 
the most severeJy. 



168 Castes. 

BOOK II. submission imposed upon them as a religious datjf 
°^^' ^' but they are driven from their just and equal share 
in all the advantages of the social institution. The 
crimes which they commit against others are more 
severely punished, than those of any other delin- 
quents, while the crimes which others comndlt 
against them are mor^ gently punished than those 
against any other sufferers.^ Even their persons and 
labour are not free. ^^ A man of the servile caste, 
whether bought or unbought, a Brahmen may com- 
pel to perform servile duty ; because such a man was 
created by the Self-existent for the purpose of serving 
Brahmens/'^ The law scarcely permits them to own 
property ; for it is declared that ^^ no collection of 
wealth must be made by a Sudra, even though he 
has power, since a servile man, who has amassed 
riches, gives pain even to Brahmens*'^ A Brahmen 
may seize without hesitation the goods of his Sudra 
slave ; for as that slave can have no property, his 
master may take his goods." ^ Any failure in tj)e're- 
spect exacted of the Sudra towai^s the superior 
classes is avenged by the most dreadful punishments. 
Adultery with a woman of a higher caste is expiated 
by burning to death on a bed of iron. The degra- 
tion of the wretched Sudra extends not oaly to every 
thing in this life, but even to sacred^struction and 
his chance of favour with the sup^nor powers. A 
Brahmen must never read the Veda in the presence of 
Sudras.^ " Let not a Brahmen," says the law of 
Menu, " give advice to a Sudra; nor what remains 
from his table ; nor clarified butter» of which part 
has been offered ; nor let him give spiritual counsel 

> See the Laws of Menu, and Halhed's Gentoo Code, passim. 

• Laws of Menu, ch.viii. 413. s lb. x. 129. 

« lb. ynl, 417. If he be distressed for subsisteoce^ sajrs the gloss of 
Collaca. 

* lb. 



The Sudras. 169 

to sqA a man, nor inform him of the legal expiation booril 
for his sin: surely he who declares the law to a ser-^^^^^ 
yile man, and he who instructs him in the mode of 
expiating sin, sinks with that very man into the hdl 
named Asamvrita." * 

Although the adherence of each class to the par- 
ticular employment assigned to it was secured by the 
most rigid laws, and the severest penalties, there 
were extraordinary cases in which a limited departure 
was permitted. When a Brahmen cannot obtain sub« 

> Laws of Menu, ch. viii. 80. 81. "If," says the Gentoo code, 
^' a man of the Sooder reads the beids of the Sbaster, or the PooraD, 
to a Brahmen, a Chehter, or a BId, then the magistrate shall heal; 
some hitler oil, and pour it into the aforesaid Sooder*s mouth ; 
and if a Sooder listens to the beids of the Shaster, then the oil, heated 
as before, shall be poured into his. ears, and arzeez and wax shall be . 
melted together, and the orifice of his ears shall be stopped up there- 
with. If a Sooder gets by heart the beids of the Shaster, the magis- 
trate shall put him to death. If a Sooder always performs worship and 
thejoggy the magistrate shall put him to death. If a Sooder gives much 
and frequent molebtatioB to a Brahmen, the magistrate shall put him 
to death." (Ualhed's Code of Gentoo Laws, ch. xxi. sect. 7.) It is 
among the most barbarous tribes, that we in general find the principle 
of subordination abused to the greatest excess. Perhaps no instance is 
equal to that wliich exhibits itself among the Hindus. " Among the 
Natchez," (says Robertson, Hist. Americ. ii. 139,) a powerful tribe 
now extinct, on the banks of ttie Mississippi, a difference of rank took 
place, with which the northern tribes were altogether unacquainted. 
Some families were reputed noble, and enjoyed hereditary dignity. The 
body of the people was considered as vile, and formed only for subjec- 
tion. This distinction was marked by appellations which intimated the 
high elevation of the one state, and the ignominious depression of the otlier: 
the former were called Kapcctable ; the latter, the Slinkards." — *^ To 
be a servant,** (says Millar, Distinction of Ranks, ch. v. sect. 1.) ^ in 
these primitive times, was almost universally the same thing as to be ^ 
slave. The master assumed an unlimited jurisdiction over his servants, 
and the privilege of selling them at pleasure. He gave them no wagett 
be»de their maintenance ; and he allowed them to have no property, 
but claimed to his own iiise whatever, by their labour, or by any other 
Qieans, they happened to acquire.*— Thus the practice of domestic 
slavery appears to have been early established among the nations of 
antiquity ; among the Egyptians, the Phoenicians, die Jews, the Babylo- 
nians, the Persians, the Greeks, and the Romans. — ^The same practice 
obtains at present among all those tribes of barbarians, in diilercut 
parts of the world; witli which we have any correspondence." 



170 Imfurt Castes. 

BOOKII. sifltence by the proper busiDess of his onto, Iwiaaf 
Chap. 2. ^^^i^ himself to that of the Cshratiym ortfae Vaisya^ 
but must never become so far degraded as to engage 
in that of the Sudra. The Cshratiya and Vai^ya, in 
like necessitous circumstances, may have recoune 
respectively to the business of the class or classes be- 
low them, even that of the Sudra, but are strictly in* 
terdicted from profaning the employment of any dast 
above them. The Sudra havings originally, noinfe« 
rior dass, was probably abandoned to his necessities, 
though afterwards, in the employments of the mixed 
classes, a resource was opened also for faim*^ In this 
arrangement, as usually happens in the laws of the 
Hindus, the advantages are all on the side of the 
superior orders* The Brahmen has open to him, if 
need be, the occupations of all the respectaUe classes; 
he can overload them with additional numbers in the 
season of distress, a season at which it is natural for 
. them to be overloaded without him, while his own 
occupatuHi is exempt from the encroachment or com- 
petition of any other description of men. The 
Cshatriya, while he has the occupations open to him 
of two of the castes, is liable to the interference oi one 
of them only. The Vaisya, on the other hand, can 
have recourse to none but the lowest of employments, 
that of the Sudra, while he is liable to be straitened 
in his own occupation by the interference and compe- 
tition of both the orders above him. The unfortunate 
Sudra, who has no resource, may be driven from his , 
employment, and his means of subsistence, mediately 
or immediately, by all the other classes of the com- 
munity. 

This distribution of the whole people into four 
classes only, and the appropriation of them to four 

« Laws of Menu, ch. x. passim. Mr. Colebrooke on the In<9i«it 
Classes, Asiat. Rcsearche«. v. 63. 



Impure Castes^ I7I 

species of employment ; an arrangement which, in book il 
the very simple state of society in which it must have ^^^ ^' 
been introducecl» was a great step in improvement, 
must have become productive of innumerahfe inoon* 
▼enienoes, as the wants o£ society multiplied. The 
bare necessaries of life, with a small number of its 
rudest accommodations* are all it prepares, to meet 
the desires of man. As those desires, speedily ex* 
tend beyond such narrow limits, a struggle must 
have early ensued between the first principle of human 
nature and those of the political establishment. The 
didfeient castes were strictly commanded to many 
with those only of their own class and profession ; 
and the mixture of the classes from the union of the 
sexes was guarded against by the severest laws. 
This was an occurrence, however, which laws could 
not prevent. Irregularities took place; children 
were bom, who belonged to no caste, and for whom 
there was no occupation* No event could be£d 
society more calamitous than this. Unholy and in- 
&mous, on account of that violation of the sacred 
law to which they owed their unwelcome tdrth, those 
wretched outcasts had no resource for subsistence, 
excepting either the bounty of the established classes, 
to whom they were objects of execration and abhor* 
rence; or the plunder of those same classes, a course 
to which they would betake themselves with all the 
ingenuity of necessitous, and all the atrocity of mudi 
injured, men. When a dass of this description be- 
came immerous, they must have filled society with 
the greatest disorders. In the preface of that com- 
pilation of the Hindu Laws, which was translated 
by Mr. Halhed,^ it is stated that, after a succession 
of good kings, who secured obedience to the laws, 

1 Vtd*Uiilii«d'<€od«of QentooUwg^ preface. 



172 Impfire CaUtB. 

BOOR II. and under whom the people enjoyed' felicity, came a 
CHAF,g. moparch evil and corrupt, under whom the laws 
were violated, the mixture of the classes was perpe- 
trated, and a new and impious race were produced*. 
The Brahmens put^ this wicked kmg to death, and 
by an effort of miraculous power created a successor 
endowed with the most excellent qualities. But 
the kingdom did not prosper, by reason of the Bur- 
ren Sunker, so were this impure brood denominated ; 
and it required the wisdom of this virtuous king to 
devise -a remedy. He resolved upon a classification 
of the mixed race, and to assign them occupations. 

' This, accordingly, was the commencement of arts 

and manufactures. The Burren Sunker became all 
manner of artisans and handicrafts ; one tribe of 
them weavers of cloth, another artificers in iron, and 
' so in other cases, till the subdivisions of the class 
^were exhausted, or the exigencies of the community 
supplied. . Thus were remedied two evils at once : 
The increasing wants of an improving society were 
provided for; and a class of men, the pest of 
the community, were converted to its service. This 
is another important era in the history of Hindu 
society ; and having reached this stage, it does not 
appear that it has made, or that it is capable of mak* 
ing, much further progress. Thirty-six branches of 
the impure class are specified in the sacred books,^ 
of whom and of their employments it would be 
tedious and useless to present the description. The 
highest is that spnmg from the conjuncticm of a 
Brachmen with a woman of the Cshatriya class^ 

> Colebrooka on the Indian 'Classes, Asiat. Researcb. v. 59. Oa 
this subject, however, that intdligent author toils us, that Sanserif 
authorities in some instances disagree. Classes mentioned by one ara 
omitted bj another ; and texts differ on the professions assigned to sonm 
tribes. It is a subject, he adds, in which there is some intricacy. 



Impure Castes. 173 

whose duty Is the teaching of military exercises. BOOK IT. 
The lowest of all is the offspring of a Sudra with a ^^^^' ^\ 
woman of the sacred class. This tribe are denomi- 
nated Chandalas, and are regarded with great abhor- 
rence. Their profession is to carry out corpses^ tO' 
execute criminals, and perform other offices, reckoned 
to the last degree unclean and degrading. If, by 
^he laws of Hindustan, the Sudras are placed in a 
low and vile situation, the impure and mixed dasses 
are placed in one still more odious and degrading. 
Nothing can equal the contempt and insolence to 
which it is the lot of the lowest among them to see 
themselves exposed. They are condemned to live in 
a sequestered spot by themselves, that they may not 
pollute the very town in which they reside. If they 
meet a man of the higher castes, they must turn out 
of the way, lest he should be contaminated by their 
presence. * 

1 '* Avoid,^ says the Tantra, ** the toach of the Chandaln, and other 
abject classes. Whoever associates with them andoubtedly falls from 
his class ; whoever bathes or drinks in wells or pools which they have 
caused to be made, must be purified by the five productions of kine/' 
Colebrooke on the Indian Classes, Asiat. Ke&eardi. v. 53. From this 
outline of the classificatioA and distribution of the people, as extracted 
from the books of the Hindus, some of ^he most intelligent of our Bricisfa 
observers appeal to the present practice of the people, which they 
affirm is much more conformable to the laws of human welfare, than the 
institutions described in the ancient books. Of this, the author is 
aware : so inconsistent with the laws of human welfare are the institu- 
tions described in the Hindu ancient books, that they never could have 
been observed with any accuracy ; it is, at the same time, very evident, 
that the institutions described in the ancient books are the model upon 
which the present frame of Hindu society has been formed ; and when 
we consider the powerful causes wliich have operated so long to draw, 
or rather to force, 'the Hindus from their inconvenient institutions and 
customs, the only source of wonder is, that the state of'soci^ty which 
they now exhibit should hold so great a resemblance to that which is 
depicted in their books. The President de Goguet is of opinion, that a 
division of the people into tribes and hereditary professions similar 
to that of the Hindus existed in the ancient Assyrian empire, and 
that it prevailed from the highest antiquity over almost all Asia, 



174 Casus. 

BOOK II. (part L book I. ch. i. art. 3 ; Herodot. lib. i. cftp. IMO ; Scrab. Ub. %ii. 
Cb4>p. 9* p. 1082 ; Diod. lib. ii. p. 143.) Cecrops distributed iDto four tribes «U 
■ ■ the iDhabitantg of Attica. (Pollux, lib. viii. cap. 9. sect. 100; Diodonis 

SicohiSy lib. ii. p 83.) Theseua afterwards made them three, by 
unitiag, as it should seem, the sacerdotal class with that of the nobles^ 
or magistrates. They consisted then of nobles and priests, labourers or 
husbandmen, and artificers ; and there is no doubt that, like the Egyp- 
tians and Indians, they were hereditary. (Plvtarch. Vit. Thes.) Aria» 
totle expressly iafbrms us, (Polit. lib. vii. cap. 10.) that in Crete the 
people were divided by the laws of Minos into classes after the manner 
of the Egyptians. We haye most remarkable proof of a diriston, the 
tame as that of the Hiadvs, anciently estabfished among the Persiaii% 
In the Zendavesta, translated by Anquetil Duperron, is the fbllowins 
passage : ** Ormosd said, There are three measures [literally weights, 
that is, tests, rules] of conduct, four states, and five places of dignity. 
— ^The states are: that of the priest; that of the soldier; thaitoftfae 
husbandman, the source of riches ; and that of the artizan or labourer.'^ 
Zendavesta, i. 141. There are sufficient vestiges to prove an ancient 
establishment of the same sort among the Buddhists of Ceylon, and by 
coDseqaisnce to infer it among the other Buddhbts over so large a per* 
tion of Asia. See a Discourse of Mr. Joinville on the Religion and 
Manners of the people of Ceylon, Asiat. Research, vii. 430, et seq. 



Form of Government'. VIS 



CHAP. III. 

The Form of Government. 

Aftea the division of the people into ranks and oc- BOOKII. 
cupations^ the great circumstance by which their ^^^^'^' 
conditioD^ character, and operations are detenrnned^ 
is the political estaUishment ; the system of actions 
by which the social order is preserved. Among the 
Hindus^ according to the Asiatic model, the govern- 
ment was monarchical, and, with the usual exception 
of rehgion and its ministers, absolute. No idea of 
any system of rule, different from the will of a single 
person, appears to have entered the minds of them, 
or their legislators. '* If the world had no king,** 
nys the Hindu law,^ ** it would quake on all »des 
tlumigh fear; the rukr of this universe, therefore, 
created a king, for the maintenance of this system.** 
Of tfaehighanduncontrolable authority of the monarch 
a judgment may be formed, from the lofty terms in 
which the sacred books describe his dignity apd attri- 
butes. " A king,'* says the law of Menu,* " is formed 
of partides from the chief guardian deities, and con- 
sequently surpasses all mcnrtals in glory. Like the 
sera, he burns eyes and hearts ; nor can any human 
creature on earth even gaze on him. He, fire and air ; 
He, the god of criminal justice ; He, the genius of 
wealth ; He, the regent of waters ; He, the lord of 
the firmament. A king, even though a child, must 

a'Iaws of Mmo, «b. ni. d. * lb. cb. vii. 



176. Form of Government. 

BOOK II. not be treated lightly, from an idea that he is a mere 
^^^^' ^' mortal : No ; he is a powerful divinity, who appears 
in human shape. In his anger, death. He who 
shows hatred of the king, through delusion of mind, 
will certainly perish; for speedily will the king apply 
his heart to that man's destruction." The pride of 
imperial greatness could not devise, hardly could it 
even desire, more extraordinary distinctions, or the 
sanction of a more unlimited authority. 
^ The plan, according to which the power of the 

sovereign was exercised in the government of the 
country, resembled that which has almost universally 
prevailed in the monarchies of Asia, and was a con- 
trivance extremely simple and rude. In the more 
skilful governments of Europe, officers are appointed 
for the discharge of particular duties in the difTia^nt 
provinces of the empire; some for the decision of 
causes, some for the control of violence, some far 
collecting the contingents of the subjects, for the ^l- 
pense of the state ; while the powers of all center 
immediately in the head of the government, and all 
together act as connected and subonlinate wheels iir 
one complicated and artful machine. Among the less 
instructed and less civilized inhabitants of Asia, no 
other plan has ever occurred to the monarch, for the 
administration of his dominions, than simply to di- 
vide his own authority and power into pieces or frag- 
ments, as numerous as the provinces into which it 
was deemed convenient to disti-ibute the empire. To 
each of the provinces a vicegerent was dispatched, 
who carried with him the undivided authority and 
jurisdiction of his master. Whatever powers the 
sovereign exercised over the whole kingdom, the 
vicegerent exercised in the province allotted to him ; 
and the same plan which the sovereign adopted for 
- the government of the whole, was exactly followed 
1 



Farm of Government. 177 

by the vioegei-ent in the goveroment of a part/ If BOOK u, 
the province committed to his sway was too extensive "^''' ' 
for )us personal inspection and control, he sutxHvided 
it into parts, and assigned a governor to each, whom 
he intrusted with the same absolute powers in his 
district, as he himself possessed in the administrt^ 
Hon of the greater department. Even this inferior 
deputy often divided his authority, in the same man- 
ner, among the governors, whom he appointed, of the 
townships or villages under his t;ontrol. Every one 
of those rulers, whether the sphere of his command 
was narrow or extensive^ was absolute wilhin it, and 
possessed the whole power of the sovereign, to levy 
taxes, to raise and command troops, and to decide 
upon the lives and property of the subjects. Th6 
gradations of command among the Hindus were thus 
regulated : The lowest of all was the l(ml of one town 
and its district ; The next was the lord of ten towns ; 
The third was the lord of twenty towns ; The fourth 
was the Icnrd of 100 towns ; And the highest vice« 
gerent was lord of 1000 towns. Every lord was 
amenable to the one immediately above him, and 
exercised unlimited authority over those below.^ The 

1 Kcefftpfer, in lits Hiitory of Ja|»ftn, book i. cbap. ▼. says^ ** Tb« 
whole empire is governed in general by the Eoiperor, with an absolute 
and monarchical power, and so is every province in particular by the 
priooe, who, under the Emperor, enjoys the govenunenc thereof/'— » 
For the simiiarky of ehe institvtion in the Ottoman goverament, se^ 
Vohiey's Travels in Syria and Egypt, ii. 376. 

* Laws of Men«> eh. vii. 115—117. There is a ^Ftry remafkable 
nmilarity between thk mode of subdividing antbority among the Hindus^ 
and that adopted by the Incis of Pern. <'The Incas/' (says Oarct^ 
lasso de la Vega, part i. book ii. di. v.) *' had one method and role iit 
their govermnent, as the best means to prevent idl mischieft and dis^ 
orders ; which was this. That of all the people in every plaoe, whether 
more or less, a register should be kept, and a division made often and 
teoy over which one of the ten, whom they called the Decurion, wss 
made superior over the odier nine ; then every five divisions of this 
nature had a Jord over tbem^ to whom was committed the charge aiid 
VOL. !• N 



178 , Form of Govemmeni. 

BOOK II. following law appears to provide for their personal 
^"^^' ^' expenses : " Such food, drink, wood, and other 
articles, as by law should be given each day to the 
king, by the inhabitants of the township, let the lord 
of one town receive : let the lord of ten towns enjoy 
the produce of two plough-lands ; the lord of twenty, 
that of five plough-lands ; the lord of 100, that of a 
village or small town ; the lord of 1000, that of a 
lai^ town." ^ The expense of the government of 
each vicegerent was defrayed out of the taxes which 
he levied, and the surplus was transmitted to the 
superior lord, to whom he was immediately respon* 
aible. From him it was again conveyed to the go- 
yemor above him, till it reached, at last, the royal 
treasury. 

. If tids plan of government was unskilful and rude, 
so was the contrivance employed for checking the 
abuses to which it was liable. ** The affairs of these 
townships," says the law, " either jointly or sepa- 
rately transacted, let another minister of the king 
inspect, who should be well affected, and by no 
means remiss. In every larger town or city, let 
him appoint one superintendant of all affairs, elevated 
in rank, formidable in power, distinguished as a 
planet among stars : Let that governor^ from time 

care of fifty; then over two divisions of fifty^ another lord, who super- 
vised 100 ; so five divisions of 100 had a magistrate who oommanded 
£00 ; the divisions of WO had a leader over 1000/' &c. The highest 
officer under the Inca was the governor of a province. Eadi inferior 
officer accounted for his conduct to the superior neit above him. See 
further Acosta, Nat. and Mor. Hist, of the Indies, bookvi. ch.xiii.; 
Carli, Lettres sur I'Ameriqae, let. liii. The analogy of the Anglosaxon 
institution of tythings, or ten &miiies ; of hundreds, or ten tythings ; 
and counties, will suggest itself to every imagination, 

> Laws of Menu, ch. vii. 118, 119. The first of these provisions, 
that for the lord of one town, is not accurately ascertained ; the two or 
five plough-lands are sufficiently distinct; but the produce of a villaga 
or hug$ town must have been extremely uncertain and ambiguous. 

1 



• Form of Government, 179 

to time, survey all the rest in person, and, by the BOOK ii. 
means of his emissaries, let him perfectly know their ^°^''' ^\ 
conduct in their several districts/'* Of the prac- 
tical state of the government abundant proof is 
afforded. In the passage which immediately follows, 
** Since the servants of the king," it is said, **.whom 
he has appointed guardians of districts, are generally 
knaves, who seize what belongs to other men, from 
such knaves let him defend his people ; of such evil- 
minded servants, as wring wealth from subjects at- 
tending "them on business, let the King confiscate all 
the possessions, and banish them from his realm.** * 

At the head of this government stands the king, 
on whom the g^at lords of the empire imqfiediately 
depend. He is directed by the law to choose a 
Council, consisting " of seven or eight ministers; 
men whose ancestors were servants of kings, who 
are versed in the holy books, who are personally 
brave ; who are skilled in the use of weapons, and 
whose lineage is noble.** ^ With them he is com- 
manded perpetually to consult on the affairs of his 
government ; but a singular mode of deliberation is 
prescribed to him ; not to assemble his Council, and, 
laying before them, as in the cabinets of European 
princes, the subject on which the suggestions of their 
wisdom are required, receive the benefit arising 
from the mutual communication of their knowledge 
and views ; a plan, apparently more artful and cun- 
ning, more nearly allied to the suspicious temper and 
narrow views, of a rude period, is recommended ; to 
consult them apart, and hear the opinion of each 

1 Laws of Menu, ch. vii. 120 — 192. A similar officer formed a dmilar 
part of the Pemviao establishment. He was denominated Cuet^ 
^icCf which is to say, '* Eje of all.'' Carii, Lettres sur TAmerique, 
let* sill. 

« Menu, ut supra, 123, 124. * Ibid. 54. * 

. N 2 



180 Form of Oovemment. . 

BOOK n. separately ; after which, having consulted them in 
^^^' ^' common^ when each man is swayed by the opinion 
he had formerly given in private, and has a motive of 
interest and vanity to resist the light which might be 
thrown upon the subject by others, the king himself 
is to decide.' A Brahmen ought always to be his 
prime minister. ** To one learned Brahmen, db# 
tinguished among the rest, let the king impart his 
momentous counsel." ^ 

To provide for the defence of the country was aae 
great branch of the duties of the sovereign, and to 
preside over the military force was his great praK)<- 
gative and distinction. As in the original division of 
the people, a fourth part of them were appropriated 
to the profession of arms, and destined from that 
alone to obtain their subsistence, the great diffioilty 
of goveraanent 9111st have consisted, not in obtaining 
troops, but in finding for* them maintenance and 
en^loyment. When so great a proportion o£ the 
population were set apart for the business of war, 
with ndthing to do, from year to year, and from 
generation to generation, but to improve its princi** 
ple% and acquire the utmost dexterity in its exerdses, 
it a{^ars extraordinary that the nation was not of 
a formidable and warlike character. Yet has India 
given way to every invader ; " and the rudeness,'* 
says Mr. Ome,* " of the military art in Indostan 

1 Laws of Menu, ch. Tit. 56. Another precept to the king, respecting 
the mode of consulting with his ministers, is very expressive of the 
Bimplictty of the times ; *' Ascending up the back of a mountain, or 
going privately to a terrace, n bower, a forest, or a lonely place, 
without listeners, let him consult with them unobserved." lb. 147. 

« lb. 68. 

> Orme on the GovemiBent and People of Indoatan, p. 417. TIm 
same accofate and hitelligent observer ioiinediately adds ; *' The infiuitry 
consists in a multitude of people assembled together without reganl t* 
rank and file,'' &c. 



Ferm of Government* 181 

can scarce be imagined but by those who have seen BOOR n. 
it." The precis in the ancient and sacred books ^"^^' ^* 
of the Hindus, which lay the foundation of their 
military system, are few in number, simple, and rude. 
For the security of the royal residence, the king is 
directed to take up his abode^ " in a capital, glaring, 
by way of fortress, a desert rather more tlian twenty 
miles round it» or a fortress of earth, a fortress of 
water or of trees, a fortress of armed men, or a for- 
tress of mountains.*' Their great unskilfulness id 
the science of attack and defence led them to place 
great dependence on fortification, as appears by a 
rariety of their precepts. ** One bowman," says 
Menu,^ *^ placed on a wall is a match in war for 
100 enemies, and 100 for 10,000; therefore is a fort 
recommended."' Yet their knowledge of fortification 
was elementary, and mostly consisted in surrounding 
the place with a mud wall and a ditch, or availing 
themselves of the natural advantages which insulated 
rocks, which water, or impervious thickets,^ could 
affoid. The duty and advantage of maintaining at 
all times a powerful army are enforced in the most_ 
cogent terms. " By a king," says Menu, " whose 
forces are always ready for action, the whole world ' 
may be kept in awe ; let him then, by a force always 
ready, make all creatures living his own."® In re- 
commending a perpetual standing army, the preceptive 
part of the military doctrine of the Hindus seems in. 
a great measure to have been summed up ; for the 
marshalling, the discipline, the conduct of an army, 
in any of its branches, no instruction is conveyed^ 
General exhortations to firiflliess and valour are all 
the additional advice of which the utility appears to 
have been recognized. The Hindu prince is, by 

1 Laws of MenU; ch. vii. 70. < lb. 74. ^ lb. 103. 



182 Farm of Govemsnent. 

BOOK n. divine authority, infonned, that those rulers of the 
^"^^' ^' earth, who, " desirous of defeating each other, exert 
" their utmost strength in battle, without eve^^ averting 

their faces, ascend after death directly to heaven."* 
V Never to recede from combat,*' says Menu, " to 
protect the people, and to honour the priests, is the 
highest duty of kings, and ensures their felicity."^ 
Of a great part of the duty which devolved upon 
the king, as head of the armed force, he appears 
to have been relieved by a deputy.^ In times of 
peace the military people seem to have been dis-' 
tributed over the country, under the command of 
the governors of provinces and of districts, for local 
defence, for the preservation of local tranquillity, 
and for the convenience of subsistence. When a 
general war demanded the whole force of the nation, 
the king commanded the governors of provinces 
to assemble the soldiers under their command, and 
repai,r to his standard.'^ From this circumstance it 
has been rashly concluded, that feudal conditions of 
mUitary service, in fact a feudal government, highly 
resembling that which existed in Europe, had place 
in Hindustan. 

. After the care of protecting the nation from foreign 
aggression or from internal tumult, the next, duty 
of the king was the distribution of justice. In the 
first stage of society, the leader in war is ako the 
judge in peace ; and the regal and judicial functions 
are united in the same pei-son. Various circum- 
stances tend to produce this arrangement. In the- 
first place, there ai*e, then, hardly any laws : and he 
alone is entitled to judge, who is entitled to legislate, 

f Laws of Menu, ch. vii. 89. * lb. 88. 

9 *^ The forces of the realm must be immediately regalated by the 
commander in chief.'' lb. 65. 

4 n>. ii3--isa 



Form of Government. 188 

flince he must make a law for every occasion. In BOOK IL 
the liext place, a rude people, unused to obedience, ' ^' 
would hardly respect inferior authority. In the - 
third place, the business of judicature is so badly 
performed as to interrupt but little the business or 
pleasures of the king ; and a decision is rather an 
exercise of arbitrary will and power, than the result 
of an accurate investigation. In the fourth place, 
the people are so much accustomed to terminate their 
own disputes, by their own cunning, or force, that 
the number of applications for judicature is compara- 
tively small. As society advances, a set of circum- 
stances, opposite to these, are gradually introduced : 
laws are made which the judge has nothing to do 
but apply : the people learn the advantage of sub- 
mitting to inferior fLuthmity : a more accurate admi- 
nistration of justice is demanded, and cannot be 
performed without a great application both of atten- 
tion and of time : the people learn that it is for the 
good of the commuTiity, that they should not termi- 
nate, and that they, should not be allowed to termi- 
nate, either by force or fraud, their .own disputes : 
the administration of justice becomes then too labo- 
rious to be either agreeable to tlie king, or consistent 
with the other services which he is expected to ren- 
der : and the exercise of judicature becomes a sepa- 
rate employment, the exclusive function of a particular 
order of men. 

The administration of justice by the king in person, 
and in the provinces of course by his deputies, as in 
the subordinate districts by theirs, stands in the sacred 
books as a leading principle of the jurisprudence of 
the Hindus; and the revolution of ages has intro- 
duced a change in favour rather of the prince who 
abandons the duty, than of the people, for whom 
hardly any other instrument of judicature is provided* 



] g4 Farm of Governments 

900K II. In the infancy of improvement, the business of the 
Chap. 3, j'ujge is much moTc to award punishment, than to 
settle disputes. The Hindu law, accordingly^ re* 
presents the king, as ^^ created for the guardianship 
of all, a divinity in human form, to inflict pumdi- 
ment according to the Shaster/'^ In conformity with 
these rude ideas, the most extravagant praises are 
bestowed upon this engine of royalty. " For the use 
of the king, Bramah formed, in the beginning of time, 
the genius of punishment with a body of pure light, 
his' own son, the Protector of all created things. 
Punishment governs all mankind ; punishment alone 
preserves them ; punishment wakes while their guards 
are asleep ; the wise consider punishment as the per- 
fection of justice. If the king were not, mthout 
indolence, to punish the guilty, the stronger would 
roast the weaker, like fish, on a spit. The whole 
race of man is kept in order by punishment ; for a 
guiltless man is hard to be found." ^ 

For the more perfect discharge of this important 
duty the king is directed to associate with himself 
Brahmens, and counsellors capable of giving him 
advice.^ Any Brahmen, or even a person of the two 
middle classes, may interpret the law to him ; but a 
Sudra in no case whatever.^ On those occasions on 
which it was impossible for the king to give judg- 

» Halhed's Gentoo Code, preface. 

« Laws of Menu, ch. vii. 14 — 2^2. ^ lb. ch. viii. 1. 

^ lb. ch. viii. 20. To learned' and righteous Brahiiieus the magistrate 
shaU give money, and every token of respect and consideration in 
the judgment seat, to have them near him ; but he shall not retain 
fewer than ten of such Brahmen. Gentoo Code^ ch. iii. sect* 1. The 
more\ sacred books of law the men by denomination holy were alone 
permitted to read. Thus the law of Menu (ch. ii. 16.) " He whose 
life is regulated by holy texts, frem his conception even to Iiis funeral 
pile, has a decided right to study this code, but no other person what* 
soever/' The more profane commentaries^ however, were less confined^ 
and the man versed in ihese might suffice for the common business of 
administering justice. 



Farm of Govemmeni. ISfl 

ment in person, he was empowered to appoint aBOORiL 
Brahmen, who, with three assessors, might try causes ^"^''' ^' 
in his stead.^ _ 

So much with regard lo the c(mstitution of the 
tribunals. The solemnities, of jurisdiction were thus 
orda-ed to proceed : " Let the king, or his judge, 
having seated himself on the bench, his body prqierly 
clothed, and his mind attentively fixed, begin with 
doing reverence to the deities who govern the worlds 
and then let him enter on the trial of causes."^ The 
form of process was simple, and good ; as it always 
is among a rude people. The paiiies were heard, , 

generally in person ; though lawyers by profession, 
unless in the case of certain high crimes, might ap« 
pear in lieu of the principals. The application of 
the plaintiff might be either wal or written ; but the 
answer was required to be in the same form ; oral, 
if the api^cation was oral ; and in writing, if it was 
otherwise.^ The judge examines the witnesses ; in- 
spects, if any, the writings ; and without any intri- 
cate or expensive forms proceeds directly to a decision. 
Punishment immediately follows conviction/ 

One of the most respected witnesses affords a pic- 
ture of the practical state of judicature in India^ 
which,, there is every reason to believe, may, with 
immaterial variations, be applied to Hindu society 
firom *the .period at which it first attained its existing 
form. '' No man is refused access to the Durbar, or 
seat of judgment; which is exposed to a large area, 

• Laws of Mena, ch. viii. 9, 10. TheXjentoo Code, translated by Mr. 
Halhed, directs, that when the king in person cannot examine a cause, 
he substitute a learned Brahmen ; if a Brahmen cannot be fooiKJ, a 
Csbatriya, lie. but iu no case a Sudra. Gentoo Code, ch. iii. sect. 1« 

s Laws of Menu, ch. viii. 9, 10. 

3 Q^ntooCode, ch. iii. sect. 5. 

^ Orme on the Government, &c. of Indostanj p. 451. 



186 FofTn of Gaeemment* 

BOOK II. capable of co(ntaining the multitude.^ The plaintiff 
^^^^' ^' discovers himself by crying aloud. Justice ! Justice I 
*""~''"** until attention is given to his importunate clamours. 
He is then ordered to be silent^ and to advance before 
his judge ; to whom, after having prostrated himself^ 
and made his offering of a piece of money, he tells 
his story in the plainest manner, with great humility 
of voice and gesture, and without any of those ora« 
torial embellishments which compose an art in freer 
nations.— The wealth, the consequence, the interest, 
or the address of the party, become now the only 
considerations. He visits his judge in private, and 
gives the jar of oil : his adversary bestows the hog 
which breaks it. The friends who can influence 
intercede ; and, excepting where the case is so m?- 
mifestly proved as to brand the failure of redress with 
glaring infamy (a restraint which human nature is 
bom to reverence) the value of the bribe ascertains 
the justice of the cause. — ^This is so avowed a prac- 
tice, that if a stranger should inquire how much it 
would cost him to recover a just debt from a creditdr 
who evaded payment, he would every where receive 
the same answer; the government will keep one- 
fourth, and give you the rest. — Still the forms of 
justice subsist ; witnesses are heard, but brow-beaten 
and removed : proofs of writing produced, but deemed 
forgeries and rejected, until the way is cleared for a 
decision, which becomes totally or partially favour^ 
able, in proportion to the methods which have been 
used to render it such ; but still with some attention 



> This publicity of jadiciai proceedings is common to rode nations. 
In the country and days of Job, the judg^ sat at the gate of the city, 
ch. iz. ver. 7. Moses alludes to the same practice, Geo. xxiii. 18 ; and 
Homer tells us it was the practice in the heroic ages of Greece, II. lib. 
xviii. ver. 497. 



Form of Govenunent. 18/ 

• 

to the consequences of a judgment, which would be BOOK IL 
of too flagrant iniquity not to produce universal de- ^^^'^' 
testation and resentment. — Providence has, at par* 
ticular seasons, blessed the miseries of these peofde 
with the presence of a righteous judge. The vast 
reverence and reputation which such have acquired 
are but too melancholy a proof of the infrequoacy of 
such a character. The history of their judgments 
and decisions is transmitted down to posterity, and 
is quoted with a visible complacency on every occasion. 
Stories of this nature supply the place of proverbs in 
the conversations of all the people of Indostan, and 
are applied by them with great propriety.**^ 
• Such are the principal branches of the duty of the 
sovereign, and in these various institutions may be 
contemplated an image of the Hindu government. 
It is worthy of a short analysis. The powers of 
government consisting of three great branches, the 
legislative, the judicial, and the administrative; 
we have to inquire^ in what hands ihese several 
powers are deposited, and by what circumstances 
their exercise is controlled. As the Hindu believes^ 
that a complete and perfect system of instruction, ' 
which admits of no addition or change, was con* 
veyed to him from the beginning by the Divine Beings 
for the r^ulation of his public as well as his private 
affairs, he acknowledges no laws but those which are 
contained in the saored books. From this it is evi- 



' 1 Orme on the Govcnuncnt and People of Indostan, p. 444 — 146. 
Another of our most iratnictive travellers, Mr. Foster, in the Dedica- 
tion prefixed to his Journey from Bengal to England, p. vii., calls Hin^ 
dastan, *' A land whose every principle of government is actuated by a 
rapacious avarice, whose people never approach the gate of authority 
without an offering/' — I1u& is a subject to which' he often adverts; he 
says again, (i. 7,) " In Asia, the principles of justice, honour, or pa^ 
triotism, as they confer no substantial benefit, nor tend to elevate the 
character, are »eld<Mii fctn to actuate the mind of the subject.^ 



188 Form of Goverttmefif. 

BOOK II. dent,. tha;t the odIj scope which remaioe fiir legiala- 
^*^^' ^' tioD is confined wittiin the limits of the interpretations 
which maj be given to the holy text. The Brab- 
loens enj<^ the undisputed prerogative of interpreting 
the divine oracles ; ficnr though it is allowed to the twa 
dasses next in degree to give advice toihe king in the 
administration of justice, they must in no case pre- 
sume to diepart from the.fiense of the law which it ha» 
pleased the Brahmens to impose. The power of legis* 
lation, therefore, exclusively beknigs to the priesthood. 
The exdusive right of interpreting the laws necessarily 
confers upon them^ in the same unlimited mannefy 
the judicial powers of government. The king, though 
ostensibly supreme judge, is commanded always to 
employ Brahmens as counsellors and assistants in the 
administration of justice ; and whatever construction 
they put upon the law, to that his sentence must 
conform. Whenever the king in person discharges 
not the office of judge, it is a Brahmen, if possible, 
who must ocaupy his place. The king, therefore, is 
so far from possessing the judicial power, that be 
is rather the executive officer by whom the decisions 
of the Brahmens are carried into effect. 

They who possess the power of making and in^ 
terpreting the laws, by which another person is bound 
to act, are by necessary conse<}uenoe the masters of 
his actions. Possessing the legislative and judicative 
powers, the Brahmens were, also, masters of the 
executive power, to any extent, whatsoever, to which 
they wished to enjoy it. With iniOuence over it 
they were not contented. They secured to them- 
selves a direct, and no contemptible share of its im- 
mediate functions. On all occasions, the king was 
bound to employ Brahmens, as- his counsellors and 
niinisters ; and, of course, to be governed by their 
judgment. " Let the king, having risen eaily,'' says 

3 



Farm of GaoemmenU ISg 

the law, ^ respectfully attead to firahmem learned book il 
in the three Vedas, and by their decision let him ^"'^'^ ^ 
abide." ^ It thus appears that, according to the ori- """"^ 
ginal laws of the Hindus, the king was little more 
than au instrument in the hands of the Brahmens. 
He performed the laborious part of government, and 
sustained the respcMisilttlity, while they chiefly pos* 
aessed the power,' 

The uncontrolable sway of supierstition, in rode 
and ignorant times, confers upon its ministers such 
extraordinary |»iyileges, that the king and the priest 
are generally the same person ; and it appears some*- 
what remaiicable that the Brahmens, who usurped 
among their countrymen so much distinction and au- 
thority, did not invest themselves with the splendour 
43f royalty. It very often happ^Eis that some acddental 
cbciUQstasces, of which little account was taken at j 
the time, and which after a lapse of ages it is impos- \ 
Bible to trace, gave occasion to certain peculiacHies 
which we remark in the affaus and characters of 
nations. It is by no means unnatural to su{]f)ose, 
that to a people, over whom the love of repose exerfe 
the greatest sway, and in whose charagt^ aversion tip 
dai^er forms a principal ingredient, the toik ad^ 
perils of the sword appeared to surpass the advasi- 
tages with which it was. attended; and that th^ 
Brahmens transferred to the hands of others, what 

> Laws of Mena, ch. Tii. 37. 

^ Even under a system, where the power of the altar was from the 
bee:inning rendered sub^vient to the power of the swor^^ the right of 
interpreting a code of sacred laws is found to confer an important author 
rity. Hear the opinion of a recent, and penetrating observer: — " Uesr 
pression vague des prcceptes du Koran, seule loi ecrite dans les pays 
HuBulinansy laisse aux docteurs ane grande latitude pour Its interpre*- 
tatJoBS, etbien des moyens d'augmenter leur autorit^. Quoiquexette 
religion ait peu de dogmes, le fanatisnie qu'elle inspire est un instrument 
que l« pr^tres sarent employer avcc succ^s." De I'Egypte, par le Gem 
Uaynier^ p. 69. 



190 Form of GcvemmenL 

BOOK II. was thus a source of too ' much labour^ as well as 

^^^^' ^' danger^ to be retained in their own. 

So many, however, and important were the powers 
which this class reserved to themselves, that the 
kingly dignity would appear to have been reduced 
to that of a dependant and secondary office. But 
with this inference the fact does not correspond. 
The monuments of the Hindus, imperfect as they 
are, convince us, that their monarchs enjoyed no 
smaU share both of authority, and of that kind of 
splendour which corresponded with their own state 
of society. They had entrusted to them two engines, 
the power of which their history serves remarkably 
to display: They were masters of the army; And 
^ they were masters of the public revenue. These two 

circumstances, it appears, were sufficient to counter- 
balance the legislative, and the judicative, and even 
a great part of the executive power, reinforced by 
all the authority of an Overbearing superstition, lodged 
in the hands of the Brahmens. These threw around 
the sovereign an external lustre, with which the eyes 
of uncultivated men are easily dazzled. In danger* 
ous and disorderly times, when every thing which 
the nation values depends upon the sword, the mill* 
tary commander exercises unlimited authority by 
universal consent; and so frequently is this the si- 
tuation of a rude and uncivilized people, surrounded 
on all sides by rapacious and turbulent neighbours, 
that it becomes, in a great measure, the habitual 
order of things. The Hindu king, by commanding, 
both the force, and the revenue of the state, had in 
his hands the distribution of gifts and favours ; the 
potent instrument, in short, of patronage ; and the 
jealousy and rivalship of the different sets of com- 
petitors would of their own accord give him a great 
influence over the Brahmens themselves. The 4i&- 



Form of Gavelmment. . I9I 

tribution of gifts and favours is air engine^ of such BOOK O. 
power, that the man who enjoys it to a certain ex- ^^^^*^' 
tent is absolute, with whatever checks he may appear 
to be surrounded.^ 

I See what is obienred by three great authors, Htune, Uackstone, and 
Paley, on the inflnence of die crown in England. See also what is 
observed by Lord Bolingbroke on the same subject, in his Dissertation 
on Parties. 



ISe The Lam. 

CHAP. IV. 
77/ e Imws. 

BOOK II. Next to the form of government, in determining 
• ^' the political condition of the people, is the body of 
law, or the mode in which the rights of individuals 
are expressed and secured. For elucidating this 
important point, in the history of the Hindus, mate- 
rials are abundant. The detail, however, or even 
the analysis, of the Hindu code, would far exceed the 
bounds, to which, in a work like the present, this 
topic must be confined. An accurate conception of 
the character and spirit of the Hindu laws, and of 
their place in the scale of excellence or defect, is 
all I can attempt to convey. 

Amid the imperfections adhering to the state of 
law among a rude and ignorant people, one observa- 
tion is, that they preserve not their maxims of justice, 
and their rules of judicial procedure, distinct from 
other subjects. In the law books of the Hindus, the \ 
details of jurisprudence and judicature occupy com- i 
paratively a very moderate space.^ The doctrines 
and cei'emonies of religion ; the rules and practice of 
education; the institutions, duties, and customs of 
domestic life ; the maxims of private morality, and 
even of domestic economy ; the rules of government, 

1 Examine that important specimen of an original Hinda book of law, 
the Institutes of Menu. See too the confession of Mr. Coiebroocein the 
preface to his translation of the Digest of Hindu Law on Contracts and 
Successions; a wjork compiled a few years ago, under authority of the 
English goTemment, by some of the most learned and respectable of the 
Brahmens. 



The Lam of the Hindm. IftS 

of war, and of negotiation ; all form essential parts BOOK ir. 
of the Hindu codes of law, and are treated in the ^°^''-^' 
same style, and laid down with the same authority, 
as the rules for the distribution of justice. The ten- 
dency of this rude conjunction of dissimilar subjects 
is, amid other inconveniences, to confound the impor-^ ^ 

tant distinction between those obligations which it is 
the duty of the magistrate to enforce, and those which 
ought to be left to the suggestions of self-interest, and 
the sanctions of morality ; it is to extend coercion, . 
and the authority of the magistrate, over the greater 
part of human life, and to leave men no liberty even 
in their private and ordinary transactions, while it 
lessens greatly the fiwre of the legal sanction in 
those cases in which its greatest efficiency is re- 
quired. 

Another topic, which it will be convenient to detach 
and premise, is the division and arrangement, which 
the Hindus have given to the matter of law. Tn 
marking a stage of civilization, this is a very cha- 
racteristic circumstance. The human mind, as, in a 
rude state^ it has not the power to make a good distri- 
bution of a complicated subject^ so it is little aware 
of its importance ; little aware that this is the ground- 
work of all accurate thought. In the Institutes of 
Menu, the most celebrated perhaps of aU the original 
compends of Hindu law, the titles, as they are there 
denominated, ov divisions,, of law, are eighteen, laid 
down in the. following order: — 1. Debt, on loans for 
consumption ; 2. Deposits and loans for use ; 3. Sale' 
without ownership ; 4. Conqerns among partners ; 5. 
Subtraction of what has been given ; 6. Nonpayment 
of wa^s or hire ; 7. Nonperformance of agreements ; 
8. Rescission of sale and purchase ; 9> Disputes be- 
tween master and servant; 10. Contests on bo«mda- 

VOL. I, ^ o 



194 The Laws of the Hindus. 

BOOK II. ries ; 11 and 12. Assault, and slander ; 13. Larceny ; 

^°^^' ^' 14. Robbery and other violence ; 15. Adultery ; 16* 
Altercation between man and wife and their several 
duties ; 17* The law of inheritance ; 18. Gaming with 
dice and with living creatures.^ It is not easy to^ 
conceive a more rude and defective attempt at the 
classification of laws, than what is here presented. 
The most essential and obvious distinctions are neg- 
lected and confounded. Though no arrangement 
would appear more natural^ and more likely to strike 
even an uncultivated mind, than the division of laws 
into civil and penal, we find them mixed and blended 
together in the code of the Hindus. The first nine 
of the heads or titles, as above, refer to civil law ; the 
eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, fourteent^i, and fifleentii, 
to criminal law ; the sixteenth and seventeenth return 
to civil, and the eighteenth to criminal ; while the 
tenth relates partly to the one and partly to the 
other. 

Another ground of division, well calculated, as being 
exceedingly obvious, to strike an uncultivated mind, 

> Laws of Menu, cb. viii. The division and arrangemeat of tbesam^ 
subject, in tbe compilation translated by Mr. Halhed, is very similar, 
as will appear by the following titles of the chapters:-—!. Of lending 
and borrowing; 2. Division of inheritable property; S. Of justice; 4. 
Trust or deposit; 5. Selling a stranger's property; 6. Of shares; 7. 
Alienation by gift; 8. Of servitude ; 9. Of wages; 10. Of rent or hire; 
1 1. Purchase or sale ; 12. Boundaries or limits; 13. Shares iu the culti- 
vation of land ; 14. Of cities, towns, and of the fines for damaging a 
crop; 15. Scandalous and bitter expresbions; 16. Of assaults; 17. 
Theft; 18. Violence; 19. Adultery; 30. Of what concerns women; 
SI. Of sundry articles. In the elaborate Digest on the subject of Con* 
tracts and Inheritances, which has been translated by Mr. Colebrooke, 
the titles of the books, as far as they extend, coincide exactly with the 
titles in the Institutes of Menu ; thus^ Book 1. On loans, and their pay- 
ment; Book. 3. On deposits; Book 3. On the nonperformance of agr^*- 
ments; Book 4. On the duties of man and wife. The part of the work 
which relates to inheritance is included in one book, and is the san« 
with the ITtfa title enumerated in the Institotea of Meoa. 



T%e Lam of the Hindus. 196 

b the distinction of persons, and things. This was BOOK n. 
the ground-work of the arrangement bestowed upon ^"^'^ 
the Roman laws. It is that of the arrangement which 
continues to prevail in the EngUsh; rude as it is^ 
at once the effect, and the cause, of confusion*^ It 
will be seen, however, that even this imperfect 
attempt at a rational division was far above the 
Hindus. 

In the order in which the titles follow one another, 
no principle of arrangement can be traced. The first 
eight of the heads may be regarded as allotted to the 
subject of contracts ; but a more rude and imperfect 
division of contracts cannot easily be conceived. Not 
to dwell upon the circumstance of beginning with 
loans, one of the most remote and refined contracts, 
instead of the more obvious and simple, we may ob- 
serve that the subject of purchase and sale is divided 
into two parts ; but, instead of being treated in con- 
junction with one another, one occupies the third 
place in the list of titles, the other the eighth ; and a 
number of heterogeneous subjects intervene. *^ Con* 
cems among Partners/' is a title which occupies the 
middle place between that of *< Sale without Owner- 
ship,** and " Subtraction of what has been given f with 
neither of which it has any relation. ** Nonpayment of 
wages or hire" stands immediately before ^^ Nonper- 

1 The Romans, by the ambigaity of their word jura^ which signified 
either rights or lawsy were enabled to use^ without manifest impropriety, 
sach expressions as, jura of persons, and jura of things : for though 
it was absurd to talk of the rights of things, things having a right to no« 
thing, yet it was not absurd to talk of the Urns of things. In their expres* 
sions^ttra personarum and jura remm, there was, therefore, only con- 
fusion of ideas, and ambiguity. The English lawyers, from two of their 
characteristic properties, blind imiution, and the incapacity of clearing 
confused ideas, have adopted the same division ; though in their set ^ 
phrases, rights of persons, and rights of things, there is not only confuiioii 
and ambiguity, but gross absurdity. 

o2 



196 The Lau^ of the Hindus. 

.BOOK n. fortnance of Agreements,*' though the latter is a gene- 
Cha». 4. ^ ^j^j^ jjj ^Iji^jj ^p former is included. The latter 

indeed is remarkaUe; for it is so general that it 
includes the whole subject of contracts, thou^ it is 
here [daced as only one, and the last save one, among 
nine different titles or divisions of that subject. Se^ 
veral of the titles are nothing but particular articles, 
belonging to some of the other divisions ; and are 
with great impropriety made to stand as separate and 
^mary heads. The contracts for example, between 
master and servant, are part of the great sulgect 
Ix)cation, or letting and taking to hire, including so:- 
vices as well as things ; yet are these contracts h^^ 
treated of under two distinct titles ; the one, ^ Non- 
fiayment o£ wages or hire,'* the other, '^ Dilutes 
between master and servant," and even these are 
separated, from one another by two intervening sub- 
jects. '^ Concerns among partners," is an article, 
little, surely, entitled to stand as a separate head 
among the primary divisions of law, since the rights 
of individuals in a joint property fall under the same 
junctions and rules which determine their rights in 
<yther property.^ Where one l»*anch of one great topic, 

1 A x^ry odd. attempt at a further generaiizatioo upon the first nine 
titles appears in Mr. Colehrooke*s Digest. His first book, On Loans,^ 
tx)rresponds exactly with the first title in the Institutes of Meoo. Hb 
second book^ On Deposits^ is divided into four chapters, which are 
exactly the 8d, Sd, 4th, and 5ch titles in the list of Mena« His third 
.book, which is entitled, '^ On the Nonperfbrmance of AgreeneeotSy" is 
^diTided into tour chapters, and these are the same with the four sw>* 
-eeeding titles in the classification of Menu.— >1. Loans, 2. I>cl|»oaiCs, 3. 
Nnnperfonnance of agreements: These, according to the logic, of the 
Digest, are the grand classes of contracts, and the titlea which belnng to 
them. The hut of the titles, it is evident, cannot belong to any partibii- 
lar class : Nonpetformnnce ia incident to all classes of oontmcts* Either, 
therefore, this is an improper title altogether, or it ought to stand as the 
title of the whole subject of contracts : and then Nonperfonmnoe of. 
Agreements would include, loans, depoiittf and every thing else. Under 



The Laws of the Hindus, 107 

u transfer of ownership, is taken up, and coneluded, BOOK II. 

Chap. 4. 



it would appear a very necessary arrangement to pass 
on to another: when transfer by contract for example, 
is finished, to begin with transfer by descent. Such ob- 
vious rules appear to have had no influence in the fram^ 
ing of the Hindu systems of law : when the subject of 
contracts is ended, the principal branches of criminal 
law are introduced ; and, after these and some other 
topics are finished, then follows the grjeat subject of 
inheritance.^ 

In order to convey, in as^ narrow a coinpass as pos- 
sible, an idea of the maxims and spirit of Hindu 
jurisprudence, it will be convenient not to follow the 
mangled division of the Hindus themselves. Omit* 
ting the laws, which regulate the political order, which 
determine who are to govern, who are to obey, and 
define the terms of command and obedience ; laws, 
are conveniently distributed under the three usual 
heads ; I. Civil laws, though Civil is a very objection- 
able term ; II. Penal laws ; and III. The laws of 
judicature, or those which fix the mode in which the 

DeposiiJi the Digest includes the following sub- titles, 1. Deposits^ and 
other bailments; 2. Sale without ownership ; 3. Concerns among part- 
ners; 4» Subtraction of gifts: of which .the last two have no more to do 
with deposits than they have with loatUy or any the most remote branch 
of the subject ; and the second is either a part of the first, and ought to 
have been included under it, as relating to the sale of things deposited, 
or that also has no comieiion with the title. Let as next contemplate 
the 8ub<titles ioduded under Nonperformance of Agreements. They 
are, 1. Nonpayment of wages or hire ; 2. Nonperformance of agreements, 
chiefly in association; 3. Rescission of purchase and sale; 4. Dispute? 
between master and herdsman: As if these included all the agreements 
of which there could be aooperformance. The first and last of them, 
moreover, are the same thing, or the last is a portico of the first. It is 
needless to carry the criticism further^ 

1 It is curious, though somewhat bumbling, to observe how far ^rea^ 
men may let authority mislead tliem. *' The articles,'* says Dr. 
Robertsoo, *^ of which the Hindu code is composed^ are arranged ia 
natural and luminous order.'' Disquisition concerning India, Ap* 
jpendix, p. 317. 



198 The Laws of (he Hindus. 

BOOR n. judicial services are rendered. Under e^tch of these 
Cdap. 4. heads, such particulars have been carefully selected 
""""""" firom the multitude of Hindu laws, as appeared the 
best calculated to convey an idea of the leading quali- 
ties of the Hindu code, and of the stage of civilization 
at which it may appear to have been fonned. 

I. Under the first of these heads, property is the 
great subject of law : To this we may confine our 
illustrations. 

It is needless to remark, that the sources of acquisi- 
tion, by occupancy, by labour, by contract, by dona- 
tion, by descent ; which are recogniised in almost all 
states of society, are recognized in Hindustan. It is 
in the accuracy with which the intended effects of 
these incidents are defined, and in the efficiency of 
the means taken to secure the benefits they convey, 
that the excellence of one system above another is 
more particularly observed. 

Though property, in the first stage of its existence, 
was probably measured by occupancy, and the one 
ceased with the other,* the privilege was early con- 
ferred of alienating for a valuable consideration, or 
of transferring by purchase and sale. As this is a 
very simple compact, it appears to admit of little 
variety in the various stages of human improvement. 
In an age, however, in which the means of detecting 
fraudulent acquisitions, and of proving the good faith 
of contracts and bargains, are imperfectly known, 
purchases and sales, made in public, are alone consi- 

1 Lord Karnes, HiBtorical Law Tracts, p'lSid, 154. Grotius de Jare 
Belli ac Pads, lib. XL cap. ii. 8. Blackstone's Commentaries on the 
Laws of England, book II. c. i. The annotator on some of the late 
editions of Blackstone diffisrs from the doctrine in the text. But that 
writer seems to have mistaken nn important circumstance, carefully at- 
tended to by the great lawyers quoted above, that when the commodities 
of the earth began to be appropriated they were not without owners, but 
the common domain of the race at laige. 



The Lam of the Hindus. 199 

dered valid. The laws of our Saxon ancestors pro* BOOK u. 
hihited the sale of every thing above the value of ^' 

twenty pence,, except in open market;^ and it is with 
a pleasing kind of surprise we find, that similar cir- 
cumstances have suggested a similar expedient to the 
people of Hindustan. '^ He/' says the law of Menu,^ 
'^ who has received a chattel by purchase in open 
market, before a number of men, justly acquires the 
absolute property, by having paid the price of if 
The right, however^ conveyed by a bond fide purchase, 
is not, among the Hindus, carried to that extent^ 
which is found requisite in a commercial and highly 
civilized society. If the goods were not the property 
of the person by whom they were sold, the right of 
the purchaser becomes absolute only if he can produce 
the vendor. "If," says the law of Menu,® "the 
vendor be not producible, and the vendee prove the 
public sale, the latter must be dismissed by the king 
without punishment.; and the former owner, who lost 
the chattel, may take it back, on paying the vendee 
half its value." This is quite sufficient to throw so 
much uncertainty into the great class of transactions 
by purchase and sale, as would prove in a civilized 
state of society, a ruinous obstruction of business. A 
manufacturer purchases a quantity of the raw material^ 
and works it up ; he would lose^ in a mischievous pro- 
portion, if the owner of that material could demand 
the identical substaince, on tendering the half of. its 
price. In many cas^ the identical substance is ex- 
ported ; in many it is consumed^; and cannot possibly 

1 L. L. Ethel. 10, 12. L. L. Edg. Hickes. Dissert p. SO. 

2 Ch. viii. 301. When Abraham booght a field of Epbron to bary 
Sarah, the baigain was transacted in the presence of all the people. 
Genesis, ch. xxiii. See, too, Homer's Uiad, lib. xviii. Ter. 499, &Cf 

3 Ch. yiii. 209. 



fOO The Laws of the Hindus. 

BOOK II. be restored.^ Among children, and among rude peqple« 
Chap. 4. ]jix\& accustomed to take their decisions upon full and 
*~"**~ mature consideration, nothing is more common than 
to repent of their baigains^ and wish to revere them : 
Among the Hindus this has been found an afiair of 
sufficient importance to constitute an entire head in 
the classification of their laws. A vapety of cases 
are enumerated, in which, if dissatisfied with his 
bargain, aman may insist upon having it annulled; and 
in general any sale and purchase of things, not perish- 
able, may be rescinded within ten days, at the will of 
either of the parties:^ another law, altogether iiN 
compatible with an age iii which the divisions and 
refinements of industry have multiplied the number 
of exchanges. The regulation, which fixes the 
price of things, instead of leaving it to the natural and 
beneficent laws of competition, conveys not a high 
idea of the knowledge of the Hindus. •* Let the 
king," says the ordinance of Menu, '^ establish rules 
for the sale and purchase of all marketable things. 
Once in every five nights, or at the close of every half 
month, let him make a regulation for market prices." ^ 

1 A curious enumeration of the cases in which the property of on«, 
man is so incorporated >vith that of auotlier as to be inseparable, is 
given in the Romati law, uirder the head of i^ccessio : Indnsio, adfer- 
juinioatio, intextura, iuasdiiicatk), scriptara, piccurai specificatio, com* 
mixtio, et confui>ii;). 

The English law (a few special cases excepted) gives an absolute rij^ht 
of property to the bon& fide purchaser, by whatever means the commodity 
may have corae iuto tlie hands of the vendor. If the English law, how- 
ever, takes care of the purchaser, it must be owned that it is deplorably 
defective In the care which it takes of the party by whom the commodity 
is lost. 

* Laws of Menu, eh. viii. 32«, 223. See also H&lhed*s Code of Gentoo 
Laws,ch. xi. and Mr.Colebrooke's Digest of Hindu Law, book Id. ch. iii. 

3 ib. 401, 402. It is worthy of remark that this was a regulation too 
among the ancient Britons. Leges Wallicv, lib. iii. 247. Uenrv's 
Hist. Brit. iv. 302. 



The Laws of the Hindus. 201 

It is a circumstance full of meaning, that, under this BOOR ii. 
head of bargain and sale, is arranged the obligation of "^^' ^ 
the marriage contract.^ 

There are many occasions, on which it is usieful to 
the owner of property, to place it in the keeping of 
another person, without transfer of the ownership. 
It may be placed, for safe-custody merely ; for the 
sake of an operation, as ^vith the dyer, for the benefit 
of his art ; with the carrier, either by sea or land, for 
the sake of transportation ; or it may be placed, as^ in 
the case of a valuable animal, for the sake of main- 
tenance. These, and a variety of other transactions 
of a similar sort, are included in English law under 
the title of bailments. In a well-regulated society, 
where the house of one man is nearly as secure from 
violence as that of another, mere deposits, unless iii 
the case of warehousing, the object of which is con- 
venience or economy, rather than security, form a 
class of transactions of little comparative magnitude* 
In a rude society, in which there is little or no secu- 
rity, and in which the means of concealing valuables 
is one of the great studies of life, deposits l)ecome an 
object of the greatest importance. In the Hindu 
code, other cases of bailment occupy a narrow space : 
the article of deposits swells, alone, to a great size, 
and forms a subject of considerable intricacy and 
detail.^ The modes of proof constitute the chief 
peculiarities in the provisions, and will be considered, 
when we speak of the third branch of jurisprudence* 

» Laws of Menu, cb. viii. 224 to 827. 

* See Laws of Menu, ch. viii.; Halhed's Gentoo Code, \v.; Cole- 
brooke's Digest, book;!!, cb. i. ; !Ieineccii Pandect, pars I!I. lib. xvi. tit. 
3, on the subject of deposits, and the importance of this class of trans- 
actions in the early days of Rome, with the causes of that importance. 

The reader n^ay see one of the few attempts which have been made 
to let in the l^ht of common sense upon the law of England, in th« 
Essay on Baildoents, by Sir William Jones. 



a02 The Laws of the Hindus. 

BOOK II. One rule, however, expressive of great simplicity, not 
"^^'^' to say rudeness, belongs exclusively to this article : 
^^ On failure of witnesses, to prove a deposit, let the 
judge actually deposit gold or precious things with 
the defendant, by the artful contrivance of spies. 
' Should he restore that deposit, he is to be held inno- 
cent; if he deny it, he is to be apprehended and 
compelled to pay the value of both." ^ 

Hiring; that is, transferring to another, -for a va- 
luable consideration, and to a definite extent, the use 
of any thing valuable; is a right which holds a sort 
of middljs place between sale and bailment; and nay 
extend to'personal services as well as to commodities.^ 
As this contract Mis very naturally under the laws 
of purchase and sale,^ it occupies a narrow space in 
, the volumes of Hindu law, and as far as commo- 
dities are concerned, offers nothing particular for 
observation/ In the hire of personal services, three 
principal classes are distinguished ; first, the students 
of the Veda, who discharge every menial office to 

I Lftws of Menu, ch. yvCu 183. 

* The language of English law in the case of this contract is defective, 
and a source of confusion. In the case of other contracts, it has one 
name for the act of one of the parties, another name for thai of the 
other. Thus, in the case of exchange, one of the parties is said to sell, 
the other to buy; in that of a loan, one of the parties is said to lend, the 
other to borrow. In the present case, it often uses but one name for the 
acts of both parties ; he who gives, and he who receives, the use, being 
both said to hire. The Civilians are saved from this inconvenience by 
the use of the Latin language ; in which the act of the one party is 
termed loeatio^ that of the other ccnductio. To let and to hirty if uni« 
formly employed, would answer the same purpose in English. 

9 Institut. Justin, lib. iii. tit. 26. Locatio et conductio proxima est 
emptioni et venditioni, iisdemque juris regulis consistit. 

^ The simplicity of some of the enactments promotes a smile ; '' If a 
person hath hired any thing for a stipulated time he shall pay the rent 
accordingly." (Gentoo Code, z.) Again, '' If a person^ having agreed 
for. the rent of the water of a pool, or of the water of a well, or of the 
water of a river, or of a house, does not pay it, the magistrate shall cause 
such rent and hire to be paid." It»d. 



The Laws of the Hindus, SOS 

their masters, and receive instruction in return : BOOK it 
secondly handicrafts, who receive either stipulated ^^^' ^ 
wages, or, if no agreement has been made, one tenth 
of the profits on their labour ; thirdly, agricultural 
servants, who are always paid in kind ; for tending 
cows, one tenth of the milk ; for the culture of com, 
one tenth of the crop,* 

That peculiar species of transfer which is kilown 
by the name of loan is an object of great importance 
in the jurisprudence of all nations. Among the Hin- 
dus it stands as the first article in the classification of 
legal subjects, and in the Digest of Mr. Colebrooke 
occupies entirely one of the four books into which 
the compilers of that work have divided the laws of 
contract. From the peculiarities in the ideas and in 
the circumstances of the Hindus, it forms among 
them a subject of more than usual complexity. In 
an improved state of society, where the efficiency of 
laws, the diffusion of wealth, and the accommoda- 
tions of business, have created a mutual confidence, 
loans are generally contracted on the security of law, 
without the actual custody' or deposit of the property 
on which they may be secured. It is only in that 
extremely confined and degraded species of lending, 
abandoned to pawnbrokers, that pledges form a regu- 



' If a hired servant perform not his work according to agreement, he 
Bhall be fined, and forfeit liis wages. What he has been prevented by 
sickness from performing, he is allowed to execute after he is well; but 
if he leaves unfinished, either by himself or a substitute, any part of the 
stipulated service, however small, he is deprived of the hire for the 
whole. One branch of this subject, the obligations between masters, 
and the servants who tend their cattle, is of so much importance, de- 
noting a state of society approaching the pastoral, as tu constitute a whole 
title of Hindu law. The principal object is to define those injuries 
accruing to the cattle, and those trespasses committed by them, for 
which the keeper i|» responsible. Laws of Menu, ch. viii. 214 to 918, 
and 229 to 244. Ilalhed's Gentoo Code, viii., ix. Colebrooke's Digest, 
jl>ook III. ch. ii. and iv. 



S04 The Lawi of the Hindus. 

BOOK II. lar and component part. In the more earlj and 
' ^' imperfect states of the social union, circumstances 
are very different, haw is both feeble and inac* 
curate, poverty reigns, violence prevails; and the 
man who is able to discharge his debts to-day may 
be stript of all his possessions to-morrow. In these 
circumstances, the security of law upon the person or 
property of the debtor is seldom sufficient ; and the 
deposit of som» equivalent property, as a pledge, is 
the obvious, and, in point of fact, the common re« 
source. The doctrine of pledges forms one of the 
most considerable branches of this part of the Hindu 
code. The laws relating to them are laid, down with 
great minuteness and solemnity ; a variety of cases 
are distinguished ; and the receipt of pledges appears 
to have formed a component part of a comparatively 
numerous and important class of transactions.^ The 
responsibility of a second person, who becomes surety 
for the borrower, is another foundation on which 
Hindu loans are contracted, and the different species 
of it are not inaccurately distinguished.^ Interest, or 
a consideration for property lent, appears to have 
been known at a very early stage of civilization.' 
As it is only interest on debts of money which is 
familar to the members of a highly-civilized society, 
European visitors appear to have been forcibly struck 
with the Hindu law, which imposes an interest to be 
paid in kind on loans in goods, as grain, fruit, wool 
or hair, beasts of burden and the like.* Mr. Halhed 
says, ^* The different rate of interest to be paid for 

1 Laws of Mena,ch. vii. Halhed's GentooCode^ ch. i. sect. 9, Colo- 
brooke's Digest, part I. book I. ch. iii. 

* Laws of Menu, ch viii. Colebrooke's Digest, part 1. book I. ch. ir, 
Halhed's Gen too Code, ch. i. sect. 3. 

3 It was perfectly familiar to the Jews at the time of their departure 
from Egypt ; Deuteron. ch. xxiii. «0. 

^ X^ws of Meou, viii. 151. 



The Laws of the Hindus. fiOS 

different articles is perhaps an institute peculiar to BOOK ii. 
Hindustan ; but it reflects a strong light upon the ' ^ 
simplicity of ancient manners, before money was 
universally current as the medium> of barter for aU 
commodities, and is at the same time a weighty proof 
of the great antiquity of these laws, which seem cal* 
culated for the crude conceptions of an almost illite- 
rate people upon their first civilization."^ When 
Mr. Halhed, however, informs us that this law •* re- 
fleets a strong light upon the simplicity of ancient 
manners," it is necessary to add that whatever light 
it reflects upon ancient, it reflects the same upon 
present manners, as this is not a law anciently in 
force^ but long ago repealed; it is a law now in 
operation, and as suitable as ever to the purely Hindu 
state of society. Mr. Halhed too is mistaken when 
he supposes that this is an institution peculiar to the 
Hindus. It was familiarly known to the Jews in 
the time of Moses, and was probably a common prac- 
tice in the nations around Judea, as well as in £gypt> 
from which the Jews had recently departed.^ 

To vary the rates of interest upon the different 
castes is a peculiarity more naturally arising from the 
unfair and odious distinctions among men, created by 
the Hindus. The rule established in the Institutes 
of Menu is, to take^ when there is a pledge, one 
and a quarter per cent, per month; when there 
is no pledge, two per cent, per month ; that is, 
from a Brahmen : but from a man ot the military 
caste, three per cent. ; four per cent, from one of the ^ 

mercantile caste ; and from a man of the servile caste 

1 Halhedy Preface to the Code ofGentoo Laws, p. 53. 

* ^< Tbon slialt not lend upon asury to thy brother, asury of money , 
usury of victuahy usury of any thing that is lent upon unity. Unto a 
stranger thou mayest lend upon usury/' Dsuteron. Kxiii, 19,90. 



soft The Lam' of the Hindus. 

BOOK II. no less than five per cent, per month.^ This exorbi-^ 
^^^'^' tant rate of interest affords a satis&ctory criterion to 
judge of the opinions which are not unfrequentlj ad* 
yanced» of the great riches which, at some imaginary 
period, formerly distinguished Hindustan. The ex* 
cessive accumulation, however, of interest was forbid* 
den. Upon a loan in money, interest, beyond the 
amount of the principal, was not a debt;^ upon 
loans in goods, for some reason which it is not easy 
to divine, it was permitted to five times the amount 
of ^ the principal. Compound interest too was pro- 
hibited. These were rules which would give effectual 
motives to the Hindu creditor to exact the regular 
payment of his interest, with rigid severity^^ In the 
laws relating to loans, however, the most remarkable 
particular is the mode of enforcing payment. The 
creditor is commanded, first, to speak to the Mends 
and relations of the debtor; next, to go in person 
and importune him, staying some time in his house, 
but without eating or drinking. If these methods 
iaU, he may then carry the debtor home with him, 
and having seated him, as the law expresses it, before 
men of character and reputation, may there detain 
him. Should he still hold out, the creditor is 
next directed, to endeavour by feigned pretences 
to get possession of some of his goods; or, if 
any pledge was deposited with him, to carry it 

> The tribes of Burrra Smiker, that is, all the mixed classes, pay at 
the rate of one in sixteen (or rather moce than six per cent) per month. 
Haihed's Gentoo Code, ch. i. sect. 1. 

« It is curious that this too was a law of Egypt, at least iu regard to 
loans upon security. Diod. Sic. lib. i. cap. 79. Goguet's Origin of 
Laws, part III. book I. ch. ir. 

3 For the details respecting the law of interest, consult Laws of Menu, 
ch. viii. 140 to 154. Halhed's Gentoo Code, ch. i. sect. 1. ColebrookVs 
Digest, part L book L ch. ii. 



The Laws of the Hindus. 807 

before the magbtrate, who will cause it to be sold to BOOK il. 
make payment. If neither of these expedients can '^' ^ 
be used, he shall seize and confine the debtor's wife» 
children, cattle, buffaloes, horses, &c« ; also his pots» 
clothes, mats, and furniture, and, seating liimself at 
his door, there receive his money. Should even this 
proceeding fail» he is commanded to seize and bind 
the debtor's person, and procure by forcible means a 
discharge of the debt.^ What is meant by forcible 
means is sufficiently explained in the following extra- 
ordinary definition. ^^ When, having tied the debtor, 
the creditor carries him to his own house, and by 
beating or other means compels him to pay, this 
is called violent compulsion. By beating," adds the 
law, " or by coercion, a creditor may enforce pay- 
ment from his debtor."^ When the debtor is of 
a caste not superior to the creditor, the latter may 
seize and compel him to labour for the discharge of 
the debt. If a man owes debts to several creditors, 
he is commanded to discharge first one debt and then 
another, in the order in which they were contracted; 
a regulation by which one or two of his creditors 
may receive in full their demands, while the rest, 
whether few or numerous, are entirely defrauded. 
The equitable arrangement of an equal dividend, 
which we find established among nations of very 
limited progress in the knowledge of law, obvious 
and useful as it is, had not suggested itself to the 
rude legislators of Hindustan. When a creditor pro- 
cures payment of a debt by application to the magis- 
trate, he pays him for his interposition a twentieth 

1 This mode of personal seizure had place at an early age aaioDg the 
Egyptians; bat they made snfiideat advancement to abolish it. A law 
of king Bocchoris permitted the creditor to seize only the goods of his 
debtor for payment. Died. Sic. lib. i. p. 90. 

• Colebrooke's Digest, part I. boek I. ch. vi. sect* 840^ 941, • 

s 



208 The Laws of the Hindus. 

BOOK II. part of the sum recovered.* By a very extraor- 
^^^^*' ^' dinary regtdation a punidiment seems to be inflicted 
on the defendant in all actions for debt wherein he is 
cast. *^ A debt being admitted by the defendant, he 
must pay five in the hundred as a fine to the king ; 
but if it be denied and proved, twice as much." ^ The 
sacred character of the Brahmen, whose life it is the 
most dreadful of crimes either directly or indirectly 
to shoi-ten, suggested to him a process for the re- 
covery of debts, the most singular and extravagant 
that ever was found among men. He proceeds to 
the door of the pei'son whom he means to coerce, or 
\rherever else he can most conveniently intercept 
him, with poison or a poignard in his hand. If the 
person should attempt to pass, or make his escape, 
the Brahmen is prepared instantly to destroy himself. 
The prisoner is therefore bound in the strongest 
chains ; for the blood of the self-murdered Brahmen 
would be charged upon his head, and no punishment 
could expiate his crime. The Brahmen setting him- 
self down, (the action is called sitting in dhema) 
fasts; and the victim of his arrest, for whom it 
would be impious to eat, while a member of the 
sacred class is fasting at his door, must fdlow his 
example. , It is now, however, not a mere contest 
between the resolution or strengUi of the parties ; for 
if the obstinacy of the {nrisoner should exhaust the 
Brahmen, and occasion bis death, he is answerable 
for that most atrocious of crimes the murder of a 
priest ; he becomes execrable to bis countrymen ; tlic 
horrors of remorse never fail to pursue him ; he is 
shut out from the benefits of society, and life itself is 

» For the laws respecting recorery of debt, see Laws of Menu, 
ch. viii. Halhed*s Gcntoo Code, ch. i. sect. 5. CdebixM)ke*s Di^esr, 
part I. book T. ch. Ivi. 

* Laws of Menu, TiU. 139. 



The Lam of the Hkidus. . Hl^g 

a calamity. Aa the BrahBGieB who avaUa bimaelf of oooKii. 
this eoipedieiit is bound fiwr his honow to peraevere^hfi Cn^f.^ 
seldom SuJis to succeed, because the danger of pudiiiiig 
the experiment too far is, to his antagomat, tremens 
dous. Nor is it in his own ooncems alone that the 
Brahmen may turn to account the sacredoess of hia 
person : he may hire himsdf to enforce in the same 
manner the claims (^ any other man ; and not claims 
of debt merdy* he may employ this barbarous expe- 
dient in any suit." What is still more extraordioaiy, 
eiren after legal proeess, eren when the magistrate 
has pronounced a decision against him, and in fitvour 
of the person upon whom his claim is made, he may 
still sit in dhoma, and by ibk dreadful mode of 
appeal make good his demand.^ 

We have now reviewed the great peculiariti^ of 
the ^indtt law, in regard to those transfers of pro^ 
perty which partake of the nature of exchange^ and 
in which some sort of an equiTaJent is given and 
received; it remains for us to consider those, iQ 
wUch the property passes from one owner to another 
without any return. 



> See Ml accont of tbft pmctict of tttdng in dh t iB t , by Sir Jobn 
Shore (Lowl T«igpimottth), Amt. RcMarcbe», W. 330 to 332. He telb 
9S that, since the institution of the ooart of justice at Benares in 1783, 
the practice has been less freqaent, bat that eren the interferenoe of that 
OMOt aftd of the resident had ooeaskiaaU J been iBiftbletpi4iedcit^ fif 
tells usy'toOy that some of the pundits, when consoltedy declared the ▼»- 
lidity of the deed or cooce&^on .extorted by dhema; but restricted that 
▼aliditj to such claims as are just : others denied its Talidityi except 
nf here fhe party confirmed the engagement after the coercion is with* 
drawn. But it is evident that these restrictions are inconsistent with 
the facts which Lord Teignmouth records, a|^d are mere attempts qf the 
pundits^ according to their usual practice, to interpret their laws ipto M 
great a cpincidence as possible with the ideas of ibe great person? h^ 
whom the questions are put to them. A regulation was made by the 
Bengal government in 1795 for preventing this practice. See pep^, 
ordered to be printed by the House of Commons, 3d June, }813> p. i^h 
See also Bropghton's Mhratta Camp, p. 42. . . . ' .^ 

VOL.1, P 



SIO The Laws of th€ Hindus. 

^OOK It. The most e^tensiTe class of this species of trans* 
"^"^•^•^ actions are those occasioned by die death of the' 
owner. Men had considerably strengthened the 
chain by which they were connected with property, 
before they ceased to consider death as the cause of 
a perfect separation, and as leaving their possessions 
free to the earliest* occupier. A right of succession 
in the children suggests itself, however, at a very 
early period in the progress of civilization. It is 
recommended by so many motives, it so happily 
accords with some of the strongest impulses of 
human nature, and is so easily engrafted 'upon the pre- 
vious order of things, that it could' not fail to be an 
early institution. The children, being naturally the 
nearest to their parent at the moment of his death, 
were generally able to avail themselves of tbe right 
of occupancy, and to exclude other successovs by prior 
possession. It was the usual arrangement in early 
stages of society^ that the diiTerent members of a 
family should live together; and possess theprop^ty 
in common.^ The fether was rather the head of a 
number of partners, than the sole proprietor. When 
he died, it was not so much a transfer of property, as a 
continued possession ; and the copartaneNhip was only 
deprived of one of its members. The laws of inhe- 
ritance among the Hindus are almost entirely founded 
upon this patriarchal arrangement.^ When the finther 

1 " Among barbarians in all parts of the world, persons who \)elong to 
the saide fiimily are understood to enjoy a community of goods. In 
those early ages, when men are in a great measure strangers to com- 
merce or the alienation of commodities, the right of property is hardly 
distinguished from t^e right of using or pauemng ; and those persons 
who have acquired the joint-possession of any subject are apt to be 
regarded as the joint proprietors of it." Millar on the English goveni- 
nent, i. 190. 

« The whole too of that Title of law, ** Concerns among partners,*^ 
rtfers not so much to a joint-stock property, contribnted by certain 
individiials for carrying on any particular business^ as to the property of 



The Jmws of the Hindus, jjjj 1 

di^ a thd sons shall trhpose. to live togeUi^r, tli€{ BOOK iXi 
eldest, says the law, shall take the station of the head ^"^"^^ ^^ 
of the family, atid the property is held jointly in his 
nameJ '^ For. brothers a common abode is ordained 
so long as both their parents live. On failure of both 
their parents, partition among brothers is ordained.*' ^. 
Even during the life-time of the father, a separation 
of the family might take place, when a division of the 
property, according to the strict notion of a joint 
interest, was made, in the proportion of two shares to 
the father, and one share equally to each of the sons.^. 
When the division, however, of the common estate is 
delayed till the death of the father, the elder brother, 
as the new head of the family, is distinguished in the 
partition. He first receives one twentieth of the 
inheritance, after which it is divided equally among 
all the brothers.* . With a few immaterial exceptions, 
the principle of equal division guided puccessioUjamopg 
the Hindus, *^ Let the sond, after the death' of the 
parents, equally share the assets. . If oU sons he equa} 

a number of persons, most commonly brothers or other near relations, 
who agree to- livi together, and to have all :theip effects io common. 
The multitude of the laws proves the frequency of the transact ionsi-r- 
The old law of inheritance among the Romans was altogether founded 
upon the same ideas. Fundamentum successionis veteris ei-at conserve 
tio familiarum. Famiiia enim umvcrsicas quasdam ?idebatiii> cojuf 
prinoeps est paterfamilias.— Quum ergo proximi in familia essej^t 
liberi vel sui heredes, tanquam vivo patre, quod^mmodo domini'el 
AuroxXiipevd^uof, legibus xii. tabularam cautum fuerat;* st rKrr£stAt^ 

MOUtVE CUf SUUB HUBES WEC BSCIS-^ AdNATui.4ffV91^(^VI| rAllU(UH 

HABETO. Heinec in Inst. lib. iii. tit. i. &ect. 090. ^ , ..^ 4 . i , 

» Laws of Menu, ch. ix. 105. . ' ' • • • , • 

« Coldbrooke's Digest>.part II. book V: cb. iii. sect. 114. 

' Halhed's Gentoo Code, ch. ii. sect. 11. CoUbrooke's Digei^ 
part II. book V. ch. ii. Mr. Halhed has remarked that the demand of 
the prodigal' SOD in the Gospel for his portion, affords proof of a similar 
state of things among the Jews. The attentive reader . will perceive 
many other strokes of resemblance. All the more cultiisated nations of 
Asia appear to have reached a stagto of society nearly the« same. 

« €olebrooke*s Digest, book V. ch. i. sect. ^, subiact. 94. U«lhed> 
Gentoo Code, ch. ii. sect. 12. 

F S 



21S The Laws of the Hindus. 

BOOK n. in godd qualities^ they must share alike ; but he who 
^^^' *• is <ystingui8hed by science and good conduct shall 
take a greater share than the rest,'' ^ The last of 
these clauses affords an example of that vagueness 
and ambiguity, the source of endless dispute, which 
distinguishes the laws of all ignorant people, and 
which forms a most remarkable feature in those of 
Hindustan. What is the criterion to ascertain that 
superiority in science and virtue, which determines 
the share of brothers in the division of the paternal 
estate? Or who is to be the judge ? Equally unskilftil, 
and pregnant with evil, is the vague and indetermi- 
nate law which declares ** that all those brothers 
who are addicted to any vice shall lose their title to 
the inheritance."^ As the interpretation of the 
phrase, " addicted to any vice/' may receive any 
latitude, according to the inctinations and views of 
the expounder, a jgate is here thrown open to unli- 
mited injustice. Inconostency, and even direct con- 
tradiction, is a characteristic of the Hindu law8» 
which it does not appear to have been thought even 
requisite to avoid; as it is expressly enacted, thai 
when two laws command opposite things, both are to 
be held valid.^ This attribute is fully exemplified in 
the laws of inheritance. It is declared that, '^ on the 
fifidlure of natural heirs, the lawful heirs are such 
Brahmens as have read the three Yedas, as are pure 
hi body and mind, as have subdued their passions; and 
they must constantly offer the cake ; thus the rites of 

1 Colebrook#*t Digeit, part IL book V. ch. 3, tubioet. 115, 116, 
dh. i. tect. % sobfl^ct. 34. 

« Laws of M«o«, ch. is. 914. 

9 ** When tb«ra are two sacred texts, apparmUhf tnemmdtni, botb afa 
held to be law, ibr both are pronounced by the wise to be valid and r»* 
ooadleable. Thus in the Veda are these teiu: Let the sacrifioebe 
when the san has arisen, and before* it has risen, and when neither son 
nor stut can be seen : The sacriBce therefore maj be pei^mned at any 
or all of those times." lb. ii. 14, 15. 



The Laws of the Hindus. 818 

obsequies cannot fail."^ Yet it is added, in thefiOOKiL 
very next clause or sentence, " The property of a ^"^' ^' 
foabmen shall never be taken as an escheat by the 
Edng; this is a fixed law; but the wealth of the 
other classes, on failure of all heirs, the king may 
take.** ^ Not unfrequently in rude nations, as if one 
Hiisfortune ought to be aggravated by another, those 
who labour under certain maladies, or bodily defects, 
are excluded from inheritance. This principle is 
fully adopted by the Hindus, and carried to an unu- 
sual, and monstrous extent. AU those persons who 
are lame, all those persons who are blind, all those 
who are deaf, all those who are dumb, impotent, or 
affected with an incurable disease, as leprosy, maras- 
mus, gonorrhoea, dysentery, are denied a share in the 
partition of their father's effects, and are only entitled 
to a maintenance from the family.^ When a 
man has sons by wives of different castes, they 
inherit in the proportion of the mother*s rank, and 
the son by a concubine is entitled only to one half of 
the share of him who is bom of a wife/ The laws 
which define proximity of kin, and fix the order of 
collateral' succession, are numerous, minute, and Iq 
nothing remarkable.^ It is particularly to be noted 

1 Lews of Menu, ch. ix. 188. • lb. 189. 

s Colebrooke*8 Digest, part II. book V. di. v. sect. 320, 331, 3S5, 
399,331. In Haihed's Oentoo Code they are thas enumerated; one 
bom an eonooh, blind, deaf, damb, without hand or foot, or nose, or 
tongue, or privy member or fundament, and one who has no principle of 
religion, as well as the victims of fariens diseases. Gentoo Code, ch. ii. , 
eect. 5. The law is thos stated in the Institutes of Menu ; ennuchs and 
outcasts, persons bom blind or deaf, madmen, idiots, the-dumb, and such 
as have lost the use of a limb, are excluded horn a share of the heritage. 
But it is iost, that the heir who knows bis duty should g^ve di of them 
fbod and rument. lAwa of Mono, viu. SOI, 90f . 

^ Laws of Menu, riii. 149, <cc. Haihed's Gentoo Code, ch. ii. sect. «. 
Colebreoke's Digest, part II. book V.^h. vn. 

A The appearance of accuracy given by minuteness of detail has some- 
dmes been quoted as a proof >ef refined knowledge ; bat it is a proof of 



S 1 4 Tke Laws of the Hindus. 

BOOK II. that daughters are debarred irom a share in the 
°^^' ^ inheritance of their fathers.^ The woman, indeed^ 
among the Hindus, is so restricted in the means 
of acquiring propertj, that she is almost excluded 
from its rights.^ llie exceptions consist, in certain 
presents ; what was given in the bridal procession ; 
what was given in token of love ; what was received 
from a brother, a mother, or a father : and this pro* 
perty is inherited by her daughters in equal portions 
with her sons. If she die without issue, her property 
falls to her husband or to her parents, and is subject 
to nearly .the sames rules of collateral succession as 
■are e&taUishedin Regard to the property" of males.^ 

The idea of a joint interest in the prop!erty of the 
family, while it early established the right of succession 
in the children, served to exclude the right of devising 
by will. As the property belonged to the parent in 
common only with his offspring, it could not be' re* 
garded as just, that he should have the power of 
giving it away from them after his death. It is only 

die very reverse. Henry tells us (Hist, of Britain, i. SSO) tiiat tbe Uws 
of the Druids provided with great care for the eqai table division of the 
effects of the family according to the circumstances of every case. Tbe 
andient law§ of Wales descend to very long and pai'ticular details on this 
subject, and make provision for every po^ible case with the most mi- 
nute exactness. Leges Wallics, lib. ii, de mulieribus, cap. i. p. 70. 
The refinement and niceties of the Mahomedan law of succession are 
perhaps still more remarkable. See Mahomediin law of succession. 
Works of Sir William Jones, iii. 467, and the Al Sirajiyyah, with Sir 
William's Commentary, lb. 50$. In fact, the want of skill to ascend tg 
a general expression, or rulei which would accurately include the diffe- 
rent ramificatioiM of the subject, is that which gives occasion to thu 
minuteness of detail. 

1 Those who are unmarried at the death of the father are directed to 
receive portions oat of their brothers' allotmeots^ Law6 of Mean, ix. 1 18. 

s Three persons, a wife, a eoo^ and a sle.ve, arp declared by law to 
have in general no wealth exclusively their owii : the wealth 'which they 
may earn is regularly acquired for the man to wlwm they belong." lb. 
ch. viii. 416. 

9 lb. ch. ix. 192 to 19r, Colebrooke> Digest, part IL book V. cb. ix. 



The Laws of the Hindu$. S15 

in stagei of sodetjr, conaderaUy advanced, that tb« BOOK ii. 
rights of property are «> far enlarged as to include ^"^^'^ 
the power of nominating^ at the discretion of the 
owner^ the person who is to enjoy it after his death. 
It was first introduced among the Athenians by a law 
of Solon,, and among the Romans^ probably, by the 
twdv« tables.^ TM Hindus have, through all ages» 
remained in a state of society too near the simplicity 
and rudeness of the most ancient times, to have 
stretched their ideas of property so far. The power df 
disposing of a man's possessions, by testament, is alto* 
gether unknown to their laws.* 

The same notion of a joint-title, in all the members 
of » family, to the property of the whole, had origi* 
nally an effect even upon the power of donation. 
Individuals were not at liberty to alienate by gift any 
part of the common stock. This, however, is a right 
which is recommended by motives more powerful and 
frequent than that of disposal after death, and was 
therefore much sooner introduced. The first in- 
stances were probably sanctioned by religious pretexts. 
By the laws of the Visigoths it was permitted to 
make donations to the church ; and by those of the 
Burgundians a f^ee man was allowed, after dividing 
his means with his sons, to make an ecclesiastical 
donation out of his own portion.^ Among the Hindus 

1 Karnes's Historical Law Tracts, i. 162. 

< Impre9sad, when I begfifi to study the history and character of the 
Hindus, with the loud encomiums I had been accoitoiaed to hear on 
their attainments, and particularly their laws ; which were represented 
as indicating a high state of civilization ; this fact, which is broadly 
stated by Mr. Halhed, (Pf e&ce to the Gentob Code, p. liii.) very forcibly 
struck me. Rude as the Arabs were at the time of Mahomed, their 
ideas of property included the right of devising by will. See Roraoy 
chap. V. 

3 Historical Law Tracts, i. 159. How like is this regulation of the 
Burgundians to the rules among the Hindus for divisipn of property ta 
the sons during the father's IHe time ? 



216 T&« Laws of the Hindiu. 

BOOK 11. tbe confeitiag of gifto upM the Ifetliiiiieiis, wUdi 10 
^^^' ^ tau^bt as on^ of the iiio«t important of reHgiow duties 
must hwt early foibiliarized the mind to gratiiitous 
aUaiations ; yet, notwithstanding this important cir« 
cumstance, a man's power of transferring his propaly 
by gift appears subject still to ^etraordinary restrio 
tions. K&cept in certain minc^ cases, the consent of 
fai$ bdurs is required* It is only over that part of his 
^opei:ty which is more than sufficient to feed and 
clothe all his dependants, that he has an unlimited 
power of disposal.^ 

II. Hie second class of laws, those which relate to 
offences and that punishment, form a sul^ect less 
csomplicated, and of less subtle and difficult disqiiisi* 
Uon, than thofsie which relate to the distribution of 
rights ; it is, however, a portion of law, which, from 
the violent interference of human passions, is not less 
alow in gaining improvement* 

An offence is an act by which a right is vidiated. 
The olyect of punishment is to prevent such acts. 
It is emfdoyed, under the empire of reason, only as a 
last resource. If offences could be prevented without 
punishment, punishment ought never to exist. It • 
&II0WS, as a necessary consequence, that as little of 
It as possible ought to exist. 

It. is equally manifest, that it would be vain to esta* 
blish rights, if the necessary means were not to be used 
for securing them. It is theref(»e good to make use of 
pmnishment, as fiBir as necessary for the securing of 
rights ; with this precaution only, that the suffering 
or eyil^ produced by the punishment, is less, upon the ' 
whole, than that which would arise from the violation 
df the right. 

By these maxims, as criterions, we shall endeavour 

I ilalhed's Gentoo Code, cfa. vii. 



Tke Latui if the Hinius. 217 

to a9ceiidin the attribntes 6f tin crimiiial dodb of Ihe bdgb ii. 
juumms* 

Tk4 w&aery and disorder wloch oi v ^r sp re a d biman 
Itfe^ i<^herever self-defence rests wfadly upon the indi« 
vidttid, are tibe cause to whkh goveromeot owes iU 
teigin* To escape from diose evi^Hien tranifer to 
tke fioiagifltrate pernors, efficient for' the defence cEadl ; / 

aad agree to expect from him alooe that proteitian; 
wkicfa they obtained w^ imperfectly from their awri 
etscertions. In the rude aadviokiit tunes whcsthbirb^ i 
volution takes place, it ie; not from a juat ^and cod 
discernment of the limits of defence^ prsventkm, fbd 
r^ration, that penalties are exacted. It b &om the « 
impulse of a keen resentment, that the suSbR pur* i 
sueap and from a strong sympatiiy with thait resent* 
tjient, that the tna^trate commodly judges and con- 
demns. It is not so muoh security that ia coveted, as 
revenge. A great injury committed can oidy be ex«' 
piated by a great injury received. Two principles 
therefore universally characterize Hie penal code of a 
barbarous people; severity; and retaliation. The 
early laws of the Greeks apd thf Romans were cruel ; 
the laws of the twelve taUes, says Mr. Gibbon, like 
the statutes of Draco, were written in characters of 
Uood.^ By the laws, of Mooes, blasphemy, idolatry, 
profaning the sabbath, homicide, adultery, incest, 
rapes, crimes against nature^ witchcraft, smiting or 
cursing father or mother, were punished with death, 
Md with burning and «toning,th6 most cruel kinds of 
death.^ Of the sanguinary character imprinted on 
the laws of the Egyptians, the fidlowing instance may 
be adduced : They thrust little pieces of reeds, about 
a finger's length, into all parts of the bodies of parri* 

• Gibbon'sHntoryoftheDari.afBdPUiordMllomtnEinpiff^ xhp, 
. ' Sfo «be Books of Mosn, pauim. 



218 The LawM ^ Me HmdiU. 

aocmiLddes} aad theD, sunoundiDg them with thoni8> set 
^^^'^ them on fire.* The barbarous punishments whSdl 
prevail among the Chinese are too familiarly known 
to require illustration. Perhaps of all the rude na« 
tibns of whom we have any account, our own Saxon 
and German ancestors wefe the most distinguished 
for the mildness of their punishments; a singularity^ 
however, to be accounted for, by the use of a vary 
ba]:barous expedient, a compensation in money for 
almost every species of crime. Yet in various in- 
stances, particularly that of theft, their la^s were not 
only severe, but inhuman.^ 

Notwithstanding the mildness which has generally 
heen attributed to the Hindu character, hardly any 
nation b distinguished for more sanguinary laws. 
'^ The cruel mutilations,'' says Sir Wi|liam Jones,* 
'< practised by the native powers, are shocking to 
humanity." 

1 Diod. die. Eb. i. p. 88. 

* Wilkins, Leg. Sax. p. S to SO. Mr. Turner, History of the Angjo- 
saxons, says, book XI. ch. viii. ** The most popular of the legal punish- 
loencs were the pecuniary mulcts. Bat as the imperiection and inutility 
of these could not be always disguised— as they were s(j»inetimes impunity 
to the rich, who could afford them, and to the poor who had nothing to 
pay them with, other punishments were enacted. Among these we find 
imprisonment, outlawry, banishment, sla¥ery, and transportation. In 
other cases, we have whippin^^ branding, the pillory, amputation of limb, 
mutilation of the nose and ears, and lips, the eyes plucked out, hair torn 
off, stoning, and hanging. Nations not ciTilized have barbarous pupiah- 



3 Ch«ge to the Grand Jury of Calcutta, Dec. 4, 1788, ^r Wm. Jones's 
Works, lii. 36. Of this feature of their laws, a few examples will impress 
m lively conception. ^ The most pernicious of all deceivers,'^ says the 
law of Menu, ** is a goldsmith who commits-frands ; the king shall order 
him to be cut piecemeal with razors." Laws of Menu, ch. ix. S9ft. 
** Should a wife, proud of her family and the great qualities- of her 
^Linsoien, actually violate the duty which she owes to her lord, let the king 
condenm her to be devoured by dogs in a place much frequented; and 
let him place the adulterer on an iron bed well heated, under wbidi the 
executioners shall throw logs continually, till tlie sinful wretch be thera 
7 



The Law$ of the Hindus, 21 Jl 

Retaliation is another peculiaritj which remarkably BOOK IT. 
^stii^guishes the laws of that barharous period, when *^'*' 
the punishment of crimes is chiefly measured hf the 
resentment of the suflferex'.* Whatever the injuiy 

burned to deatb." lb. viii. 3f 1» S7S. ^If a woman immian bar tpintiial 
guide, or her hasband, or her too, the magktratei baTing cut off her ear^ 
her nose^ her hands, and her lips, shall expose her to be killed bj cows. 
Halhed's Gentoo Code, ch. xxi. sect. 10. '< Of robbers^ who break m 
wall orpartitioD, and commit theft in the night, let the prince order the 
bands to be lopped off, and themselves to be fixed on a sharp stake. Two 
fingers of a cutpurse, the thumb and the index, let him cause to be ampu- 
tated on his first conviction ; on the second, onahand and one ibot ; oa 
the third, he shall suffer death.'' Laws of Menu, is. S76» S77. ^ k 
thief uho,. by plundering in his own country, spoils the province, the 
magistrate shall crucify, and confiscate his goods ; if he robs in another 
kingdom he shall not confiscate his possessions, but shall oradfj bim* 
If a man steab any man of a superior caste, the magistrate shall biii4 
the grass beena round his body, and bum Lim with fire; if he steals m 
woman of a superior caste, the magistrate shall cause him to be stretched 
out upon a hot plate of iron, and, having bound the grass beena round 
bis body, shall burn him in the fire. If ^ man steals an elephant or a 
horse, excellent in all respects, the magistrate shall cut off his hand, and 
foot, and buttock, and deprive bim of life. If a man steals an elephant 
or a horse of small account, or a camel or a cow, themagiatrate shall cut 
off from him one Band and one foot. If a man. steals a goat or a sbeep^ 
the magistrate shall cut off one of his hands. If a man steals any small 
animal, exclusive of the cat and the weasel, the magistrate shall cut off 
half his foot.'' Uaibed's Gentoo code, ch. xvii« sect. 8.. '' If a omo seta 
fire to the tillage or plantation of another, or sets fire to a house or to 
a granary, or to any uuinbabited spot where there is much fruit or flow- 
ers, the magistrate, having bound that person's body in the grass beena, 
shall bum him with fire." lb. xriii. '< For boring the nostrils of oowa 
belonging to priests, the offender shall instantly lose half of one fbotp 
Laws of Menu, ch. viii. 335. The same system of mutilation prevailed 
in Persia. Xenophon, describbg the Persian punishments, aajrsy 
noXA^Xif T i|» tUa nofa rmg fufitfutag 6S«r, xxu ireW, tuu X**?"^ *'" ^f^P'^i'i*^ 
Ftpm/iv^s ay^pwirwf. Xenoph. Cyropsed. lib. k p. 99. The common mode 
of banging is thus described by an eye-witness : ** A hook is fixed to one 
end of the rope, and this book the exeoutioaer forces with all his streagtb 
into the flesb below the criminars chin; he is then hoisted up, and the 
otki^r end of the rope is made fiist to the gallows.** Bartulomeo's Tra- 
vels, book II. ch. V. ^ If a magistrate has committed a crime, and any 
person, upon discovery of that crime, should beat and ill-use the magis- 
trate, the^nagistrate shall thrust an iron spit through him and roast bun 
at the fire." Halhed's Gentoo Code, ch. xvi. sect. 1. 

1 " The inhuman and unequal principle of retaliation," says Mr. Gib- 
bon, Ilist. of Ded. atid Fall of the Rom. £inp. oh. xliv. 



S89 The Laws of tJu Hindmt. 

BOOK II. which U^. ipnoce^t man has sustained^ a similar in« 
^*^|][[^iwy* by way of puBBbinent, is imposed upon the 
goilty. Whatever the member^ or pert of his body» 
with which the offender committed the qime, upoa 
that part is the chastisement inflicted. The Hebrew 
V law of an eye for an eye» and a tooth for a tooth, is a 

familiar example of what occurred among other na- 
tions. The forfeit of limb for limb, and member for 
member, was, among- the Romans, exacted by the law 
of the twelve tables, unless where the offender could 
expiate his crime by a fine of 300 pounds of copper. 
The earliest legislators of Greece were so rude as to 
. ]^ve the punishment of crimes, undefined, to the 
discretion of the judge ; but Zaleucus, legislator of 
the Locrians, who first prescribed rules on this subject, 
enforced so literally the maxim of an eye for an eye, 
that it was deemed an important reform on his laws, 
when it was decreed that he who struck out the eye 
of a person with one eye should lose both his own.' 
The Egyptians extended the principle of punishing 
criminals in that part of the body which was chiefly 
instrumental in the guilt, to an extraordinary numbar 
of instances. He who discovered the secrets of the 
state h^d his tongue cut out ; he who violated a free 
woman was made an eunuch ; of those who counter- 
feited coin and seals either public or private, of those 
who made use of false weights and measures, and of 
public notaries who forged or mutilated deeds, the 
two hands were cut off; and calumniators were sub- 
jected to the same punishment which would have 
been due to those whom they falsely accused.^ To 
how extraordinary a degree the spirit of retaliation 
moulds the penal legislation of liie Hindus, a few 

« Stnibo, lib. vt. p. 308. Potter's Antiq. book I. ch. xxvi. Blackstom's 
Commentaries, book IV. ch. i. 
• Diod. Stc. lib. i. p. 88, 89. 

6 



The Lam of the Hindus, ^ im 

spedmeiis will evince. The law concerning assault B0(» iK 
and battery, in the Institutes of Menu, thus earn- ^^^'^ 
raences: ** With whatever member a low-born man 
shall assault or hurt a supjerior, even that member of hid 
must be slit, or cut, more or less in proportion to the 
injury : this is an ordinance of Menu." ^ ^ If a man 
strikes a Bramin with his hand, the maf^strate %he31 
cut off that man's hand; if he strikes him^ with Iris 
foot, the magistrate shall cut off the foot ; in the same 
manner, with whatever limb he strikes a Bramin, 4hat 
limb shall be cut-crfT; but if aSdodier strikes titherof 
the three casts, Bramin, Chehtet^, or 'Bide, mtii his 
hand or foot, the .mi^strate sfaaU. cut off stidk hand 
or foot/V^. ^ If a man has put out both< the eyes of 
any person, the magistrate shall dcfirivie diat man ctf 
both his eyes, and condemn him to perpetual impci» 
sonment, and.fiae him." ^ The punishment .of murder 
is founded entirely upon the same principle. ** If a 
man,** sajrs the Gentoo code, ^ deprives anodKr of lifel 
the magistrate shall deprive that person of life.**^ 
'^ A once-born man, wha insults the twioekbom witl| 
gross invectives, ought to have fab tongue sliU If he 
mention tiieir names and classes widi contMndy, as 
if he say, ' Oh thou refuse of Biahmens,' an inm s^yle^ 
ten fingers long, shidi be thrust red-hot intafaiamoutlu 
Should he through pride give instruetion to priests 
concerning their duty, let the kingerdersmnehot 
oil to be dropped into his mouth and his ear."^ ^ If a 
hlaw» attended with much pain, be given either to 
human crdatuies or cattle, the king shall haffict on 
the striker a punishment as heavy as the presumed 

t Laws of M«nu, ch. vHi. 979. In a stjle cbaraeterisdcallj Hindti^ 
llw ibilowing, among other -cases,, are specified; wben a ram spite oil 
another^ when he urines on hioi^ and when he breaks wind on him. The 
penalties I choose not to describe. See the same chapter, 280 to ^84. 

" Halhed's Code ofGentoo Laws, ch. xvi. sect. 1. 3 lb. 

« lb. ^ Laws of Mean, ch. y'liL SJO to 273. 



BOOK n.siifferioi^/^^ '' With whatever Umb a thief conuniti 
^'^' ^' the ofience, by any means in this world, as if he break 
a wall with his hand or his foot, even that limb shall 
the king amputate, for the prevention of a similar 
crime." ^ "A mechanic or servile man, having an 
adulterous connexion with a woman of a twice-born 
dass, if she was unguarded, shall lose the part offend' 
ing, and his whole substance/' ^. ** The breaker of a 
dam to secure a pool, let the king punish by long 
imtnersion under water.*" ^ The portion of suffering, 
suflkient to ^constitute a motive for abstaining from 
the crime, is all the punishment which reason author- 
kes ; but we see nations far advanced in dvilizatioa 
so tardy in recognizing this principle, that .the excess 
of suffering, produced by the law of retaliation, would 
not, it is probable^ suggest to nations, at a very early 
itage of civilization, the utility of repealing it Yet 
no maxim more naturally recommends itself to the 
human mind, even before it is strong, than that all 
who commit the same crime should meet with equal 
punishment ; and it requires a very slight degree of 
reflection to see, that when the hand or the foot is cut 
off from one man, the punbhment may be a very mode* 
rate one ; when the same limb is cut off from another 
man, to whose subsistence it is essential, the penalty 
may far exceed a sentence of death. 

In another class of punishments, where the princi* 
I pk of equality may. be 3till more easily applied,, the 
grossness of the violation excitea considerable surprise. 
As among our Saxon ancestors, so among the Hindus, 
fines bear a very large proportion to other punish«- 
ments. When reparation to the party injured should 
be made by the author of the wrong, the pecuniary 
ability of the party on whom the obligation ffills can 

> Laws of Menv, oh. viii. S80. ^ lb. S3i. > Ri. 374. « lb. h. S79. 



Tkt Uw$ of th€ Hhdui. ' SSt 

no more be regarded, than where he owes a debt* bmo& n. 
Butin^sofar as it is the olgect of the law to create a **^^'^* 
motive against the occurrence of a like offence; or 
even to take vengeance, to inflict pain purely because 
pain has been occasioned ; in so far it is one of the 
plainest dictates of reason, that where the offence ia 
equal, the suffering or hardship imposed should be 
equaL Though a pecuniary mulct in^Mises all de« 
grees of hardship, acconfing to the pecuniary abili- 
ties of the man who pays, the Hindu law makes w^ 
distinction between the rich and the poor.^ It makes,! 
indeed, a serious distinetion between the man of one 
ciass, and another : and th^ of the lowest are, with a 
very few exceptions, always the most severely fined* 
But if the class is the same, the same Jhrfeit is exacted 
for the same oflbnoe; though me man should be toa 
opulent to feel from it any sensible inconvenience^ 
another should suffer all the pains and horrors of 
want. 

From the dassification of the people, and the pri^ 
vilegesofthe castes, we are prepared to expert, amoi^ 
the Hindus, inequalities created by distinctions of 
rank. They relaile either to the crimes committed 
against persons of the different ranks, or the crimes 
temmitted bp them. Inequalfties of the first sort, 
it is found difficult to avoid even in high stages of 
civiHzadom At present, in the best governed cobm 
tries of Europe, ah injury done to a nobleman is 
treated as a crime of a 4eeper die, than a similar in* 
jury to a person of the lowest rank.^ If the laws 

1 There is in one pusage of Meno, ch. vixi. 196, an incidental eibor* 
tation to the jndga, not to he regardless of the ability of the saflerer in 
the infliction of corporal or other punishment; and it is impossible bnt 
•ome regard mast hare been paid to it in practice : hot defined snms are 
in almost all cases affixed to specific crimet, without the smattesl refeip- 
•noe to the ability of the payer. 

• The eftAodSoir jad|^ Blackston^i as Mr. Gibbon rery ngni/kantlf 



lS24 2%c Lawn of the Hindus. ^ 

BOOK TT. should make no diftmction in prindite tbe power of 
^^^*:^\ the noUeinan to Jbnag the offender to tiial» and to 
command the partiality of the judge, would long make 
a rery essential difference in practice* When the 
Ifindu law, therefore, makes a gradi^JOB in the act* 
minality of the same action, aocordii^ as it is com^ 
mitted against the Brahmen, tfie Gshatcqra, the 
Vaisya, and the Sudca, it is only the excess i» the 
difference of punishment, which is calculated to eaccite 
our Suisse. With regard to offences comodtted by 
indrnduals of the different- ranks, it is rare, even 
among the. rudest people, to find the principle of 
unequal pumsfaiaents, expresdy avowed;, and com* 
parative impunity granted hy taw to the crimes of the 
great. Perjury, firaudy defanM(kBon,;forg«py^ inoest,mur- 
tier; are inot among us reckoned crimes more vernal 
in the lord than in hia servant. Among the Hindus^ 
whatever be the crime committed, if it is by a Brab^ 
men, tbe punishment is in general comparative 
sliglii; if 1^ a man of the military dasa^ it is more se- 
vere; if by a man of the mercantile and i^griculjtu^ 
lal class, it is still increased ; if |^y a Sudre, it i$ 
violent and crueL For defamation of a BrahmeUa a 
mask of the saipe class must be filed 12 panas; a man 
of themilitary class^ IDO; a merchant^ 150 or 200; but 
a. mechanic or servile mbn is whipped.^ The general 
priheiple on .which the penalties £»- this crime seem 
U> beregithted is^ that whatever fine .is evicted firom 
a man of the same class by wbom you have been 

a«BoaiiMtes him, (Sm Hist. Dcd. and Fall, kt. 6tk. kUv. n. 145) is gaite 
an advocate for the saperior criminality of an injorj to a man of a sope- 
lior rank. 'Mf a nobleman strikes a peasaat,^" J»a/a he, ** all mankind 
;viU sea, that, if. a court of justice awards a return of the blow, it is more 
than a just compensation. The execution pf a needy, decrepid assassin, 
is a poor satis^iictioo for the. murder of a nobleman, in the bloom of his 
jrotttb, and full enjoyinent of his friends^ his .honours, and hia forto^e^" 
Commentaries on the Laws of England, book IV. ch« L 
. i Laws of ]Mknu,.cb. viii. S#9, ^67. » 



The Laws of the Hindus. 225 

accused, one only half as large should be imposed BOOR n. 
upon the man of a superior class, but one double in ^^''' ^' 
magnitude, should the caste of the slanderer be inferior 
to your own. For all the more serious accusations 
against any of the superior orders, the punish- 
ment of the Sudra is far more dreadful.^ That the 
scale of punishment for crimes of assault is graduated 
by the same rule, the following instance, out of 
many, will evince. '* If a man of a superior cast and 
of superior abilities to another should strike him with 
a weapon, the magistrate shall fine him 500 puns of 
cowries. If a man of an equal cast and of equal 
abilities with another should strike him with a 
weapon, the magistrate shall fine him 1000 puns of 
cowries. If a man of an inferior cast and of inferior 
abilities to another should strike him with a weapon, 
the magistrate shall fine him 3000 puns of cowries.'*^ 
For perjury, it is only in favour of the Brahmen, that 
any distinction seems to be admitted. '* Let a just 
prince,** says the ordinance of Menu, " banish men of 
the three lower classes, if they give false evidence, 
having first levied the fine ; but a Brahmen let him 
only banish/' ^ The punishment of adultery, which 
on the Brahmens is light, descends with intderable 
weight on the lowest classes. In regard to the infe- 
rior cases of theft, for which a fine only is the punish*- 
ment, we meet with a curious exception, the degree 
of punishment ascending with the class. ** The fine "^ 

of a $udra for theft shall be eight fold; that of 
a Vaisya, sixteen fold ; that of a Cshatriya, two and 
thirty fold ; that of a Brahmen, four and sixty fold, 
or a hundred fold complete, or even twice four and 
sixty fold."* No corporal punishment, much less 

1 Code of Gentoo LawSi ch. xv. sect. 2. Vide supra, p. 166. 

2 lb. xvi. sect. 1. ^ Laws of Menu, ch, viii. 123. 
« lb. 337, 338. 

VOL. I. Q 



SS6 The Lam of the Hindus. 

BOOK II. death, can be inflicted on the Brahmen far any crime. 

Ciup.4» u Menu, son of the Self-existent, has named ten 
places of punishment, which are appropriated to the 
three lower classes; the part of generation, the 
belly, the tongue, the two hands; and fifthly, the 
two feet, the eye, the nose, both ears, the property ; 
and, in a capital case, the wh<de body ; but a Brah- 
men must depart from the realm unhurt in any one 
ofthem.*** 

Punishment should be proportioned, not to the 
greatness of the crime, that is, the quantity of suffer- 
ing it produces, but solely to the difficulty of creating 
an adequate motive to abstain from it: if a fine of one 
shilUng created a sufficient motive to abstain from the 
crime of. murder, the fine of a shilling would be dl 
the punishment which ought to exist. It must 
be owned, however, that the principle of punishing 
crimes, according to their magnitude, very naturally 
suggests itself; and bears a strong appearance of 
according with the principles of reason* Even to 
this early and imperfect principle, the Hindus have 
never ascended. While perjury, one of the most 
mischievous of crimes, and one against winch an ade* 
quate motive is very difficult to create, is punished 
only with fine, and, in its most aggravated cases, with 
banishment, the crime of detuning goods on false 
pretences is punished with mutilation, and even with 
death. '^ If a person steals a man of an inferior cast, 
the magistrate 3hall fine him 1,000 puns of cowries : 
If he steals an elephant or a horse excellent in all 
respects, the magistrate shall cut off his hand, and 
. foot, and buttock, and deprive him of life/'^ The 
following places of the body are enumerated; the 



1 Laws of Menu, ch. viii. 1S4, 185. 

• Ualhed's GeDtoo CkKle, ch. xyii. s«ct. S. 



TU Lawi of th€ HinAu. 827 

ear, the nose, the hand, the foot, the Up, the eye, the BOCK ii. 
tongue, and some otherst ; upon any one of which a "**' **• 
stroke, such as to separate or cut them off from tlte 
body, is punished equally ; ^ yet surely there is no 
comparison between the injury of depriving a man of 
his ear, for example, and of hi& tongue, or his hand. 
An amour with a woman 6f the Brahmeoical caste is 
more dreadfully pui^shed than parricide. Various 
cases of theft and robbery are accounted worthy 
of more shocking penalties than murder. Even Sir 
William Jones is constrained to say that the punish- 
ments of the Hindus ** are partial and fenclftil, for 
some crimes dreadfully crud, fixr others reprehenribly 
dight."* 

The principal acts erected into punishable ofiences \ 
by the Hindu law are, false witness, deftunation, 
assault, theft, outrage, adultery* The species and 
c^;ree8 of perjury are thus distinguished: '^ If a 
witness speak falsely through oovetousness, he shall 
be fined 1,000 panas ; if through distraction of mind, 
S50; if through terror, 1,000; if through friendship, 
the same; if through lust, 2^500; if through wrath, 
1,500; if through ignorance, SOO complete; if 
through inattention, 100 only.*' * The laws against 
reproachful expressions are numerous, and the penal- 
ties semarkably severe; a pretty satisfactory |»oof 
that the Hindus have always been abusive; as we 
find they continue to the present day.^ By the term 
Assault, are indicated the smaller instancy of per- 

1 Halhed's Gentoo Code» ch. xti. sect. 1. 

* Preface to the Translation of the lostitutet of Menu, Sir Wm* 
Jones's Worksy iii. 6S. 

'LawsofMeno, cb. viiL 120,191. Where the language of the text 
specifies the fine by naming it technically in tW order of amercenentf, I 
ha?e stated the sum, that the reader might see at a glance the pro« - 
portions. 

« See tha Chapter on Mannert, 

• 2 



22g TU Ldw$ of the Hindus. 

BOOK n. sonal offence and injury ; on which the laws of the 
^^^' ^ Hindus descend to the most minute distinctions and 
details. In this they present a remarkable agreement 
with.the laws of our Gothic ancestors. Lord Kaimes, 
observing upon the ancient European mode of satis* 
fying for injuries by money, remarks, that ** the laws 
of the Burgundians, of the Salians, of the Almanni, of 
the Bavarians, of the Bipuarii, of the Saxons, of the 
Angli and Thuringi,of the Frisians, of the Langobards^ 
and of the Anglo-saxons, are full of these composi- 
tions, extending from the most trifling injury to the 
most atrocious crimes. In perusing the tables of these 
compositions, which enter into a minute detail of the 
most trivial offences, a question naturally occurs, why 
all this scrupulous nicety of adjusting sums to delin- 
quencies? Such a thing is not heard of in later 
times. But the following answer wiU give satisfac- 
tion :'^That resentment, allowed scope among Bar- 
barians, was apt to take flame by the slightest spark ; 
therefore, to provide for its gratification, it became 
necessary to enact compo»tions for every trifling 
wrong, such as at present would be the subject 
of mirth rather than of serious punbhment : for ex- 
ample, where the dothes of a woman, bathing in a 
river, are taken away to expose her nakedness, and 
where dirty water is thrown upon a woman in the 
way of contumely." * The following orders of crime, 
in the Hindu cpde, present a similar, and a very re- 
markable picture; 1. Throwing upon the body of 
another, dust, or sand, or clay, or cow-dung, or any 
thing else of the same kind, or striking with the hand 
or foot ; 2. Throwing upon the body tears, or phlegm, 
or the paring of one's nails, or the gum of the eyes, or 
the wax of the ears, or the refuse of victuals, or spittle; 

1 Historical Law Tracts, i. 49, 5a 



The Lam of the Hindus: 2S9 

3. Tlirowing upon another from the nayd down- BOOK IL 
wards to his foot, spue, or urine, or ordure, or semen ; ^^^' ^ 

4. Throwing upon another, from the navel upwards 
to Iieneath the neck, any of the substances mentioned 
in the last article ; 5. Throwing upon another any of 
the same substances from the neck upwards ; 6. As- 
saulting with a stone, or with a piece of iron or wood; 
7. Hauling by the foot, or by the hair, or by the hand, 
or by the clothes; 8. Seizing and binding another in a 
cloth, and setting one^s foot upon him ; 9- Raising up 
an offensive weapon to assault ; 10. Striking with a 
weapon. In all these cases a further distinction is 
made, as the offence is committed by a superior, an in- 
ferior, or an equal, and committed against a man or a 
woman. The gradations too of wounds are curiously 
specified; 1. Wheq no blood is shed; 2. When a 
littie blood is shed ; 9. When nmch blood is shed ; 
4. When a very great quantity ; 5. W?ien a bone is 
broke as well as blood is shed ; 6. When a member 
or organ is struck off or separated.^ Under the title 
theft, the Hindus include the various species of frauds. 
In all nations which have made but the first step 
in civilization ; when the means of protecting pro- 
perty are very imperfectly known, and covetous- 
ness is a furious passion; the depredations of thieves 
are always punished with extreme severity. In 
the Gothic nations of Europe, when the murder 
even of the King inferred but a pecuniary composi- 
tion, theft was punished by mutilation and death.^ 
In the same manner, among the Hindus, while mur- 
der is punished by the mere loss of life, some of the 
most atrocious instances of the cruelty of the Hindu laws 

1 See the Article Assault in the Code of Gentoo Laws, cb. xri. seqt. t. 
Laws of Menu, ch. viii. 279 to 301. 

^ See Karoes*8 Historical Law Tracts, i. 63, and the aathoritios there 
quoted. 



S80 Th$ Luwi of the HinAu. 

BOOK II. were drawn as above firom the pumshments awarded 
^^^* *• to theft.^ The minor cases of theft are punished hj 
fines, and hj yarious degrees of mutilation ; but the 
higher species, by impaling, by burning alive, and by 
crucifixion. By Outrage; which is sometimes deno- 
minated violence, sometimes robbery ; are designated, 
all attadu, accompanied with violence, upon either 
property or person, including even murder* While 
the infeiior species are punished by fine and by muti* 
lation, the higher are punished by death; and some 
itf the more heinous kinds of spoliation are avenged 
with all the sanguinary fiiry which, among the Hin- 
dus, has dictated the higher penalties of theft.^ Adul^ 
tery is a very complicated subject. In the Hindu 
language it includes every unlawful species of sexual 
indulgence, from the least, to the most, injurious, or 
offensive. If the laws are any proof of the man- 
ners of a people, this article affords indication of 
one of the most depraved states of the sexual iq>pe- 
tite. Almost all the abuses, and all the crimes which 
it is possible to conceive, are there depicted with 
. curious exactness ; and penalties are devised and as- 
signed for every minute diversity and refinement, as 
for acts the most firequent and familiar. There are 
even titles of sections in the code which cannot be 
transcribed with decency, and which depict crimes 
unknown to European laws.^ According to the ge- 

> Supra, p. SIS, S19. 

• Laws of Menu, ch. viii. 344 to 348. Code of Gentoo Laws, ch. xviii. 

9 Mr. Haihed makes so curious an apology for this article in his pre- 
face to the Code of Gentoo Laws, p. ixiii. that I am tempted to transcribe 
it : ^ The luneteeoth and twentieth chapters,'* says he, ** present us a 
lively picture of Asiatic manners, and in them a strong proof of their ori- 
fpnaiity. To men of liberal and candid sentiments, neither the grossoess 
of the portrait nor the harshness of the colouring, will seem improper or 
indecent, while they are convinced of the truth of tbe resemblance ; and 
if this compilation does not exhibit mankind as they might have been, 
or as they ought to have been, this anfwer is plain, * Because it fBaints 



Tki Law of tki Hindus. SSI 

neral practice . of Eastern nations^ among whom an book ii. 
extraordinarj value is set on the diastity of the/^"^****' 
women, its more aggravated violatimifi are punished' 
bj the most shocking death which human cruelty has 
probably devised, that of burning on a heated j^te of 
iron. The ramifications of criminality are also pur-* 
sued to the most minute and trivial acts, and such as^ 
even in the most jealous nations of Europe, would be 
held perfectly innocent : '• He, who talks with the 
wife of another man at a fdace of pilgrimage, in a 
forest or a grove, or at the confiuence of jrivers^ 
incurs the guilt of an adulberous inclination : to send 
her flowers or perfumes, to ^port and jest with her, 
to touch her apparel and ornaments, to sit witli 
her oh the same couch, are all held adulterous acts 

them as they were/ — ^Vices» as well as fashions, have their spring and 
their fall, not with individuals only, but in whole nations, when one 
reigning foible for a while swallows o^tfae rest, and then retires in its 
turn to make room for tbe epidemic influence of a newer passion. Where- 
fore, if any opinions, not reconcileable to our modes of thinking, or any 
crimes not practised, and so not prohibited ambng us, should occur in 
these chapters, they must be imputed to the different effects pro- 
duced on the human mind by a difference of climates, customs, 
and manners, which will constantly give a '' particular turn and 
bias to the national vices.— Hence it would be a weak and fHvolous ar- 
gument lor censuring the fifth section of this nineteenth chapter, to 
olgect that it was levelled at an offence absurd in itself, not likely to be 
frequent, or, supposing it frequent, still to be deemed of trivial conse- 
quence; and to make this ol^ectaon merely in oonsideration that the 
offence may not be osnal among us, and has certainly never been forbid- 
den by our legislature, such cavils would betray a great ignorance of the 
general system of human nature, as well as of the common principles of 
legislation ; for penal laws (eicept for the most ordinary crimes) are not 
enacted until particular instances of offence have pointed out their abso- 
lute necessity ; for which reason parricide was not specified among the 
original institutes of the celebrated lawgiver of Sparta. Hence we may 
with safety conclude, that the several prohibitions and penalties of this 
fifUi section were subsequent to, and in consequence of, the commission 
of every species of enormity therein described.^ — Mr. Halhed here main- 
uins, with very cogent reasons, though rather an unskilful style, that 
the Hindu morals are certainly as gross as the Hindu laws ; that the 
latter grossnees is, in foct, the lefult of the former. 



ass The Laws of the Hindus. 

BOOK 11. on his part/'^ Of all crimes, indeed, adultery ap- 
'*'''^' pears, in the eyes of Hindu lawgivers, to be the 
greatest ; and worthy of the most severe and terrible 
chastisement. The offences committed with the 
women of the higher classes by men of the lower are 
the acts which are looked upon as of greatest atrocity, 
and which rise in criminality, as the classes recede 
from one another, till they arrive at last at the 
adultery of a man of the servile with a woman of the 
priestly caste ; a point beyond which, it is supposed, 
that human guilt and depravity cannot proceed.^ 

III. The fulfilment of the laws of the two pre- 
ceding orders ; denominated, for want of better terms, 
the Civil, and the Penal ; is the End ; the laws of Ju- 
dicature are to be regarded in the light of Means to 
that End. The subject, in its full extent, includes an 
account of 1. the instruments made use of for pro- 
ducing the fulfilment of^e laws of the two former 
kinds, and 2. the modes of using them. 

The instruments made use of among the Hindus, 
have been already described, in giving an account of 
the functions of the king; who, with his Brahmen 
assessors, is the principal instrument. ' The mode of 
using the instruments of judicature, or the steps accord- 
ing to which judicature is performed, were there also 
briefly described. Of the matters which remain, the 
laws or rules respecting evidence form the only part 
which it is still useful to represent. 

Prior to the general use of writing, the chief species 
of evidence, applicable to judicial cases, is the speech 
of witnesses. It is this species which makes the prin- 
cipal figure in the laws of Hindustan to the present 
age. It is even more than doubtful whether written 

1 Laws of Menu, ch. viii. S56> 357. 

» lb. 352 to 886. Code of Gentoo Laws, ch. xiz. 



The Laws of the Hindus. 28S 

evidence i« at all referred to by the author of the ordi- BOOK ii. 
nances of Menu ; though from himself we learn that "^^'^' 
writing had been applied to laws/ *' On the denial," 
says the law, ** of a debt which the defendant has in 
court been required to pay, the plaintiff must call a 
witness who was present at the place of the loan, or 
produce other evidence ;"^ the gloss of CuUuca adds, 
** a note and the like : " ^ but for the use of evidence by 
writing not a single rule is afterwards adduced, 
though numerous rules are prescribed for the use of 
that which is dettvered in speech ; not even a word of 
allusion to this novel species of evidence appears ; and 
where the various circumstances are enumerated on 
which the attention of the judge ought to be fixed, 
while the evidence of speaking witnesses occupies a 
conspicuous place, the evidence of writings is entirely 
omitted/ In the compilations, however, of recent 
times, as in that made by order of Mr. Hastings and 
translated by llalhed, the use of written evidence ap* 
pears ; but even there it is treated with a negligence 
and slightness due to a matter of subordinate im- 
portance. 

Among the rules for evidence at the lips of wit- 
nesses, some are reasonable and good ; others are not 
only the reverse, but indicate a state of ignorance and 
barbarism. The evidence of three witnesses is re- 
quired for the decision of any question : '^ When a 
man has been brought into court by a suitor for pro- 
perty, the cause shall be decided by the Brahmen who 
represents the king, having heard three witnesses at 



1 Laws of Menu, ch. viii. S. « lb. 52. ^ lb. 

« *' Let him fully consider the nature of truth, the state of the case, 
and his own person ; and next, the witnesses, the place, the mode and 
the time." lb. 45. From these circumstances it is probable that the 
emendation of the commendator has been added from the more enlaiiged 
knowledge of later tiroes. 



8S4 The Laws of the Hindus. 

BOOKn.ka&f ^ Yet it is declared in another place that 
^"^^' *' ** one man, untainted with covetousness, may {in some 
cases, SBjs the gloss of CuUuca) be the sole witness.**^ 
This apparent contradiction may perhaps be explained 
by a passage in the Code of Gentoo Laws, where the 
decision of a cause by the testimony of a single wit^ 
ness is made to depend upon the consent of the liti- 
gants*^ Even from this rule the following cases are 
excepted : '' Supposing," says the law, *' a person to 
lend another money secretly, or secretly to entrust his 
money to the care of another, in such affairs one sin- 
gle person is a sufficient witness."^ The different 
degrees of trustworthiness in differatit witnesses leads 
to misdiievous rules. ** Married housekeepers, men 
with male issue, inhabitants of the same district, 
either of the military, the commercial, or the servile 
class, are competent, when called by the party, to give 
their evidence.*'^ The most fancifiil distinction siudy 
that ever was made by an uncultivated mind, is that 
between the &ther of male and the father of female 
offspring, as a source of evidence. The persons held 
incompetent to bear witness are a very numerous 
dass. ^ Those must not be admitted who have a 
pecuniary interest ; nor familiar friends; nor menial 
servants ; nor enemies ; nor men formerly perjured ; 
nor persons grievously diseased ; nor those, who have 
committed heinous offences. The king cannot be 
made a witness, nor cooks and the like mean artifi- 
cers ; nor public dancers and singers ; nor a priest of 



1 Laws of Menu, ch. viii. 60. The same law is stated still more ge- 
oerally md absolutely, in the Gentoo Code, ch. iii. sect. 8. 

* Laws of Meno, (^. Tiii. 77. 

* Halhed's Gentoo Code^ ch. iii. sect. 8. ** If the plainti£f or defend^ 
ant, at their own option, appoint a single person only, not fraudulently 
inclined, Sec. ha may be a witness." 

* Ibid. > Laws of Menu, ch. nil. Oe. 



the Laws b/ the Hindus. 2S5 

deep learning in Scripture; nor a student of the BOOK li. 
Vedas; nor an anchoret secluded from all worldly ^*^^'^- 
connexions ; nor one wholly dependant ; nor one of 
bad fame ; nor one who follows a cruel occupation ; 
nor one who acts openly against the law; nor a de>* 
crepit old man ; nor a child ; nor a wretch of the 
lowest mixed class ; nor one who has lost the organs 
of sense ; nor one extremely grieved; nor one intoxi- 
cated ; nor a madman ; nor one tormented with hun- 
ger or thirst ; nor one oppressed by fatigue ; nor one 
excited by lust ; nor one inflamed by wrath ; nor one 
who has been convicted of theft.** ^ Among the per- 
sons excluded from the rank of witnesses are the fe- 
male sex entirely ; unless in the case of evidence for 
others of the same sex. Servants, too, mechaiuc8» 
and those of the lowest class, are allowed to give evi- 
dence for individuals of the same description.^ Brah- 
mens and the king are exempted from the obligation 
of giving evidence, by way of privilege, though the 
Brahmens are admitted when they please.^ 

This enumeration of persons, whose testimony was 
altogether unfit to be believed, affords a proof of the 
great difficulty of obtaining true testimony in the 
age in which it was made ; and holds up a dreadful 
picture of the state of morality to which it could be 
supposed to be adapted. It indicates, also, by the 
strange diversity of the cases which it includes, a sin- 
gular want of discrimination, in the minds by which 
it was framed. And further ; rules for the exclusion 
of testimony, from any person, not deprived of the 
ordinary exercise of the human faculties, could, how- 
ever the vicious effects of custom may preserve them, 
be introduced, only in an age of great ignorance and 
barbarity, when the human mind judges in the gross, 

1 Uw« of Menu, ch. Tiii. 64 to 6f . • lb. 68. « lb. 60, 70, 71. 
6 



f$6 The Laws of the Hindus. 

BOCHC II. is incapAble of nice discriminations, cannot assign the 

^^^^'^' different value which ought to be attached to the 

teistimony of different men, and estimates the weight 

of a body of evidence by the number, not the trust- 

worthinessy of the people who deliver it. 

The introduction of rules for the exclusion of evi- 
dence marks the age of false refinement, which is that 
of semibarbarism, intermediate between the age of 
true wisdom, and that of primeval ignorance. When 
the first judges, or arbiters, the heads of families, had 
to clear up any dispute, they called before them every 
individual of the little community or family, who ap- 
peared to know any thing of the matter, and ques- 
tioned them all; allowing to the statements, ex- 
tratted from each, the influence, much or little, or 
none at all, to which they seemed entitled ; and this 
is the course, which true wisdom would recommend. 
In an age, however, of false refinement, which aims 
at excessive accuracy, but, failing in comprehensive- 
ness, applies its rules to only part of a subject, when 
they should include the whole, the makers of laws, 
perceiving that certain classes of witnesses were apt 
to give false testimony, and considering that false tes- 
timony misleads, resolved immediately that the testi- 
mony of such witnesses ought never to be received. 
Now, if the testimony of the best sort of witness had 
been a thing which the judges always had at com* 
mand, in sufficient quantity, this might have been a 
rational procedure. But as this was very far frcmi 
being the case ; as it very often happens that the tes- 
timony of the best sort of witnesses cannot be had, or 
that they contradict one another ; that not only some 
light, but full and satisfactory light, may often be 
obtained from the worst sort of witnesses ; to deter- 
mine that certain classes of persons, and among them 
the persons whose knowledge of the facts is naturally 



The Laws of the Hindus. SS7 

the most complete, shall not be used as wknesses, is book ir. 
merely to determine that judicature shall be per« ^^^^' *' 
formed, so far, without evidence ; that the judge shall 
decide without knowledge ; and the question of right 
or wrong, instead of being determined upon all the 
evidence that can be had, shall be determined upon a 
part of it only, sometimes a most insignificant part, 
sometimes hardly any at all.^ 

One of the strongest characteristics of a rude age, 
or of a corrupt government, is, to make laws which 
cannot, or ought not, to be executed; and then to 
give dispensations from them. " In all cases of vio- 
lence, of theft and adultery, of defamation and as- 
sault,'' says the Hindu law, « the judge must not 
exaniine too strictly the competence of witnesses,"^ 

A presumption, of the very weakest kind, is ad- 
mitted as a full proof, in the following passages : ^i If 
a man brings a suit against another, saying, I have 

1 '* If," says Mr. Home, '^ the manner of panishing crimes among the 
AnglosaxoDS appear singular, the proofs were not less so: and were aUo 
the natural result of the situation of those people. Whatever we may 
imagine concerning the usual truth and sincerity of men who live in a 
rude and barbarous state, there is much more falsehood, and even per- 
jury, among them, than amoDg civilized nations: Virtue, which is no- 
thing but a more enlarged and more cultivated reason, never flourishes to 
any degree, nor ia founded on steady principles of honour, except where 
^ good education becomes general ; and where men are taught the pemi*- 
cious consequences of vice, treachery, and immorality. Even supersti- 
tion, though more prevalent among ignorant nations, is but a poor supply 
for the defects in knowledge and education : Our European ancestors, 
who employed every moment the expedient of swearing on extraordinary 
crosses and reliques, were less honourable in all engagements than their 
posterity, who, from experience, have omitted those ineffectual securi- 
ties. This general proneness to perjury was much increased by the usual 
want of discernment in judges, who could not discuss an intricate evi- 
dence, and were obliged to nun.ber, not weigh, the testimony of wit* 
nesses." History of England, Appendix I. 

This subject will, one day, when the papers of Mr. Bentham are pro-,< 
daqed, be presented to the world, in all the light which full knowledge. \ 
a minute analysis, and philosophy, can bestow upon it. |\ 

» Menu, ch. viii. 7S. 



8S8 Th$ Laws of ihe Hindus. 

BOOK U-Ient you several srticles, and the person answers, I 
^ never received one of the articles you mention ; in 
that case, if the plaintiff proves any one of all the 
articles claimed, to be in the defendant's possession, 
the magistrate shall cause the whole so daimed to be 
restored.'*^ In cases of infinitely greater importance 
the same deceitful rule is applied. *< If a man hath 
accused another of the murder of a man, or of a rob* 
bery, or of adultery, and should say. You have in 
several places been guilty of these crim^, and the de» 
fendant denies the accusation; in such a case, if the 
accuser can prove upon the other the commission of, ' 
any one of these crimes, it shall be a proof of the 
whole complaint." 

Of all the perverse proceedings of a superstitious 
mind, which the history of rude nations presents to 
us, few will be found more at variance with reason, 
than the establishment of the following law : ** The 
witness, who has given evidence, and to whom 
within seven days after, a misfortune happens from 
disease, fire, or the death of a kinsman, shall be con- 
demned to pay the debt and a fine."^ 

Though there is no ground on which the infirmities 
of the human mind are more glaring, and more tena* 
dous of existence, than that of law, it is probable 
that the annals of legislative absurdity can present 
nothing which will match a law for the direct encou* 
ragement of perjury. " Whenever," says the ordi- 
nance of Menu, " the death of a man, who had been 
a grievous offender, either of the servile, the commer- 
cial, the military, or the sacerdotal dass, would be 
occasioned by true evidence, from the known rigour 
of the king, even though the fault arose from inad* 

I Code of Gentoo Laws, cb. iii. sact. 6, p. 107. 
* Latrs of Menu, ch. viit. 



The Laws of the Hifidus. S39 

vertence or error, ftlsehood may be spoken: it is BOOK n. 
even preferable to truth."* What a state of justice ^^""^'^ 
it is, in which the king may condemn a man to 
death, for inadvertence or eiror, and no better remedy 
is found than the perjury of witnesses ? ^ When- 
ever a true evidence would deprive a man of his life, 
in that case, if a false testimony would be the pre- 
servation of his life, it is allowable to give such false 
testimony. If a marriage for any person may be 
obtained by fijse witness, sudi £dsehood may be 
told. If a man by the impulse of lust tells lies to a 
woman, or if his own life would otherwise be lost, or 
all the goods of his house spoiled, or if it is for the 
benefit of a Brahme^, in such affairs falsehood is 
allowable."* 

The laws respecting written evidence are few, and 
aj^lied to a very limited number of cases. One dis* 
tinction is recognized. " A writing," says, the law, 
** is of two sorts ; first, that which a man writes with 
his own hand; second, that which he procures to 
be written by another : of these two sorts, that which 
is written by a man's own hand, even without wit- 
nesses, is aj^roved ; and that written by another, if 
void of witnesses, is not approved."^ The remaining 
rules apply, almost entirely, to the modes of supply- 
ing, by means of the oral, what is at any time deSec^ 
tive in the quantity or quality of the matter drawn 
from the scriptural source.^ 

Notwithstanding the diversities of appearance 

I Laws of Menu, eh. yiii. sect. 104. 

t Halhed's Gentoo Code, cb. iii. sect. 9. ^ lb. 6. 

4 We know that grants of land by their princes were made in writing; 
and sonnods, pottahs, and other writings, of legal import are numeroas in 
modem times. That so little of them is indicated in the more ancient . 
books of law, implies a mder period of society; though, doubtless, we 
cannot be sure of their being asdestitnte of legal wril^ingsas the few, which 
we possess, of thmr anient moniunentt would gite nasoa to suppose. 



£40 The Laws of the Hindus. 

BOOR n. which, in different ages and countries, human nature 
Chap. 4. p^^ ^^^ ^1^^ attentive observer may trace in it an 
astonishing uniformity with respect to the leading 
particulars which characterize the different stages of 
society; and often a surprising coincidence in par- 
ticular thoughts and observances. The trials hy 
ordeal, in the dark ages of modem Europe ; when the 
decision of the most important questions was aban- 
doned to chance or to fraud ; when carrying in the 
hand a piece of red hot iron, or plunging the arm in 
boiling water, was deemed a test of innocence ; and a 
painful or fraudulent experiment, supplanting a righ- 
teous award, might consign to punishment the most 
innocent, or save from it the most criminal of men ; 
have been deemed a shocking singularity in the insti- < 
tutions of our barbarous ancestors. This species of 
evidence holds a high rank in the institutes of the 
Hindus. There are nine different modes of the trial 
by ordeal ; 1. by the balance ; 2. by fire ; 3. by water; 
4. by poison ; 5. by water in which an idol has been 
washed ; 6. by rice ; 7. by boiling oil ; 8. by red hot 
iron ; 9. by images. The first of these, by the ba- 
lance, is thus performed. The party accused is 
{daced in the scale, and careftdly weighed; after 
which, he is taken down, the pundits wriCe the sub- 
stance of the accusation on a piece of paper, and bind 
it on his forehead. At the end of six minutes he is 
weighed again, when, if lighter than before, he is pro- 
nounced innocent ; if heavier, guilty. In the second 
ordeal, an excavation in the ground, nine hands long, 
two spans broad, and one span deep,' is filled with a 
fire of pippal wood, into which the party must walk 
barefooted ; proving his guilt, if he is burned ; his in- 
nocence, if he escapes unhurt. The third species is 
rather more complicated : the person accused is made 
to stand in water up to his navel, with a Brahmen by 



Tke Lawi of tKt Hindm. 241 

hb aide; asoUUer then shoots three arrows fixun a BOOK h. 
bojnr of cane^ aod a man is dispatched to bruig back ^°^^' '** 
that whidi was shot the £Eurthest ; as soon as he has 
teken it qp, another man is directed to run from the 
brink of the water, and at the same instant the party 
under trial must [duqge into it, grasping the foot or 
tte staff of the Brahmen who stands by him : if he 
remains under the water till the two men with the 
arrows return, he is innocent ; if he comes up, he is 
guilty. The fourth kind, by poison, is performed 
two ways : either the party swallows a certain quan- , 
tity of a poisonous root, and is deemed innocent if no 
ii^ry ensues ; or a particular species of hooded snake 
is thrown into a deep earthen pot, and along with j^t 
a ring, a sealf or a coin. If the man, putting down 
bis naked hand« cannot take this out, unbitten by the 
serpent, he is accounted guilty. The accused, in the 
fifth species, is made to drink three draughts of the 
water in which the images of the sun and other 
deitk^ have been washed; and if within fourteen 
days he has any indisposition, his crime is considered 
as proved* When several persons are suspected of 
theft, they chew, each, a quantity of dried rice, and 
throw it upon some leaves or bark of a tree ; they 
from whose mouth it comes dry, or stained with 
blood, are deemed guilty : This is the sixth species 
of ordeal. In the seventh, a man thrusts his hand 
into hot oil ; and in the eighth he carries an iron ball, 
or the head of a lance, red hot in his hand ; receivii^ 
his sentence of innocence or guilt according as he 
does or does not come off with iinpunity. The ninth 
species is literally a casting of lots : two images of 
the gods, one of silver, and one of iron, are thrown 
into a Jarge earthen jar ; or two pictures of a deity, 
one on white, and the other on black cloth, are roll^ 
up in cow-dung, and thrown into a jar : if the man, 
VOL. I. K 



242 • The Laws of the Hindtts. 

BodK ii. on putting in his hand, draws out the silver image, 
. ^^^•^' or the white picture, he is deemed innocent ; if the 
contrary, guilty. The religious ceremonies with 
which these trials are performed it would be tedious 
and unprofitable to relat^.^ i : 

' The qualities desirable in a BOBfOP law may 
all be summed up under two comprehensive titles ; 
I. Completeness; II. Exactness. 

Completeness has a reference to the matter : jBj*- 
actness to the form. 

I. A body of laws may be said to be Complete^ 
when they include every thing which they ought to 
include ; that is, when all those rights, the existence 
of which is calculated to improve the state of society, 
are created; and all those acts, the hurtfiilness of 
which to the society is so great as to outweigh the 
cost, in all its senses, necessary for preventing them, 
are constituted offences. 

II. A body of laws may be said to be Exact; 
1. when it constitutes nothing a right, and nothing 
an offence, except those things precisely which arc 
necessary to render it Complete; 2. when it contains 
no extraneous matter whatsoever ; 3. when the aggre- 
gate of the powers and privileges which ought to be 

> For a full acdount both of the law and the practice respecting the 
trial by ordeal, see a discourse << On The trial by Ordeal among the 
Hindus, by Ali Ibrahim Khan, chief magistrate at Benares,*' in the 
Asiat. Researches, i. 389. See too the Institutes of Meftu, ch. viii. 114, 
115, 190; Mr. Halhed*s Code of Gentoo Laws, ch. i\\. sect. 6, ch. ii. 
sect. 15y ch. xvii. sect. 4, ch. xviii., and the Translator's preface, p. 55, 
56. Dr. Buclianan informs ns of a shocking species of ordeal in use, in 
some places, in regard to those, '^who, having bad sexual intercourse 
with a person of another cast, allege that it was by mistake. If the 
criminal be a woman, melted led is poured into her private parts; if it 
be a man, a red hot iron is thrust up. Should they be innocent it is sup- 
posed that they will not be injured.'' Journey through the Mysore, C*- 
. nara, and Malabar^ under the orders of Marquis Wellesley, i. 307. Ac* 
cording to Koempfer, the Japanese too use a species of ordeal for the dls* 
eovery of guilt: History of Japan, ch. v. SS^. 



. The Laa^ 6f the Hindus. S40 

eoiisfilttited rights, the aggr^ate of the afcts which book ii. 
dvght to be constituted offences, are divided and sub- ^^^' 
divided into those very pait:ds or classes, which be- 
yond sll othei's best adapt themselves to the means of 
securing the one, and preventing the other ; 4. when 
it defines those classes, that is, rights and offences, 
with the greatest possible clearnessr and certainty; 
5k when it repres^s Crimes with the smallest possible 
expense of punishment ; and 6. when it prescribes 
the best possible form of a judicatory, and lays 
down the best possible rules for the judioatorial func- 
tions* 

To show in what degree th6 Hindu law Approaches, 
or recedes from, the standard of Completeness, would 
require, a more extensive survey of the fidd .of lair, 
than consists with the plan of the present work* 

That it departs widely from Exactness, in every 
one of the particulars wha^ein, exactness consisgts, 
enough has cdbready been seen to make abundantly ap- 
parent* 1. It cJdeates a great many rights which ought 
to have mo existence ; and acts, which ought not to 
be erected into offences, it does so erect in great num- 
bers* 2. It abounds in extraneous matter. 3. The 
division and arrangement Of thie .matters of law are 
highly itnp^rfeict. 4. The de&aitions ate so far from 
excluding darkn^s and doubts that they leave almost 
every Uung indefinite and uncertain. 5. Punish- 
ments are not repressed>,but abound ; while there is 
the most enormous excess in the quantity of punish- 
ment. 6* The form of the judicatory is bad, as are a 
certain proportion of the rules for. the mode of per- 
forming the judicial services. 

In respect to definitions, th^ Hindu law is in a state 
which requires a few words of elucidation* Prior to 
the art' of Writing, laws can have little accuracy of 
definition ; because when words are not uiitten, they 

R S 



1144 The Laws of the Hindus. 

BOOK n. are sddom exactly mnembered; and a definiticm 
^^^^'^' vhose words are constantly varying is not, for the 
purposes of law, a definition at aH. Notwithstand- 
ing the necessity of writing to prodace fixed and 
accurate definitions in law, the nations of modem 
Europe have allowed a great proportion of their laws 
to continue in the unwritten; that is, the tradi- 
tionary state ; the state in which they lay before the 
art of writing was known. Of these nations, none 
have kept in that barbarous condition so great a pro- 
portion of their law as the English. From the Gfi- 
nion of the Hindus that the Divine Being dictated 
all their laws, they acknowledge nothiBg as law but 
whkt is found in some one or other of their sacred 
books. In one sense, therefore, all their laws ate 
written. But as the passages which can be cdlected 
from these books leave many parts 6f the field of law 
untouched, in these ptfrts the defect must be supplied 
either by custom, or the momentary wiU of the judge. 
Again, as the passages which are cdlected fi*em these 
hocks^ even where they touch upon parts of the fidd 
of hiWt do so in expressions to the highest degree 
vague and indeterminate, they commonly admit of 
any one of several meanmgs, md very firequently are 
contradicted and opposed by one another. When the 
words in which laws are couched are tp a certain de-- 
gree imperfect, it makes biit little difference whether 
they are written or not : Adhering to the same words 
is without advantage, when these words secure no 
sameness in the things which they are made to 
signify. Further, in modem Europe, the uncer- 
tainty adhering to aB unwritten laws, that is, laws 
the words of which have no certainty, is to some 
degree, though still a very imperfect one, circum- 
scribed and limited, by the writing down of deci- 
sions. When, on any particular part of the field, a 

8 



The Laws (f the lEndus. 24S 

number of judges hare all, with public approbatiotty BOOS, ii. 
decided in oneway; and when these decisions are/'*^^' *' 
recorded and made known, the judge who comes 
after them has strong motives, both of fear and of 
hope, not to depart from their example. The degree 
of certainty, arising from the regard for uniformity, 
which may thus be produced, is, from its very na4;ur% 
infinitely inferior to that which is the necessary result 
of good definitions rendered unalterable by writing. 
But 8U(^h as^ it is, the Hindus are entiiiely de|»riived 
of it Among them the strength of the human mind 
has never been sufficient to recommend effectually 
the preservation, by writing, of the memory of judi- 
cial decisions. It has never been sufficient to create 
such a public regard for unifonmty, as to constitute 
a material mtrt;ive to' a judge. And as kings, and 
their great deputies, exercised the principal functions' 
of judicature, thcfy were too powerful to be restrained 
by a regard to what others had done before them. 
What judicature would pronounce was, therefore^ 
almost always uttcevtain ; almost always arbitrary. . 

In a JUDICATORY, the qualities desirable are; 
!• inteUigance; S». gpod design : and that is the best! 
judicatory in which the best securities ave taken for 
them. In the judicatories of the Hindus, composed 
of the king and his Brahmens, or the Brahmens 
alone, there is no security for either the one or the 
other ; and accordingly neither the one nor the other 
almost ever appears. 

The qualities desirable in the forms of judicial pro^ 
cedure, are^ 1. efficiency; 2. freedom from delay; 
S. freeddm from trouble and expense. In these 
several respects the system of the Hindus displayed 
a degree of excellence not only far beyond itself in 
in the other branches of hiw, but ihr beyond what 13 
exemplified in more enUghtened countries. 1. The 



246 The Laws of the Hindus. 

BOOK n. efficiency of the Hindu system of judicial procedure is 
"^^' '*' chiefly impaired by those rules of evidence the bad- 
ness of which has already been pointed out : 2. For 
preventing delay, it enjoys every requisite, in its me- 
thod of immediate, direct, and simple investigation : 
3. In the same method is included all that is requisite 
for obtaining the judicial services with the smallest 
portion of trouble and expense.^ 

> One of the moft recent witnesses of die phenoiseQa of Hiodn society^ 
who possessed ejitraordinary means of accurate knowledge, speaks in ge- 
neral upon the administration of justice an^ong the Hindus in the follow-, 
ing terras* 

• '^.Without any of ih^ jedidai forras invented bj tbe spirit of chicanery 
in Europe; with no advocates, solicitors, or other blood-suckers, now 
become necessary adjuncts of a coiirt of justice in Europe; the Hindus 
determine the greater part of their ^it» of law, bj the arbitration of 
fiiends, or of the beads of the cast, or, in cases of the vei^ highest im- 
portance, by reference to the chiefs of the whole casts of the district 
assembled to discuss the matter in controversy. — ^In ordinary questions 
they generally apply to the chief of the place, who takes upon himself 
the office of jastice of the peace, and accommodates .the matter betweea 
the parties. When he thinks it more fit, he sends them before their 
kindred, or arbitrators whom he appoints. He generally follows the last 
course when the complainants ara BrahmaDs, because persons out of thar 
oast are not supposed capable of properly deddiag differences between 
them. When theses methods hare been ineffectual to reconcile the parties, 
or when they refuse to submit to the decision of the arbitrators, they must 
bpply to the magbtcates of tbe distficl, who decide the contcoveitsy with- 
^t any appeal. 

" The authority of the Ilinclo priqces as well as that of the vile emis- 
saires whom they keep in the several provinces of their country for the 
porpose of barasttAg jandAppressing theqi in their pame, being altoge- 
ther despotic, and knowing no other ^ule but their own arbitrary will, 
there is nothing in India that resembles a court of justice. Neither is 
there a shadow of public right, nor any code of laws by which those 
wfaio administer justice may be guided. The cifil power and the judi- 
cial are generally united, and exercised in each .district by the collector or 
receiver of the imposts. ITiis sort of public magistrates are generally 
known under the name of Havildar or Thadldar, They are generally 
Brahmans. This tribunal, chiefly intended for the collection of the 
taxes, takes co^izance of all affairs dvil and criminal within its bounds, 
and determines upon all causes/' Description of the Character, Man- 
ners, and Customs of the people of India, by the Abb^ ^. A. Duboi^ 
AfM^op^ ^^ Ml® Mysore, p. 493. 



Tanut, g47 



CHAP. V. 

The Taxes. 

The fonji of the government is one ; the nature of lOoA ir. 
the tews for the administration of justice is the other) ^'^^' ^' 
of, the two circumstances "by wliich the .condition 9f 
the pjeople in all countries is chiefly determined. . OF 
th^ two primary causes no result to a greater degree 
ensures the happiness or misery of the, people, thaii^ 
the mode of providing for the pecuniary wants of the 
government, and the extent to which the agents of 
goivernment, of whatever kind, are enabled to divide 
among themselves and their creatures, the annual 
produce of the land and labour of the community. 

The matters of detail, which by their number and ' 
uncertainty have so exceedingly perplexed the ser# 
vants of the Company, in the financial operations of 
the Indian government, cannot here, be described. 
The general outline, and the more important effects, 
of that system of taxation which is described in the 
ancient books, are all that falls within the design 
of an account of the ancient state of the people'. 
1. "Of grain," says the ordinance of Menu, *^an 
eighth part, a sixth, or a twelfUi may be taken by 
the king;" to. be determined, adds the gloss of the 
commentator CuUuca, " by the difference of the soil, 
and the labour necessary to cultivate it."^ 2. ** He 
may also take a sixth part of the clear annual in^ 

♦ Laws of M«nD, ch. vii. 130. 



24S Taxes. 

V 

BOOK IL crea^ of trees, flesh«meat, honey, clarified butter, per- 
'^^' ^' fumes, medical substances, liquids, flowers, roots and 
fruit, of gathered leaves, potherbs, grass, utensils 
made with leather or cane, earthen pots, and all 
things made of stone.*^^ 3. ^* (H cattle, of gems, of ^ 
gold and silver, added each year to the capital 
stock, a fiftieth part may be taken by the king."^ 
4. *^ Having ascertained the rules of purchase and 
. salcj" says the law, " the length of the way, the 
expenses of food and of condiments, the charges of 
securing the goods carried, and the neat profits of 
trade, let the king oblige traders to pay taxes on 
their saleable commodities ; after full con^eration, 
let a king so levy those taxes continually in his domi- 
nions, that both he and the merchant may receive a 
just compensation for their several acts/'® 6. ** Let 
the king order a mere trifle to be paid, in the name 
of the annual tax, by the meaner inhabitants of his 
realm, who subsist by petty traffic : 0. By low handi- 
craftsmen, artificers, and servile men, wlio support 
themselves by labour, the king may cause work to 
be done for a day in each month.*** It is added ; 
7. ** A military king, who takes even a fourth part 
of the crops of his realm at a time of urgent necessity, 
as of war or invasion, and protects his peopte to the 
utmost of his power, commits no sin. 8. The tax 
on the mercantile class, which in times of prosperity 
must be only a twelfth part of their crops, and a 
fiftieth of their personal profits, inay be an eighth of 
their crops in a time of distress, or a sixth, which is 
the medium, or even a fourth in great public' adver- 
sity; but a twentieth of their gains on money and 
other moveables is the highest tax : serving men, ar- 

» Laws of Menu, ch. vii. 131, 182. « lb. 130. 

» lb. ISr, 138. 4 lb. 137, 138. 



tlsaUB, ttft4 iMdmAoB, mut asdst by thw kbour, but book n« 
at no time pay taxes/*^ . ^'^^^•^' 

In these sevens articles is feand an ennmeration of 
ffU the olgeete e^ taatatiM ; and a general eX{nres6ioa 
of the modes and degrees of impost. We perceive 
tiaxes on the produce of land, taxes on the prodace of 
labour, a tax on accumulation, a tax on sales, and poll 
taxes: ftr asiicle 1., is exhibited a tax on the pn>« 
dttce of land ; In article 2., a tax both on the pro- 
dince of land, and on the produce of labour ; In article 
9., i9 a tax on accumulation, at least in certain com« 
modities ; In article 4., is a tax on purchases and 
9sSes\ In article 5., is one sort of poll tax ; In artide 
6;, is another. 

There are two primary qualities desirable in a 
system of taxation ; and in them^ every thing ia in- ^ 
dudeA. 

The First is, ta take from the people the smallest 
^(nanfity possiMe of their annual produce. 

Ifit Sec6vidt is, ta take from them that which i» 
taken with the smidlest possible hurt or uneasi* 
n^ess. 

I. Of taking from the people more tiian enough of 
the matter of weafth, the causes are two; 1st. When 
the government consumes beyond the smidlest amount' 
soiffcient to obtain the services which it. yields; 
^d: Wllen the c^oITection of the taxes themselves 
costs^ itiore than the lowest sum at' which, without 
sacrificing greater advantages, it ia ciqmble of being- 
performed. 

II. Of the hurt and uneasiness, beyond the loss of 
t^hat is taken away, which a system of taxation is 
liable to produce, the causes seem to be; 1." Uncer- 
tainty ; 2. Inequality ; 3. Impe<fiment ta production ; 

1 Laws of MenU; cb« 1. 118, ISO. 



250 Taxesi 

BOOK 11. 4. Injury to the good qualities^ bodily or mental^ of 

^"^''^' the people. 

Of the first head and its subdivisions, no illustra- 
tion is necessary ; and a few words will suffice for the 
second. 

1. Uncertainty may arise from two sources ; 
1. Uncertainty in the meaning of the words^ by 
which the tax is defined; 2. Uncertainty in the dr- 
cuKistances upon which the amount of the tax is 
made to depend ; as if it were made to depend upon 
the weather, or the state of a man's health. Uncer- 
tainty in. die i;iieaning of. the words opens a door to 
0{^ression and fraud, on the part of the coUector. 
He will exact the largest sum consistent with the 
words, if he is not bribed ; the lowest, if he is. Un- 
certainty^ fror^ whatever source, is a cause of uneasi- 
ness. The mind is continually haunted with the 
idea of the worst, and with all the fears which attend 
it ; fears, often very great and tormenting. As often 
as a source of chicanery is opaied about the amount 
which the contributor should pay, a source of extor- 
tion is opened, and a source of oppression, necessary 
t^.elBfect^ the^iextortion. 

^ 2. ,pf the .unequ^ partition of taxes, the necessaiy 
consequence is, a greater quantity of sufiering, than* 
thq same amount of taxes would produce, if more 
equally imposed ; because the pain of the man who 
p^ys too mjach i^ out of all proportion greater than 
the pleasure of the man who pays too little. To 
make the burthen of taxes equal, it should be made 
to . press witli equal severity upon every individual. 
This is not effected by a mere numerical propqrtione 
The nwin whor is taxed to the amount of one tenth, 
and still more the man who is taxed to the amount of 
one fifth or one half, of an income of 100/. per annum, 
is taxed far ii^ore severely, than tl^ie man who is 



TaT^. 251 

taxed to an equal proportioti of an ineottie of lOOOA BOOK IL 
and to a prodigious degree more severelj than thc^ 
man who is taxed to an equal proportion of 10,000/^ 
per annum. * 

8. On the mischievousnes& oif all laxes which' im-' 
pede production^ it is needless- to enlarge* ' It is only 
necessary to make them known, of rather a^ftsnow-. 
ledged. 1. Of this sort, are all taxes which take^ 
away any part of that jH-operty which hajs beett 
already employed, as capital; because there iS' 
always more or less of difficulty irt replacing it from* 
the fund destined for immediate consumption. £. Of 
this sort also ai^e all taxes- whi^^h create any encou^ 
ragement whatsoever, or any di^uragement what- 
soever, to any particular emplbymeilt of capital in 
respect to other employments ; for as capital is always 
carried by a strong impulse to that employment 
which is the most productive, every thing which 
turns it out of the course which it would take of its 
own accord, turns so much of it out of a more, into a 
less productive channel. 

4. That all taxes ought to be shunned which tend 
to lessen the amount of useful qualities in the people, 
will not be contradicted, l^xes upon medicines 
have a tendency to diminish health and strength. 
Taxes upon innocent amusements, as the sports of 
the field, have a tendency to drive the people io 
others that are hurtful. Taxes upon articles of con- 
sumption not hurtful, which have a tendency to 
supplant others that are, as tea and sugar to supplant 
intoxicating liquors, prompt to the consumption of 
the hurtful. Taxes upon law proceedings are a pre- 
mium upon the practice of every species of iniquity. 
liOtteries are a direct encouragement to a habit of 
inind, with which no useful tendency can easily co- 
exist. And all taxes, of which the quantity due is 



263 Tium. 

BOOK II. not dear and certaiii, train the people, by eontmual 
^"^^' ^' practice, to a state of hardened perfection in menda^ 
city, in fraud, and in perjury. 

1. In the above list of the sacred ordinances eon- 
oeming taxes, the first rdates entirely te the tax on 
tiie produce of the soil. It ofiends i^^ainst the rule 
of certiUnty to a high degree. The amount varies 
as one to one haiSi and the variation is made to de- 
pend upon circiHnstaBees the unocrtaiiity of whidi 
opens a boundless field to all the wretched arts of 
chicanery and firaud on the part of the people, and 
all the evils <tf opptession on the part of the collectors* 
As the determination of the circumstances on> which 
the amount of the assessment depends bdongs of 
course, in such a state of society as that of the 
Hindus, to the agents of the treasury, a firee career 
is i^orded to all the baneful operations of favour 
and disfavour, of bribery and corruption. When- 
ever an option js granted between a liesa exaction and 
a greater, the viofent propensity of aU imperfect go^ 
vemments to excess in expense ia sure in time to 
estd^xiish the greater. It w&aki appear aiccordingly 
that a axth part of the produce became t&e imifonii 
tax in Hindustan ; and that the indulgence in fa- 
vour of the barren soils was extinguished. This is 
the state in which it was^ found by tWMohMiiaedan 
conquerors.^ And iu Sacoiital%^ the king is de- 
scribed, at a much earlier peried, aa ^that man 
whose revenue arises from: a sixth part g[ his people's 
income." The source of variation mid uncertainty 
from these causes was prodigioudy enlarged by the 
power reserved to the king, of taking even a fourth 
of the crops^ in times of distress. As he was huaaddf 

1 Ayeen Akbery, p. 347. 

« An ancient Sanscrit poem of the dramatic form, translated by Sir 
•IViUiaJD Joues : See the be^nniug of tbe filth act. 



Taxu. , SffS 

the judge of iiififie (times of neaessky, We may betteve book n. 
that they were of pretty fre(|uent recurrence. ^*^* ^* 

fi. In the second of ibesi fiscal ordinances, a vsoriety' 
of products are enumerated, whidb, in a rude age, are 
eiAer the spontaneous produce of the soil, as flowen^ 
roots, grass ; or obtained from the spontaneous pro* 
(kice, by some rery siBq>le process ; as perfumes and 
medical substances, by expression; flesh-meat and 
honey, by kilUng the animals whidi produce them ; 
and these, as costing little in point of labour, are all 
taxed at the highest rate imposed upon grain. By 
one of those capricious arrangements which abound 
in the instkutkms of a rude people, utensils made of 
leather, cane, earth, and stone, in the production of 
whidi labour is the principal agent, are placed under 
the same ezactian as the spontaneous productions of 
the soiL The consequence must have been to render 
these commodities prqportionahly dear. 

In the execution of this ordinance, there must have 
been excessive uncertainty, and excessive expense. 
What is meant by "the annual increase?** The 
^ annual produce of trees'' is an absurd expressiop: 
Trees.grow not by the year. What shall be said of 
such expressions, as " the annual produce,'' of *^ clari- 
fied butter," «of flesh-meat," **of flowers?" Not 
commodities, which continue accumulating, till the 
amount of the annual produce is seen entire at the 
end of the year : but conunodities daily brought into 
existence and daily consumed. To collect the tax 
upon such commodities, a daily visit in every fiunily 
would hardly suffice. In the execution of this ordi- 
nance, the temptation to the incessant practice of all 
the arts of fraud, on the part of the people, and the 
powers of oppression bestowed upon the collectors, 
were well calculated to fill the society with immorality 
and suffering. 



S54 Taxes. 

BOOK n. S. In the third of the above ordinluices afae emt^ 
^"^^' ^' merated the principal classes of moveables known to 
the Hindus. It seems to be the addition made in any 
year to the previous stock, and not the previous 
stock itself, of which one fiftieth is taken in the way 
of tax* In a society, full of knowledge and industry, 
this would have been a tax upon capital, and there'- 
&re mischievous : in Hindustan, where gold, silver, 
and gems, were most commonly hoarded, and not 
devoted to production, it would not have been easy 
to find a less objectionable taj^-. Unless in a state 
of society rapidly progressive, or a state in which there 
is excessive fluctuation of fortunes, that is, excessive 
misery, it would be a very unproductive tax. 

4. In the words of the fourth ordinance is described 
a tax on all purchases and sales. .The circumstances 
on which the amount is made to depend ste so unc^^ 
tain, as to constitute a great seminary of fraud- on the 
one hand, and a great ofiice of oppression on the other. 
The tax is also hurtful to production, by impeding 
circulation ; that is, the passage c£ property from a 
situation in which it is less, to one in which it » more 
useful. The mode in which, 4t le^t in modem times, 
it was chiefly raised, that of transit duties, multiplied 
to excess, obstructed all that encouragement' to indus^ 
try which is afforded by the interchange of commodi«- 
ties, not only between different countries, but one 
province and another of the same counfry. As often 
as property which has been, and is to be, employed as 
capital, is bought and sold, it is a tax upon capital. 

5. A poll tax, when paid in money, or any other 
common measure of value, is chiefly objectionable on 
account of its inequality ; as the same sum is a very 

. different burthen to different persons. 

6. A poll tax paid in labour is somewhat less ob- 
jectionable in point of equality, though the same 

2 



Taxes. 255 

portion of his tine may be a mtich greater burthen, book il 
upon one man than it is upon another. It is chiefly ^"*^- *• 
objectionable 'on account of the loss of time, and of 
property, which it occasions to those who have it to 
pay. In a well-ordered society, acconlingly, where 
every ^man's time and labour are disposed of to the 
best advantage, it has no place. 

Some of these ordinances are modified, or the wcn^ 
rendered a little more precise, in the GentoQ Code 
translated by Mr. Halhed. The following are exani* 
pies. If a man purchase goods in his own. country, 
and* sell them again there, one tenth of his profit goes 
to the magistrate. If the purchase took place in a 
foreign kingdom, and the sale in his own, .one twen- 
tieth only is the share of the magistrate/ If a man, 
having purchased flowers, or roots, as ginger, racUshes, 
and the like, or honey; or grass, or firewood, from 
another kingdom, sells them in his own, the magistrate 
is entitled to one sixth* of his profits.^ What was 
the reason of severe exaction in such cases does not 
appear. Rude times give not reasons. In the days 
of Menu these taxes appear to have been much mote 
moderate; a fiftieth of mercantile profits being the 
ordinary, and a twentieth the extraordinary tax» 

In this system of taxation, other sources are of small 
importance ; the revenue of the sovereign arises al- 
most wholly firom the artificial produce of the land. 
To understand in what manner the people of Hindus- 
tan were affected by taxation, the circumstances of 
this impost are all that require to be very minutely 
explored. 

1 The political economists of Hindustan, and those of the mereaatile , 
theory in modem Europe, proceeded oa diSerent views. 

8 Halhed^s Gentoo Code, ch. xxi. sect. 4. On sales of very smalt 
amount, or on those of young heifers, (the cow was a sacred animal no 
tax was levied. , ^ 



206 Land Tmures. 

.BOOR A. The tenure of land in Hindustan has beep the 
^^^' ^' source of violent controversies among the servants of 
the Company ; and between them uid other Eurqpeans. 
They first ^nrung up amid the disputes betweai Mr. 
Hastings and Mr. Francis, respecting the best ipoAe 
of taxing Bengal. And they have been casried on 
with great warmth, and sometimes with great acri- 
mony, ever since. Of these controversies the account 
will be due» at the periods when they occur* At 
present it will suffice to bring to light the circum- 
stances which appear to ascertain the ancient state of 
the country, in respect to the distribution of prc^ierty 
in the land. 

In a state of society resembling our own, in which 
property is secure, and involves very ext^isive rights 
or privileges, the affections which it excites are so 
strong, and give such a force to the associations, tty 
which the idea of it is compacted and formed, that 
in minds of Utde range, whose habits w% bUnd and 
obstinate, the particulars combined together und?r 
the idea of property, appear to be connected by na- 
ture, and cannot, without extreme injustice, be con- 
ceived to exist apart. 

At different times, however, very different rights 
and advantages are included under the idea of pro- 
perty. At very early periods of society it included 
very few : originally, nothing more perhaps than 
use during occupancy, the commodity being liable 
to be taken by another, the moment it was relin- 
quished by the hand which held it : but one privilege 
is added to another as society advances: and it is 
not till a considerable progress has been made in 
civilization, that the right of property involves all the 
powers which are ultimately bestowed upon It. 

It is hardly necessary to add, that the different 
combinations of benefits which are included under the 



idea of property, at different peFiodts of society, are BOOK V, 
nU equally arbitrary ; that they are not the oflbpring ^"^^' *' 
of nature, but the creatures of will ; determined, and 
choseii by. the society, aa that arrangement witk 
regard to usefiil objects, which is, oris pretended to be, 
the best for all. 

It is worthy of remark, that property in moveables 
was established ; and that it conveyed most of the 
powers wUcfa are at any time assigned to it ; while, 
aa yet, property in land had no existence. So long* 
as men continue to derive their subsistence from 
hunting ; so long, indeed, as they continue to derive 
it from their flocks and herds, the land is enjoyed in 
common. Even when they begin to derive it partly / 
from the ground, though the man 'who has culti* 
vated a field is regarded as possessing in it a property 
tiU he has reaped his crop, he has no better title to it 
than another for the succeeding year.^ 

In prosecuting the advantages which are found to 
spring from the newly-invented method of deriving 

1 Suevonia gens est longe maiima et bellicostssima Germanoruni omnium* 
li oaitttm pagos habere dicuntvr.*** Privati et sepaiati agn apud eos 
nihil est ; neque hngiu$ anno remanere uno in loco, incolendi causa Ucet : 
neque multum frumento, sed inaxipaam partem lacte atque pecore yivunt, 
multumque sunt in yenationibus. Cassar. De Bell. Gal. lib. iv. cap. 1. 
.^ong some tiibes of negroes on the coast of Africa, each iodtTtdual 
must obtain the consent of the chief before he has liberty to cultivate a 
fields and is only protected id its possession till he has reaped the cro[^ 
iif which he has toiled. Kisloire Generate des Voyages, torn. v. ch. txi. 
sect. 5. ^' Neque quisqoam agn raodum certum, aut fines proprios htp 
bet: sed magistratos ac prindpes, ia annos singulos, gentibus cogna- 
tionibusque hominum qui una coierunt quantum et quo loco visum est* 
agri attribuunt ; atque anno post, dio transire cbgunL" Casar. De 
Bello Gallico, lib. vi. cap. 30. 

Rigidi Get«, 

Immetata qnibus jugera iiberas 

Frugea et Cererem ierunt, 

Nee cnltora placet kmgior aonna; 
Defnoctumque laboribua 

£qaali recnafc sorle vicanoe. Hop. lib. iii; O^ Mv 
VOL. I, S 



26S Taxes. 

BOOK II. the means of subsistence from the ground, experience 
"^^' in time discovers, that much obstruction is created by 
restricting the right of ownership to a single year ; 
and that food would be provided in greater abund« 
ance, if, by a greater permanence, men were en- 
couraged to a more careful cultivation. To make, 
however, that belong to one man, which formerly 
belonged to all, is a change, to which men do not 
easily reconcile their minds. In a thing of so much 
importance as the land, the change is a great revolu* 
tion. To overcome the popular resistance, that 
expedient which appears to have been the most 
generally successful, is, to vest the sovereign, as 
the representative of the society, with that property 
in the land which belongs to the society; and the 
sovereign parcels it out to individuals, with all those 
powers of ownership, which are regarded as most 
favourable to the extraction from the land of those 
benefits which it is calculated to yield. When a 
sovereign takes possession of a country by conquest, 
he naturally appropriates to himself all the benefits, 
which the ideas of his soldiers permit. 

In many of the rude parts of Africa, the property 
of the land is understood to reside in the sovereign ; 

y it is in the shape of a donation from him, that indivi- 

duals arte allowed to cultivate ; and when the son, as 
is generally the case, succeeds to the father, it is only 
by a prolongation of the royal bounty, which, in 
some places at least, is not obtained without a for- 
mal solicitation.^ It is known, that In Egypt the 

1 Histoire Generale des Voyages, torn. iv. cb. xiii. p. 203. Modem 
UniTenol History, vol. xvii. p. S22. I am induced to transcribe tbe fol- 
lowing passage from Mr. Park : '< Concerning property in the soil ; it 
*^ appeared to me that the lands and native woods were considered as be- 

longing to the king, or (where the government was not monarchical) to 
the state. When any individual of free condition had the means of cul- 
tivming more land than he actually possessed, he applied to the chief 



Taxes. . 259 

king was the sole proprietor of the land; and one fifth book li. 
of the produce appears to have been yielded to him "^^' ^' 
as revenue or rent.* Throughout the Ottoman do- 
minions, the Sultan claims to himself the sole property 
in land.^ The same has undoubtedly been the situ- 
ation of Persia, both in ancient and modem times.^ 
'* It is established," says the late intelligent Governor 
of Java, "from every source of inquiry, that the ^ 
sovereign in Java is the lord of the soil."* And 



man of the district, who allowed him an extension of territory, on condi- 
tion of fodeitore, if the lands were not bron^t into cultivation by a giren 
period. The condition being fulfilled, the soil become vested in the po6« 
sessor ; and, for aught that appeared to me, descended to his heirs.^ 
Travels in Africa, p. 860, 261. 

" All the land is said to belong to, the king ; but if a man chooses to 
dear a spot and erect a town, he may : the land is free for any oT the 
people. If a stranger, indeed, that is, an European, should wish to settle 
among them, he must make a present of goods to the king." Correspond* 
ence of John Kizell, on the state of the people on the river Sberbro, 
Appendix to the Sixth Report of the African Institution, p. 133. 

1 Herodot. lib. ii. cap. cix. says, that Sesostris, as he was told by the 
priests, divided all the land of Egypt among the people, and thence 
raised his revenues, imposing an annual tribute on each portion; 

x«i onro TvTii rocf vporoiiig tronio-a^^flu, «irira|euTc awo<popyiiv nrtrtXtni xcer ffiaurw. 
See too, Strabo, lib. xvil. p. 1135. Diod. Sic. lib. i. sect. S. cap. xxiv. 

* Volney's Travels in Syria and Egypt, vol. ii. p. 403, et passim. De 
I'Egypte, par le General Beynier, p. 6Q, 51. , 

3 For inionuation on this point, see Herodot. lib. iii. ; lib. iv. cap. 
xlii. ; Sir William Ouseley's Translation of Ebn Haukal, an Arabian geo- 
grapher, who lived in the tenth century, p. 137 3 Institutes of Timor; 
Ayeen Akberry ; Chardin's Travels. 

4 Gov. Raffles' Minute on Java, p. 6 ; also, p. 79, 108. The distribu* 
tion of the land among the Peruvians was as follows : Oae third part of it 
was dedicated to, and cultivated for, the gods; that is, the priests. 
AnoUier third pact the Inca reserved for himself, for the maintenance of 
His court and of his armies. The remaining third he distributed to the 
people, assigning an established portion to each family. ** But no parti- 
cular man," (says Acosta, Mat. and Mor. Hist, of the Indies, book VI.. 
cb. XV.) " possessed any thing proper to himself of this third portion, 
neither did the Indians ever possess any, if it were not by special grace 
from the Inca.^ Garcilasso de la Vega tells us, (part I. book V. ch. i.) 
that it was only when there was more land than sufficed for the people, 
that the Inca and the Sun received their full thirds; when that was not 
the case, these portions were diminished to auginenl to the proper pro- 

S2 



26Q Taxeu 

BOOK II. when the fiaigt isi estobUshi^ in regard to JAva» ii 
is established with regard to all that part of the 
eastern islands, which in point of manners and civili- 
zation resembled Java. It is not disputed that; 
in China the whole property of the soil is vested in 
the Emperor,^ By the laws of the Welsh, in the 
ninth century, q11 the land of th,e kingdom waa 
declared to belong to the king ; ^ and we may safely,, 
^ys M^. Turner, believe, that the same law prevailed 
whUe the Britons oct^upied the whole island.^ 

To those who contemplate the prevalence of this. 
, ii]i^titution« amopg naUoas contiguous^ to the Hindus^ 
and resembling them in the state of civilization, it 
cannot appear surprising, that among them, too, the 
Sovereign was the lord of the soiL The fact is, 
indeed, very forcibly implied, in many of the ancient 
laws and institutions, " Of old hoards," says one at 
the ordinances of Menu, ^^ and precious minerals in 
the earth, the king is entitled to half by reason of his 
general protection, and because he is the supreme lord, 
of the soil." * The king, as proprietor, and as fiiUy 
entitled to an equitable return for the land which he 

portion tl\^t of tbe people. See too Carli, Lettres sur TAmeriqae, lot. 
xv. For. great services land was given in full property ; Acostd, book 
VI. cb. xviii; and this ia another remarkable coinctdeoce with what ex- 
isted in Hindustan. 

1 Abb^ Grosier Descr. de la Chine ; bat Mr. Barrow's teslimony is 
tbe most direct and satisfactory. ^' The emperor,*' says he, " is consi- 
dered as the sole proprietary of the soil, but the tenant is never turned 
out of possession as long as he. continnes to pay his rent, which is cal- 
culated at about one tenth of what his farm is supposed capable of 
yielding > and though the holder of lands can only be considered as a 
tenant at will, yet it is his own fault if he should be dispossessed/' 
Barrow's China, p. 397. 4'< 

^ Leges Wallics, Hoel, cap. 337. 

3 Tumer's^Uistoryof the Anglo-saxons, w>l. ii. ch. iii. 

^ L^ws of Menu, ch. viii. 39. ' I have here substituted the wondi m- 
ffrem^ for the word paramountf used by Sir William Jones^ which has no 
meaniiig but aa it relates to the feudal institutions of Europe, and is cal- 
culate to convey an. erroneous idea. 



Taxes, Sf6l 

has let, is empowered to ptinfeh the cukivator for bad BOOK li. 
cultivation. « If land be injured, by the fault of the ^"^^'^ > 
farmer himself, as if he fails to sow it in due time, he 
shall be fined ten times as much as the king's share 
of the crop, that might otherwise have been tadsed ; 
but only five times as much, if it wats the fault of his 
servants withoiit his knowledge." ^ Among other -an- 
cient memorials 6f Hindti institutions and mamlers, 
are certain inscriptions engraved on durable mate- 
rials. Some- of them are records of grants of land, 
commonly to favourite Brahmens ; tod afford ^rong 
indication of the proprietary rights of the sovereign. 
The sovereign gives away villages and lands, not 
empty, but already oc^cupied by cultivators, and 
paying rent.^ It appears from an ordinance of 
Yagyawalcya, xyne of the most sacred of the law 
sages, that the kings alienated the lands within their 
dominions, in the same manner, and by the same title, 
as they alienated any portion of their rev6nues.^ On 

1 Laws of Menu, ch. viii. 243. 

« See a royal grant of land, engraved on a copper plate, bearing date 
twenty-three years before Christ; and discovered among the ruins at 
Monguir, translated by Mr. Wilkins, Asiat. Researches, i. 123. " Be 
it known," says the inscription, (p. 126) " that I have given the above- 
ni^entioned town of Meseeka, whose limits include the fields where the 
cattle graze, above and below the surface, with all the lands belonging 
to it, together with all the Mango and Modhoo trees ; all its waters, and 
all their banks and verdure; all its rents, all its tolls and fines for crimes, 
and rewards for catching thieves. In it there shall be no molestation, 
no passage for troops," &c. It is here remarkable that the sovereign, as 
well as the proprietary, rights are given away; so indissolubly were 
these united in the minds and institutions of the Hindus. In the same 
manner in another grant of land found at Tanna, and bearing date An. 
Christi, 1018, the laud is given away "with its herbage, wood, and 
water, and with power of punishing for the ten crimes." Asiat. Re- 
searches, i. 364. 

3 *' Let a king, having given land, or assigned revenue, cause his gift 
to be written for the information of good princes, who will succeed him 
euber on prepared cloth, 6r on a plate of copper, sealed above with his' 
signet ; having described his ancestors and himself, the dimensions or 
quantity of the gift, with its metes and bounds, if it be land, and set his 
owii hand to it, and specified the tfme, let him render his donation firm/' 



262 Taxes. 

BOOK u. this point, it is of material importance to remark, 
^^'^' that up to the time, when the interests of the Com- 
pany's servants led them to raise a controversy about 
the rights of the Zemindars, every European visitor, 
without one exception that I have found, agrees in 

I the opinion, that the sovereign was the owner of the 

soiL^ 

See the origioa], and the translation of Sir William Jones, Asiat. Res. 
iii. 50. 

The Digest of Hinda law, translated by Colebrooke, (i. 460) declares, 
** By conquest, the earth became the property of the holy Parasu Rama, 
by gift the property of the sage Casyapa ; and, committed by him to 
Cshatriyas for the sake of protection, became their protective properly 
successively held by powerful conquerors, and not by subjects, cultivate 
ing the soil." It Airther appears, from the same passage, that by agree- 
ment with the soyereign, and not otherwise, a tenure of more than one 
year might be required; but without such agreement, the cultivator might 
be turned away at the end of every year, if a larger rent was offered by 
any other. It was highly necessary to quote this passage, though it is 
^ affirmed by CoLWilks,-to be a law manufactured by the complaisant 

Brahmens, wHo^made the Digest, on purpose to suit the opinions of the 
ruling power, at that time in love with the Zemindarry system. Col. 
Wilks affinns, that there is nothing whatsoever which the Brahmens can* 
not make to be law, on a similar occasion. And it is at least certain, 
that part of what they give as law has been proved to be at variance with 
all that appears either of their present or ancient institutions. 

" That there were no hereditary estates in India; for that all the land 
belonged to the king, which he disposed of at pleasum." Persian autbo- 
rity, quoted by Steijrart, Hist;, of Bengal, p. 132. 

1 It is proper to adduce the more remarkable instances. The ancient 
Greeks who visited India expressly inform us, that the kings were the 
sole proprietors of the soil, and that a fourth part of the produce was 
usually paid them in kind as the rent or tribute. Strabo, lib. xv. p. 1030. 
Diod. Sic. lib. ii. p. 53. 

*' Diodoras, Strabo, the voyagers and travellers of later times, without 
any exception that has fellen within the scope of my limited reading, the 
authors of the Lettres Edifiantes, and the European travellers who visited 
the court of Aurungzebe in the latter part of the seventeenth century, 
Bemier, Thevenot, Chardin, Tavemier, and I believe, Manouchi, are 
unanimous in denying the existence of private landed property in ludia.'^ 
AVilks, Hist: Sketches, p. 1 14. 

^ In revenue the Emperor doubtless exceeds either Turk or Persian, or 
any eastern prince, the sums I dare not name, but the reason. All the 
land is his, no man has a foot." Sir T. Roe to the Archbishop of Can- 
terbury, Churchill, i. 803; 

'< Toutes les terres du royaume,'' says Qetnier, <' estant en propre au* 



Taxe$. 263 

Wherever the Hindus have remained under the BOOK II. 
influence of their ancient customs and laws, the facts °^^' 
corresijond with the inference which would be drawn 
from these laws. Under the direction of the Go- 
vemor-GJeneral of Bengal, a journey was undertaken, 
in the year 1766, by Mr. Motte, to the diamond 
mines in the province of Oiissa. In a narrative of 
his journey, he gives an account of the distribution of 
the land at Sumbhulpoor, which till that time had re- 
mained under the native government. Each village 
being rated to the government at a certain quantity 
of rice, .which is paid in kind, the land is thus divided 
among the inhabitants : To every man, as soon as he 
arrives at the proper age, is granted such a quantity 
of arable land as h estimated to produce 243-^ measures 



roi,''&c. Suite de Mem. sur TEmp. du Grand Mogol, t. ii. p. 10. See 
also, p. 150, 174, 178 : at p. 189, he makes the following remark ; " Ces 
trois etats, Turkie, Perse, et Tllindoustan, comme ils oat tous ost6 ca 
Mien et ce Tien, a Tegard des foiKls de terre et de la propri6tc des poB* 
sessions, qui est le fundcnient de tout ce qu it y a de beau et de bon 
dans le nwnde, ne peuvent qu'ils ne se resembletit de bien pr<:s/* Mon« 
tesquiau seems to have been fully aware of this important fact. — **^ Les 
loix des Indes, qui' donnent let terres anx princes, et 6tent auvparticw 
Hers Vesprit de proprittCy augroentent les mauvais effcts du climat, 
c'est it dire, ia paresse naturelle/* £sp. de Loix, liv. xiv. ch. G. 

" All the lauds in India are con-iidered as the property of the king, 
except some hereditary districts possessed by Hindoo princes.*' Dow'a 
liindostan, preface, p. xiii. 

** All the lauds in tho kingdom,*' says Mr. Onne, (fragments, p. 409) 
belong to the king : therefore all the lands in the provinces are subject to 
the Nabob. With him, or his representatives, farmers agree for the cul- 
tivsftion of such an extent, on reserving to themselves such a proportion 
of the produce. This proportion is settled according to the difficulty oi^ 
ease of raising the grain, and seldom exceeds a third.*' One third to the 
cultivator, and two thirds to the proprietor, would be accounted a rack- 
rent in England. Mr. Orme says again, (Ibid. p. 414) " The king, by 
being proprietor of the lands, sells to \]h subjects their subsistence, in- 
stead of receiving supplies from then^." Mr. IIolwcU says, (Interesting 
Historical Events, i. 12*20). "Hie rents of the lands are the property 
of the emperor." And again, " The tenures of the ryots are irrevocahk?, 
as long as they pay the rent ; and by the laws of Ilindostan, they must be 
twelve mouths in arrcar before they can be ejected. *' Ibid, 



264 Tax€$. 

BOOK n. of rice, of which he must pay 60|- measures, or about 
^^^^'^' one fourth to the riyah or king. Mr, Motte adds; 
" ** The reserved rent of three or four Tillages, being 
one fourth the produce of the land, is applied to the 
use of the rajah's household. The reserved rent of 
the rest is given to his relations or principal servants^ 
who by these means have all the inhabitants depend- 
ent OH them."^ Dr. Buchanan gives a particular 
account of the manner in which the crop, in those 
parts of India which are most purely Hindu, is 
divided between the inhabitants and the government* 
In Bengal it is not allowed to be cut down till the 
rent or tax is first paid: but in those countries to 
which his journey principally relates, it is the custom^ 
after the grain has been thrashed out in the field, to 
collect it into heaps/ and then to divide it. A heap 
,V'^*^ generally consists of about 110 Winchester bushels, of 

which he presents the following distribution €ts a spe- 
cimen of the partition which is usually made. Foi* 
the gods, that is, for the priests ^t their temples, are 
deducted five seers, containing about one-third of a 
Winchester gallon each ; for charity, or (ot the men- 
dicant Brahmens, an equal quantity ; for the astrolo- 
ger and the Brahmen of the vills^, one seer each ; 
for the barber, the potmaker, the washerman, and the 
Vasaradava, who is both carpenter and blacksmith, 
two seers each ; for the measurer, four, seers ; for the 
Aduca, a kind of beadle, seven seers ; for the village 
chief, eight seers, out of which he has to furnish the 
viUage sacrifices ; and for the accomptant, ten seers. 

I A Narrative of a Joumey to the Diamond Mines of Sumbhulpoor, 
ill the province of Orissa, by Thomas Motte, Esq. Asiat. Annual Regis- 
ter, 1.9 Miscellaneoas Tracts, p. 75. Mr. Motte further informs us that 
every man at Sumbhulpoor is enrolled as a soldier, and is allowed half a 
measure of rice in the day for his subsbtence, while his wife cultivates the 
farm. He seems to say that this subsistence is given to him by the wife 
from the produce of the farm. 



All theKe perqiifaites ikre the same, wfafttevter be the book k. 
siae of the heap beyond a measure of about ttrenty- ^'^''' ^' 
fiye Winchester busheb. When^theto allowasces 
are withdrawn the heap is measwed ; atid for every 
candaca which it contains^ a measure equal to 5-^ 
Wnk^sler bushds, there is again dedficted half a 
teer to the Village watctnnen, two and a fadf seers to 
the acootnptant» a$ much to tiie chirf of Uie village; 
a&d the bottotta of the heap» about an inch thicks 
toixed with the cow«dung which in order to pnrify it 
had been spread on the ground^ is given to the Nir« 
^nt j9 or conductor of water. These several deduo* 
tkms, on a heap of twenty candacas, or 110 Win-^ 
Chester bushels, amount to about 5^ per cent, on the 
gross produce. Of the remainder, 10 per cent ii 
paid to the coMectof*s of the revenue, as their wi^es 
or hire ; and' the heap is last of all divided into halves ^ 
betweea the king and the cultivator.? , 

From theie facts only one conclusion can be drawn^ 
that tlie property of the soil resided in the sovereign ; 
for if it did not reside in him, it will be impossiUe to 
show to whom it belonged. The cultivators W&i 
left a bare compensation, often not so much as a bare 
compensation, for the labour and cost of cultivation : ^ 

th^ got the benefit of tbek labour : aU the benefit of 
the land went to the king.' 

1 Bachanan's Jouraey through the Mysore, Sec. i. 3, 3, ISO, 194, 365. 
^' This simple mode of ratinglands for half their yearly prodbce is deriyed 
from the remotest antiqaity in different parts of Uindostan, and still in*- 
▼ariahly prevails in such countries as were left unsubdued by the Maho- 
medans, Uke Taqiore, where the ancient Indian forms of adiiiinisti|^a * 

are, for the most part, preserved entire/* British India Analysed) . 
i. 195. 

* The Missionary Dubois, with his singular opportunities of correct 
information, says, peremptorily; *' Creditors can have no hold on the 
real estate of their debtors, because the Hindus have no property in the 
soil. The lands which they cultirate are the domain of the piiuce, who 



S66 Taxes. 

BOOK IT. Upon the state of facts, in those places where the 
^"^^* ^* present practices of the Hindus have not been forced 
into a disconformity with their ancient institutions, . 
the fullest light has been thrown, by those servants 
of the Company, who made the inquiries requisite 
for the introduction of a regular system of finance, 
into the extensive regions in the south of India added 
to the British dominions during the administrations 
s of the Marquisses Comwallis and Weliesley. Place, 
Munro, Thackeray, Hodgson, wfre happily men of 
talents; sufficiently enlightened to see the things 
which were before them with their naked^eyes; and 
not through the mist of English anticipations. From 
the reports of these meritorious gentlemen, presented 
to their superiors, the Committee of the House of 
Commons, which inquired into East India affairs in 
1810, have drawn the following as a general picture : 
** A village, geographically considered, is a tract of 
country, comprising some hundreds, or thousands, of 
acres of arrable and waste land. Politically viewed, 
it resembles a corporation, or township. Its proper 
establishment of officers and servants consists of the 
following descriptions: The Potailt or head inha- 
bitant, who has the general superintendance of the 
affairs of the village, settles the disputes of the inha- 
bitants, attends to the police, and performs the duty 



is the sole proprietor. He can resame them at his pleasare, and give 
tbein to another to coltivate. Even the huts in which they live, built of 
ffiud and covered with thatch, are not their own. All belongs to the 
pnnoe ; and if a roan, for any reason whatever, quits his babitatien in 
the village, he can by no means dispose of it to another, although it were 
constructed by his own hands. The only property they possess is their 
few cows and buffaloes; and upon these no creditor is allowed to lay 
bis hands ; because, if deprived of his cattle, be would be unable to 
cultivate the land ; whence an injury would accrue to the prince.'' De^ 
scription, &€. of the People of India, by the Abb6 Dubois, p. 496. 

1 



Taxes. 267 

ef collecting the revenues within his village: The book IL 
Curnum, who keeps the accounts of cultivation, and ^^^^' ^ 
rasters every thing connected with it : The Tallier 
and Totie; the duty of the former appearing to con- 
sbt in a wider and more enlarged sphere of action^ 
in gaining information of crimes and offences, and in 
escorting and protecting persons travelling from one 
village to another ; the province of the latter appear* 
ing to be more immediately confined to the village, 
consisting, among other duties, in guarding the crops, 
and assisting in measuring them: The Boundary^ 
man J who preserves the limits of the village or gives 
evidence respecting them in cases of dispute: The 
Super inteniant of water courses and tanks, who 
distributes the water for the purposes of agriculture; 
The Brahmen, who performs the village worship: 
The Schoolmaster, who is seen teaching the children 
in the villages to read and write in the sand : The 
Calendar Brahmen, or astrologer, who proclaims the 
lucky, or unpropitious periods for sowing and thrash*- 
ing : The Smith, and Carpenter, who manufacture 
the implements of agriculture, and build the dwelling 
of the ryot : The Potman or potter : The Washer- 
man: The Barber: The Cow-keeper, who looks 
^er the cattle : The Doctor : The Dancing Girl, 
who attends at rejoicings,; The Musician, and the 
Poet. 

" Under this simple form of municipal govern- 
ment, the inhabitants of the country have lived, from 
time immemorial. The boundaries of the villages 
have been seldom altered : and though the villages 
themselves have been ^metimes injured, and even 
desolated, by war, famine, and disease, the same 
name, the same limits, the same interests, and even 
the same families, have continued for ages. The 
inhabitants give themselves no trouble about the 



%0S Taing$. 

AooKn.Weaking ^ amd divi«<m of kingdoms; Whie th« 
^°^^' ^' vilbge Temains entire, thi^ycjrt'e not to what potv^* it 
is tra^sfbrred^ or to what soverdgn it devolves ; its 
ifiteinal economy tiemains unchanged ; the Potail to 
gdll the head inhaMtant, and still acts as the petty^ 
jud^e and magi^rate, and coflector or tenter of the 
village."^ 

These villages appear to have been not only a sort 
of small repid:>lic, but to have enjoyed to a greal; de- 
gree the community of goods. Mr. Place> the cd- 
lectot in the jaghire district at Madras, informs Ufiy 
that ^ Every village considers its^ a distinct iN^ 
ctety; and its general concerns the sole object of the 
inhabitants at large: a practice/' he adds, ** which 
surely redounds as much to the public good as to 
theirs ; eadi having, in some way or other, the assist- 
tfice of the rest; the labours of all yield the rent; 
they enjoy the profit, prop<nlionate to their oj%iliiA 
interest, and the loss falls light. It consists exa^y 
with the principles upon which the advantages are 
derived iW)m the division of labour ; one i6an goes to 
market, whilst the re^ attend to the cultivation and 

1 Fifth Report, Commit. 1810, p. 85. See, in '' Considerations on 
the State of India," by A. Fraser Tytler, i. ItS, a description of a vil- 
tlige in Bengal, which shows that th6 Indian continent was pervadM by 
this institation. 

An association of a similar kind existed among the Mexicans. Bxh 
bertson's America, iii. 283. 

Some carions strokes of resemblance appear in the following p&rticu- 
lam of the Celtic Inanners, in the highlands and islands of Scotbad. 
** The peculiarities which strike the nadve of a commercial country, 
proceeded in a great measure from the want of money. To the servants 
and dependants, that were not domestics, were appropriated certain por- 
tions of land for their support. Macdonald has a piece of ground yet, 
called the bard's, or senachie's field. When a beef was killed for the 
house, particular parts were clainfed as fees by the several officers, or 
iitoi^men. The. head belonged to the smith, and the udder of a cow to 
the piper; the weaver had likewise his particular part; and so many 
pieces followed these prescriptive claims, that the laird's was at last but 
little." Johnson's Hebrides. 



the hajfvest; each ha& kk |iertiGulw yrrTurgritnn BPQic iiL 
l^si^ed to hiuu and insensibly l^oursfor a^ Anpr ^'^' ^' 
ther practice very frequently prevailB, of each pro- '■^" 
prietoi; changing hi« lands every year. It is fovndi 
in |K)me of the richest vijUages ; and intefided, I iqa^ 
fpfi^t to obviate that inequality to which % fU^d 4U-. 
tr41)ution would be liable/'^ 

Tt^ ^ialLe of tfuc^ipn is described by the same 
i}(mfi^iiXe^9 in the fpUo^iog terms : " By the custom 
of th^ Hindu government, the cultivators were en^ 
titled to one h^^ oi the paddy |H*oduce (th^t isj^ graw 
k) the hu6k;) depending on the pmodical rain^« Og 
the crops fxowk the dry grain l^ndjs, watered by arti- 
tol^l meanv the shA^e ai the cultivator was ajaqy^ ^ 
two*thi]!d9. £iefpre the harvest coDpjz^nce^ the^ 
quantity of the cvop was ascertained, in the presence 
ef the inhabitants and viUage aervants^ by the survey 
qi pevsonfb unconnected with the vi}h|g^i who, from 
t^tjt were particular^ skilful andexpert^ in judgnig 
of the amount of the produce, and who^ in the adjusfc- 
Mmt of thia business were QiateriaUy aided by a re- 
fi^nce tg^ the produce of former years, f^ reeordi^ 
l^j the a^scountants of the viltages. The quantity 
vhid^ bdonged to the government being; thus ascer- 
tiMied^ it wi^ received in kindj^ or ini 9ioney." 0£ 
gai;d^n produce, of which the culture was more diffi*s 
Quh^ a arnall^ portion was taken ; beciuise^ if field; * 
culture was taxed as much as it could bear> it seema 
to have been supposed that garden culture, at an equal 
mte of taxation, could not have been carried on. 

'*Stich," continue the cconmittee, " were the rightp. 
of the ryots, according to the ancient usage of th/e* 
eountry. In consequence, however, of the qhav^^. 

1 Fifth Reporti^ut supra, p. 793. 
5 



£70 Taxes. 

BOOK n. introduced by the Mahomedan conquest^ and the many 
*^^'^* abuses which later times had established, the share 
really enjoyed by the ryots was often reduced to a 
sixth, and but seldom exceeded a fifth. The assess- 
ments had no bounds but those which limited the 
supposed ability of the husbandman. The effects of 
this unjust system were considerably augmented by 
the custom, which had become common with the 
Zemindars, of sub-renting their lands to farmers, 
whom they armed with unrestricted powers of col- 
lection, and who were thus enabled to disregard, 
whenever it suited their purpose, the engagements 
they entered into with the ryots ; besides practising 
every species of oppression, which an unfeeling motive 
of self-interest could suggest. If they agreed with 
the cultivators at the commencement of the year, for 
. a rent in money, and the season proved an abundant 
one, they then insisted on receiving their dues in 
kind. When they did take their rents in specie, 
they hardly ever failed to collect a part of them be- 
fore the harvest time had arrived and the crops were 
cut ; which reduced the ryots ta the necessity of bor- 
rowing from money lenders, at a heavy interest of 
S, 4, apd 5 per cent, per month, the sums requisite to 
make good the anticipated payments that were de- 
manded of them« If, from calamity or other cause, 
the ryots were the least remiss in the discharge of 
tfieir rents, the offices of the renters were instantly 
quartered upon them ; and these officers they were 
obliged to maintain, until they might be recdied on 
the demand being satisfied. It was also a frequent 
practice with the renters to remove the inhabitants 
from fertile lands, in order to bestow them on their 
friends and favourites; and to oblige the ryots to 
assist them, where they happened to be farmers, in 



Taxes. 271 

the tilling of thdr lands ; and to furnish them gra- BOOK IL 
tuitously with labourers, bullocks, carts, and straw."* Craf*&. 

The two terms. Ryot, and Zemindar, introduced 
into this passage, are of frequent recurrence in the 
history of India, and require to be explained. By 
ryots, are always denoted the husbandmen ; the im- 
mediate cultivators of the ground. The .Persian 
term Zemindar, introduced by the Mahomedkin con« 
querors, was in Bengal, and certain other parte of 
India, the name of a certain sort of middlemaUt be^ 
tween the cultivator who raised the crop, and the 
king who received the greater part of the net pro- 
duce. Into the controversy respecting the nature of 
the interest which the Zemindar possessed in the 
land with respect to which he performed his function 
of middle-man, I shall not at present enter. Another 
iMxasion will present itself for the examination of that 
subject. It is here sufficient to say, that in districts, 
somelames of greater, sometimes of less extent, a 
fperson, under the title of Zemindar, received the 
share of the produce, which was exacted from the 
ryot ; either by lamael^ or the persons to whom ha 
farmed the receipts ; and paid it over to the sove- 
reign, reserving a prescribed portion to himself. The 
Zemindar was thus, whatever else he might be, the 
collector of the revenue, for the district to which he 
belonged. As the receipt of revenue, in a rude state 
of government, is the business most dear to the go- 
vernors, the Zemindar, in order the better to secure 
tliis favourite end, was vested with a great share of 
the powers of government. He was allowed the use 
of a military force;. the poUce of the district was 
placed in his hands; and he was vested with the 
civil branch of judicature. When his . district was 

* Fifth Report, «t supra, p. 81, 82. 



BOOfi It Itage, he wfi& a sort of a petty prnoe. In variuu 
^^^]^ places of IiKJia, hgiwevev, the coyection of the re- 
veaue had never become fixed and beieditaiy, in the 
hands of an individual, and the business was trans- 
HCted between the immediate cultivators, and a 
man who possessed none but the characteristics of an 
immediate officer of government. 

The eommittee say, that a rate of taxation much 
move severe than that which existed under the 
Hindu governments was introduced by the Moha- 
medan rukrs, and amid the abuses of modem times. 
For this opinion they have no authority whatsoever. 
It is, therefore, a mere prejudice. Ilie rate which 
they mention goes &r beyond the scale of the ancient 
ordinances : And what reason is there to believe that 
the ancieut Hindu governments did not, as the Mo^ 
hamedan, levy assessments to the utmost limits of the 
supposed abUity pf the ryots? In those parts a[ 
India which Europeans have found stiH remaining 
under Hindu governments, the state of the people is 
wcMrse, if there is any difference, than where they 
have been subject to the Mohamedan sway. 

Ilie rate established in the ancient oidinances has 
been regarded as evidence of miU taxation, that is, 
of good government. It only proves that agriculture 
was in its earliest, and most unproductive state; 
and though it paid little, it could not afford to pay 
any more.^ We may assume it as a principle, in 
which there is no room for mistake, that a govern- 
ment constituted and circumstanced as that of the 



> Bj the same rale, the Tarkish government would be ranked as excel- 
lent. It takes little : bat the reason is, there is nothing moce which it 
CUP take. The ancient assessinent on the cultivator in Persia waa one* 
tenth ; but in the days of the Indian Emperor Akbar, he was by one 
means or other made to pay more than a half. Ayeen Akberry, Ed. 
in 4to. p. 348. 



HinAis had oofy one limit to its^ exactions, the hm* BOOliii. 
existence of any thing further to take. Another ^°*''\^. 
thing is certain, that under any stale of Guktiration, ^ • "^ " 
hot the Tery worst, if the whole except a sixth of the ' 
produce of a soil, so rich as that of Hindustan, had 
bee* left with the cultivator, he must have had the 
means of acquiring wealth, and of attaining rank and 
consequence ; but these it is well ascertained that the 
ryots in India never enjoyed.^ 

Notwithstanding these proofii that the ownersh^ 
in the land was reserved to the king, this condusion ^ 

has been disputed, in favour, 1st, of the Zemindars, 
and 9dly, of the Ryots. The question with regard to 
the Zemindars may be reserved till that period of the 
biatory, when it was agitated for the sake of practical 
proceedings on the part of the government. The 
^eslion with regard to the Ryots belongs pecuMarly 
to this part of the woik. 

The circumstance, which appear to have misled 
the intelligent Europeans who have misinterpreted 
this part of the Hindu institutions, ere two ; first, 
the tenure of the ryot or husbandman ; and secondly, 
tUe humane and honouraUe anxiety, lest the in-- 
tetests and the happiness of the most numerous class 
of the population should be sacrificed, if the sovereign 
were acknowledged as owner of the soiL 

But, if this acknowledgment were ever so complete, 
it is inconsistent neither with the tenure which if 
claimed in favour of the ryots, nor with the meai» ot 
their prosperity and happiness. And if it were, the 
acknowledgment of its previous existence would be 
no bar to a preferable arrangement; since the so* 

1 The population in Indiai, through so many ages, must have been kspt 
down by excess of exaction. Even in the richest parts of India one half 
of the soil biM never been under cultivation. 
VOL. r. T 



•7^ T<upe$. 

900K 11. vereign caa bare a right to nothing wliidi ift li^ 

Chap. 5< 



jurious to his people. 

Id a situation in which the revenue of the sore* 
jreign was increased in proportion to the number of 
cultivators, and in which a great proportion of the 
fend continued void of cultivators, there wouhl be a 
competition, not of cultivators for the land, but of the 
land for cultivators. If a ryot cultivated a piece of 
ground, and punctually paid his assessment, the so* 
vetagn would be far from any wish to remove him, 
because it would be difficult to supplyihis place. If the 
ryot sold the ground to another ryot, or left it to a sue* 
oessor, that is, put another in his place who would 
fulfil the wishes of the sovereign, he, whose source of 
fear was the want of a cultivator, had still cause for 
satisfaction ; and seldom, if ever, interfered. 

* By custom^ the possession of the ryot became, in 
this manner, a permanent possession ; whence he waa 
not removed except when he failed to pay his assess- 
ment or rent; a possession which he could sell during^ 
his life ; or leave by inheritance when he died. As 
far as rights can be established by prescription, these 
rights were established in India in favour of the ryots* 
And no violation of property is more flagrant than 
that by which the tenure of the ryot is exponged. 

But, according even to European ideas, a right to 
^tivafte the. land under these, and still greater ad- 
vantage^ is not understood to transfer the ownership 
of the land. The great estates in Ireland, for exam* 
pie, let underleases perpetually renewable, are vendi- 
ble and inheritable by the leaseholders, without affect- 
ing the ownership of their lords ; subject, moreover, 
to a very important restriction, from which the sove- 
reigns in India were free;* the lords of such estates 

1 It is renuurkabla that the king's tenaott in anoeiii dememe were, in 



Tuxe%. m 

cannot raise their rents at [Measure ; the sorere^gps bcxhl il. 
in India enjoyed this privilege, and abused it to ex- ^"^'' *' 
cess. The sovereigns in India had not only the 
ownership, hut all the benefit of the land ; the ryots 
had merely the privilege of employing their labour 
always upon the same soil^ and of transferring that 
privilege to some other person ; the sovereign claimed 
a right to as much of the produce as he pleased, and 
seldom left to the ryots more than a very scanty re« 
ward for their labour. 

That ownership in the land Justified this extent of 
exaction, or implies a valid title to any power at 
variance with the interests of the ryots> is an errone- 
ous inference. Without violating its obligations to 
the people, a government cannot spend any sum, 
beyond what is strictly necessary for the performance 
of the services, which it is destined to render : and it 
is justified in taking even this sum exclusively from 
the cultivators of the land, only if that is the mode in 
which all the qualities desirable in a financial system 
are the most completely realized 

Those who contend for the privileges of the 
ryots would no doubt observe, that in this mode of 
interpretation, we reduce the ownership of the sove- 
reign to an empty name ; and that to the admission 
of it, thus understood, they see nothing to object. 
The controversy is then at a dose. The ownership 
of the sovereign in the soil, wherever it exists, is, by 
the principles which constitute the very foundation of 
government, reduced to the limits above described. 
And it is no less certain, that all which is valuable in 
the soil, after the deduction of what is due to the 

England, perpetual, on the same condition af the ryotf in India. A 
gleba atnoveri non poterint, quamdiu soWert possoot debitas pensiones. 
BractOQ, lib. i. cap. ii. 

T 2 



i7« Rijrrt, 

BOOK n. severe^ belong^ «[ incoMestable right to the Imfiftn 
^"^'•*- husbandman.* 



Y The following qaotations will show Row completely these dedactione 
vcGord with the facte which the kte perfect investigation has elicited* 
Mr. Thackery, in bis general report, remarks, '^ All this peninsula, ex- 
cept, perhaps, only Cauara, Malabar, and a few ot|ier provinces, has ex- 
hibited, from time immemorial, but one system of land revenoe. The 
land has been considered the piroperty of the Circar [government], and of 
the ryots. The interest in the soil has been divided between these two; 
but the ryots have possessed little more interest than that of being here- 
ditary tenants. If any persons have a claim to participate with govern- 
ment in the property of the soil, it is the ryots." (Fifth Report, ut 
supra, p. 992.) These ideas, and even the very words, have been 
adopted, in the Report of the Board of Revenue. Tb. p. 898. ^ Lands,'' 
says Mr. Place, ** cannot be alienated without a written instmment; 
because both the sovereign and the subject have a mutual property in 
them. Each, however, may alienate his own, and the other is not 
affected. The sovereign may part with his interest in them : but the 
nsofructuary right remains with the subject. And all that the latter can 
sell, mortgage, or give away, h the enjoyment of the pro6t, afler paying 
what is due to the sovereign." (Ibid. p. ^18.) Mr. Harris, in his 
r€fkir\ on Tanjore, informs us, ** A meerassadar (ryot) disposes of hfs 
station in tmy manner he pleases. He disposes of it, too, and quits, 
without being bound to give, to any one, notice of his transfer and de- 
parture. Like him, his successor superintends its cultivation, and pays 
its revenue. Government know nothing of his relinqidshment; and if 
they knew of it, they would 6ot care ab6nt it here, as in Eoropd. The 
proprietorship of the land belongs to government or the landlord ; and he 
who is entrusted with the duty of making It productive, lives npon it 
and cultivates it, so long as he pays iu fevenut, and no Idnger. Bat this 
occupation of it, while the sufierior is satisfied, has been converted bgr 
the meerassadar, into a right. They have made the right a property; 
and they retain, sell, lend, givft, or tnorrgage, ticcording to dielr inclina- 
tion, the whole or any pUrt of it" (Ibid. 889.) Even Mr. Hotigson, 
who is an advocate for raising the revenue through the instrumentality 
of Zemindars, affirms the rights of the cultivators to be incontestable. 
^ I make/' sayS he, *' the fbllowing inductions : 1st. that the ciiltivators 
have a right, every where, to pay a fixed eax for the land they occupy; 
9dly. that they have the right, universally, to occupy this land, so long 
as they pay the standard rent; Sdly. that they have the rir.ht to sell or 
transfer, by deed, gift, or otherwise, the land they occupy, suliject always 
to the condition of paying the standard rent; 4thiy. tihat they exercise 
the right, stated in the third position, wherever the standard resit has 
not been increased, so as to absorb all the profit on cultivation, or arable 
land is sufficiently scarce to be of value in the acquisition.'^ (Ih. 979.) 



Taxes, ten 

Tte Hinda mode of ndsLog tshe reTemie of the BOOKII. 
state, whdUj, or Almost whdlj^ by taking as much as ^''^' 



necessary of the rent of the land, while it is the 
obvious expedient which first presents itself to the 

If the writer ineaosy by saying thftt the cuUivator bad a riglU to pay no 
more tban a fixed rent, that it would have been right or good to pay only 
in that manner, I maiutain the same doctrine ; but if he means that the 
cultivator ever enjoyed this right, the proposition is Air from troe. In 
every other respect I assent to the jxopo^itions'of Mr. Hodgson. I also 
agree with him, when he saysj ** Prpvidod the property in private 
estates, that is, the standard rent, and no more, be paid by these owner! 
of private estates, I hold it to be a matter of very secondary importance 
to ihem, whether the rent ir demanded of them by the ai^ciant ngaba or 
polygars, the officers of Byjnuggur or Bednore government, the rajah 
ooorg, the tehsildars of the Company, or the (to be created) zemindars 
of the Ck>Bpany/' (lb. 080.) The collector of Tanjore also thinks it 
not worth inquiriog what ownersbip the sovereign has, provided the 
usufruct of the ryot is well defined and secured. (lb. 831.) See Hodg^ 
eon again to the same effect. (lb. p. 996.) We are informed by Mr. 
f ark, that in Africa, when a permission to cultivate a spot of ground has 
b^n granted by the sovereign, it is not resumed, while the revenue q^ 
rent is paid. (Travels, p. 261.) In China, Mr. Barrow assures us, that 
the cultivator, though in reality a tenant at will, is never dispossessed, 
but whan he fails to discharge the stilted engagements. " So accu»- 
toned," he adds, ^ are the Chinese to consider an esute as their own, 
while they continue to pay the rent, that a Portuguese in Macao had 
tieaiiy lost his life for endeavouring to raise the rent upon his Chinese 
teaants.'' (Travels in China, p. 397.) Dr. Buchanan says, <<The 
ryots or farmers have no property in. the ground; but it is not usual to 
turn any man away, so long as he pays the customary rent. Even in the 
reign of Tippoo, such an act would have been looked upon as an astqnish- 
ii^ grievance." (Joprpey through Mysore, &c i. 184.) '* The genius 
and tendency of all Hindu institutions is, to redder offices, as well as 
property, hereditary." (VVilks's Hist. Sketches, p. 231.) *< The king is 
the general heir of all his subjects; but when there are children to in- 
herit, they are seldom.deprived of their father's estate." (Dow*s Uio- 

dostan, pref. p. xiii.) H X^P* ''^^^ xnKiwC aXX* aSiy iim* run Kixrn/utwif ixarof 

w^fof IP Tfinr i«u7«. (Dio Chrysostom. Orat. 31.in Rhodiac.) Anquetil 
Duperion was the first of the Europeans i*ho maintained that the owner- 
ship of the land was vested in the ryots. He has written a discourse 
upon the subject, in his work entitled, Recherchet UiUoriguex et Geo- 
grapttigttei sur tlnde. He proves what is now acknowledged, that a 
tnan might dispose of his farm, and was seidora turned ont of it, while 
he continued to pay his tai^es or rent. There is a learned and able 
diapter, in support of tlie same opinion, in " Historical Sketches of the 
fioutb of India, by Col. Wilks," 



J78 Taxes. 

BOOK II. rudest minds, has no inconsiderable recommendation 
^°^^' ^ from science itself. Previous to allotment, the pro- 
ductive powers of the soil are the joint property of 
the community; and hence are a fund peculiarly 
adapted to the joint or common purposes and de- 
mands. If the whole of what is strictly rent were 
taken away, the application of labour and capital to 
the land would resemble the application of labour 
and capital to wood or iron ; and the same principles, 
in both cases, would determine their reward. 

But as the expense required for the services of go- 
vernment exceeds not a very small portion of the 
rent of the land, unless where the quantity is very 
v^ minute, the greatest possible benefit is derived from 
the productive powers of the soil, when it is the pro- 
perty of individuals. The benefits of the soil have, 
accordingly, over the greater psirt of the globe, been 
employed, first, to supply in whole, or for the greater 
part, the necessities of government, next to enrich 
k the individual occupant. The most remarkable ex- 

ception to this rule is in modem Europe. After the 
conquests of the Gothic nations, the land was thrown 
in great portions into the hands of the leading men ; 
and they had power to make the taxes fall where 
they chose; they took care accordingly that they 
should fall any where rather than upon the land ; 
that is, upon any body rather than themselves. Fur- 
ther, as their influence over the sovereign made him 
glad to share with them what he derived from the 
taxes, they not only threw the burthen off their own 
shoulders, but taxed, as they have continued to do, 
V and sometimes in' a progressive ratio, to the present 

hour, the rest of the community for their benefit. 

The objections to the Hindu system of providing 
for the expenses of government, arise rather irom the 
mode, than the essence 



. By aiming at tlie receipt of a pnscrtt)ed portion book ii. 
of the crop of each year; and witii a very imperfect '^^' ^' 
distinction of the lands of different powers, the Hindus 
incurred most of the evils which a bad method of 
raising a tax is liable to produce. They rendered the 
amount of the tax always uncertain, and its pressure 
Tery unequal ; they rendered necessary a perfect host 
of tax-gatherers; and opened a boundless inlet to 
partiality and opfH^ssion on the one h^d; to firaud 
and mendacity on the other. A tax, consisting of 
any portion of the gross produce of the soil, raises the 
price of that produce ; because the tax raised from 
the poorest of the cultivated land must be returned, 
along with the expense of cultivation, in the ex- 
changeable value of its produce. In this manner a 
tax is levied upon the consumers of com, which sur- 
passes the sum paid to the government, and enriches 
the owners of the best land at the expense of the 
community.^ 

An expensive mode of raising the taxes is a na- 
tural effect of a rude state of society. We are in- 
formed by Sully, that the receipt into the French ex* 
chequer, in the year 1598, was oa(y -thirty miUions 
of French money ; while the sum, dragged out of the 
pockets of the people, was 150 millions. '* The thing 
appeared incredible,'' says the statesman : ** but by 
the due degree of labour, I made the truth of it cer- 
tain." ^ The proportion was doubtless greater in Hin- 
dustan. 

Receiving the taxes in kind was a practice which 
ensured a prodigious expense, and a waste, by which 
nobody gained. Scarcely any other mode seems to 

1 See a Dissertation on the Principles of Taxation, the most profound. 
by hr, which has yet been ^ven to the world, by David Ricardo, Eeq 
in his work " On the Principles of Political Economy and TazatioD.'* 

* Mem. da Sully, Ht. xx. 



886 Xaxe$. 

BO0K IL hmre been known to flie Hiodvs ia tbe lime of tkeir 
^"^^^*' ttdent imtitiitions ; and to a gre«t degnee it con* 
tinued down to tiie latest period ci their history.^ 
How rude and inconvenieDt soever this pradioe 
most be regarded ; we find several nattads^ who 
nake a coasidendde figure in the history of the 
world, whahave not in this respect advanced faejond 
the Htadns* It maj not suiprise any ^ne, that taxes 
were raised in kind in the ancient empire of Meadco.^ 
The greater part, though not the whole, were raised 
in the same manner, in Persia^ even in the tme of 
Darius Hystaspes ;^ and the mixture, at teast, what- 
ever the prqKNTtion, continues to the present day.^ 

> AiBong the Mexicans, says Dr. RobertsoD, <' TasMS were laid upon 
land, upon the acqaisitions of industry, and upon commodities of every 
kiad exposed to sale in the public markets. These duties were conii- 
devable, but not arfakrary or unequal. They were imposed according to 
established rule^, and each knew what share of the common burden he 
liad to bear!'' History of America, iii. 2Q5, 229. The political descrip. 
rions of this admired historian are, commonly, by far too genend, and 
thence vagne. We cannot supjKise that the Mexicane ware moia skilled 
in the policy of taxation than the Hindus. 

* '< As the use of money was unknown,'' says Robertson, (Ibid. p. 996,) 
•^ all the taxes were paid in kiad, and thus not only the natural produc- 
tions of all the difiPerent provinces in the empive, hist eveiy spades of ma- 
nufacture^ and every work of iugeouity and art, were collected in the 
public storehouses.^ It is worthy of remark that the same mode of 
taxing handicrafts and labourers was adopted in Mexico as in Hiaclas- 
tan; " People of inferior condition (ibid.), neither poaaessing iand tier 
engaged in commerce, were bound to the performances of various ser- 
vices. By their stated labour the crown lands^ere cultivated^ public 
works were carried on, and the various hoasea belonged to the eitiperor 
were built aod kept in repair." 

* It is remarkable that, \u Persia, the use even of coined money was 
unknown till the time of Darius Hystaspes. The portion of tribute 
that was paid m gold aad silver was received by weight Hendot. lib. 
iv. cap. clxvi. Major Renoel, uot aware that this was only a portion, 
and a small pt>rtion, of the Persian taxes, is exceedingly puzzled to ac- 
count for the diminutive amount of the Persian revenues, and at last 

. ' concludes that *' the value of money was increcttAfygreater at that time 
than at present.*' Rennel's Geography of Herodotus, p. 316. 

* Ebn Ilaakal, translated by Sir William Ousely, p. 136. Chaidin^ 
Travels in Persia. 



The whole revenue of China* with the exception of book ir. 
some trifling articles, is paid in kind.^ ^^^^' ^' 

1 A\ih6 Grosiery p. 76 ; Barrow's Chma, p. 499. Mr. Barrow in- 
forms as that a vast number of the vesMla on the canals and rivers are 
employed in conveying the taxes to the capital. lb. p. 608. In those 
countries on the Euxine Sea which early attained so high a state of civi- 
lization as to have a large export trade in grain, even the custom house 
duties, or the taxes on export atfd import, were levied in kind. We are 
informed by Demosthenes, Orat. adv. Leptinem, that Leucon king of 
Bosphorus, from which Athens derived her principal supplies, levied a 
duty of OM thirtieth in kind upon all like com sbii^ied in 4ii8 porta. 



tSa JUiigion 



CHAP. VI. 



Religion. 

BOOR II. It is difficult to determine whether the constitution 
^^^^' ^' of the government and the provisions of law, or Re- 
ligion, have, among the Hindus, the greatest influ- 
ence upon the lives of individuals, and the operations 
of sodetj. Beside the' causes which usually give 
superstition a powerful sway in ignorant and credu- 
lous ages, the order of priests obtained a greater au- 
thority in India than in any other region of the 
globe ; and this again they employed with astonishing 
success in multiplying and coiToborating the ideas on 
which their power and consequence depended. Every 
thing in Hindustan was transacted by the Deity. 
The laws were promulgated, the people were classi- 
fied, the government was established, by the Divine 
Being. The astonishing exploits of the Divinity 
were endless in that sacred land. For every stage of 
life from the cradle to the grave ; for every hour of 
the day; for every function of nature; for every 
social transaction, God prescribed a number of reli* 
gious observances. And meditation upon his incom- 
prehensible attributes, as it was by far the most diffi* 
cult of all human operations, so was it that glorious 
occupation which alone prepared the intense votary 
for the participation of the Divine nature. 

Of so extensive and complicated a subject, as the 
religion of the Hindus, a very general view can alone 
be taken here. All that is interesting to the politi- 



of the Hindus. «8S 

dian and the philosopher, maj, however, it /is pre* BOOK IL 
sumed, be confined within a moderate spaoel The ^^^' 
task is rendered diflScuIt by the unparalleled vague- 
ness which marlcs the language of the Brahmens re- 
specting the nature of the gods, the vast multiplicity 
of their fictions, and the endless discrepancy of their 
ideas. Hence it is, that no coherent system of belief 
seems capable of being extracted from their wild 
eulogies and legends; and if he who attempts to 
study their religion is disposed, like themselves, to 
build his faith on his imagination, he meets with little 
obstruction from the stubborn precision of Hindu ex- 
pressions and tenets. 

Nothing is more curious than to trace the ideas 
concerning Divine power which the natural faculties 
of our race suggest to them at the various stages of 
their career. In the very rude and imperfect state 
in which society originated^ the human' mind can 
hardly so far enlarge its views as to draw conclusions 
respecting the universe. Those operations and events 
of nature, which more immediately concern mankind, 
and on which their happiness and miseiy depend, no 
doubt engage their eager curiosity. The causes of 
light and darkness, of drought and rain, of the 
thunder, of the hurricane, of the earthquake, suggest 
many an anxious inquiry ; but to put all the objects 
of nature, and all the chatiges which they undergo^ 
into one group of ideas, and to ask whence did the 
whole proceed, seems to be an operation too com- 
plicated, and too far removed from the ordinary track 
. of his ideas, to be one of the first that takes place 
in the mind of a barbarian. 

With regard to that other class of questions, which 
more easily occur to him, his nature very readily sug* 
gests an answer. Prior to experience and instruct 
tioq, there is a propansity in the ima^nation to endow 



984 tUUgim 

BOOR If. wiih lie whatever me behold id motion; or, in ge« 
2^tT\^' i»rtl, whatever appeaons to be the cause of any event* 
"""""""^ A cfaild beats the inaMraate object, by whkh it has 
been hurt, aAd caresses that by which it has been 
gmtified* The sun, which is the cause of day, the 
savage i-egards as~ a beneficent deity. A spirit re- 
sides in the storm; the woods and the waters are 
peopled with (tivinities ; there is a god of plenty, and 
a .god of want ; a god of war, and a god of peace ; a 
god of health, and a god of sickness* That this may 
be considered as a correct ^ouliine of the first religion 
whidi is suggested to tibe human mind, the laVs of 
human nature, and the ideas which are fimnd to pre- 
vail among rude tribes, appear sufficiently to evince. 

But men are not long in making another step in 
their nfijpous progress. Having made for them- 
aehres jitiKory wfidi respect to the cause of the events 
which aflfect them, tiie origin too of the things which 
tiiey peroeive attracts their curiosity; and from 
asking the cause, first of one great object, and Uien 
of anofther, tfacff >oome at last to put the general quea^ 
tiorv what is the cause and origin of tUe whole? 
There are very few, therefore, even among the most 
ba]rbarou3 nations, who have not made an attempt to 
aecount far the origin of the nni^oese, and in whose 
religious ideas some species of cosmogony is not in- 
volved. But, in answering ihe question I'e^iecting 
the origin of the universe, it is impossible that men 
should not be guided by their previous ideas. It 
JhUows, ^at jNnong the divinities, whom they already 
adored. He, whom they regarded as the most power- 
ful, should be selected as the Maker of the world. 
Were they {daced in circumstances of tolerable tcan- 
quillity, this potent QoA would probably be the sun ; 
were tfiey a peqile almost constantly {dunged in the 
, horn» of wai\ the god of arms H^ould naturally be 

2 



•f /At Hiudw. SBS 

thdr chief divinity. Hence we see that in nuiy na- book rr. 
tions of Asia, wlio at an early period seem to liaw/^^''^" 
lieen placed in favouraUe circumstances, the sun was 
supreme among the gods, and tiie great principle of 
the universe; among the turbulent and warlike 
teibes who inhaUted the north of Europe, Odin, the 
god of war, was the supreme deity, and author of aK 
tilings. 

The Hindus had made considerable progress be* 
yond the first and lowest stage of human society. It 
seems common, however, to retain for a long time 
the ideas which are then implanted ; and, rather than 
eradicate the old to make of them a heterogeneous 
compound with the new. The Greeks and the Ro^ 
mans did not reject their Jupiter, and Mars, their 
gods of the mountains, trees, and rivers, when they 
rose to more comprehensive views of the universe ; 
they only endeavoured to accommodate to these pri* 
mary conceptions th^ir new apprehensions and con- 
clusions. In like manner, the Hindus have still their 
Indra, or the god of the firmament, Yaruna, or the 
god of the waters, Rembha, the goddess of love ; in 
the whole, a long and splendid catalogue of ihirty- 
. three crore.* 

We have translations from the Hindu books of 
several passages containing accounts of the creatkxrL* 

< A crord is 100 lacs^ «ftd a lad k 100/100 ; so thai rhirty-thMe Ctfon 
of deities is just 330 iniUions. 

* Three of these froin the Vedas themselves by Mr. Cdebrooke, (As. 
Rm. viii. 404,491, 459); another accoant, translated frcAn the Puran«s 
by Mr. Halbed, is published in Maurice's History, (i. 407); Mr. Wiiford 
has given us another, derived from the same source, (As. Res. iii. 358.) 
An account of the creation is prefixed to the Gentoo code translated by 
Halb4d ; we bate another, in th4 French translation, entitled BagavA- 
dam, of the Bhagavat- The author of the Ayeen Akbery informs us 
that no fewer than eighteen opinions respecting the creation were enter- 
tained in Hindustan, and presents us three as a specimen, of irhich the 
last, taken' from the Surya Sidhauta^ be says, is tlic most comroo&. 



BOOK ir. I'hey differ frdm one another rerf widdy in tte 
^^'^•^' minor forms and circumstances; but strongly resemUe 
in the general character, and in the principal ideas* 
That contained in the sacred volume which bears the 
name of Menu may be taken as a standard, being 
more full and circumstantial than any of those which 
are given us from the Vedas ; derived from a work 
of equal authority with the Vedas themselves, and 
exhibiting, as drawn up at a later period, the im- 
provement, if any, which the ideas of the people had 
acquired. It is all vagueness and darkness, incohe- 
lence, inconsistency, and confusion* It is one of the 
most extravagant of all specimens of discourse with- 
out ideas. The fearless propensity of a rude mind to 
guess where it does not know, never exhibited itadf 
in more fantastic and senseless forms*^ 

Beside accounts of what creation was, we have 
accounts of the mode in which the Hindu divinity 
performed the creation. If a man possessing refined 
and exalted notions of the Divine. Nature were to 
describe the great work of creation, he would have 
the clearest conviction of his own incompetence; 
and, as Moses, he would attempt no more than 
by a few strokes to convey an idea of the magnitude 
of the task, and of the power and wisdom of him 
who performed it. If far removed from this degree 
of knowledge and reflection, he will enter with- 
out hesitation upon a minute and detailed descrip- 
tion both of the plan, and of its execution* If» 
however, the society in which he lives has attained 
any considerable improvement, the process which he 
conceives will indicate some portion of human wis- 
dom ; will, at least, be such as an instructed member 

Ayeen Akbery, iii. 6. The most important of all is that which I havs 
referred to an the test, from the Institutes of MenU| ch. i. ^, &c. 
» See note A. at the end of the Tolume. 



of the Hindus. 1M7 

of that society, had he infinite polrer imparted to him, BOOK IL 
would devise for himself. On the other hand^ if a ^"^^* ^* 
description of the creation presents no idea but what 
is fantastic, wild, and irrational; if it includes not 
even a portion of that design and contrivance which 
appear in the ordinary works of man; if it carries the 
common analogies of production, in animal and ve- 
getable life, to the production of the universe, we 
cannot be mistaken in ascribing it to a people, whose 
ideas of the Divine Being were grovelling. 

** The .self*existing power," says Menu, ** having 
willed to produce various beings, first with a thought 
created the waters." This is not a despicable con- 
ception : but what succeeds? ^* He placed in these 
waters a productive seed." This is one of those ana* 
logics to the growth of a plant or an animal which 
are generally the foundation of the cosmogony of 
a rude people. What next? The seed becomes 
an egg; which is a very extraordinary product ; a 
wonderful course, too, for the self-existing power to 
follow in the formation of the universe. The other 
steps are not less amazing. In this egg the divine 
being deposited himself, and there he lay, in a state 
of inactivity, a whole year of the Creator, that is, 
according to the Hindus, 1,555,200,000,000 solar 
years of mortals.^ At the end of this astonishing 

1 The length of a year of the Creator may he thas computed. A 
calfMi, or grand period, containing the reigns of fourteen Menus, cod- 
iftitutes, Sir WilUam Jones informs us (Asiat. Research, i. S37) one day 
of Brahma. This period comprises (see an accurate calculation, accord- 
ing to the books of the Hindus, in Mr. Bentley's Remarlcs on Ancient 
Eras and Dates, A«iat. Research, t. 316) 4,390,000,000 years; and such 
is the length of one day of the Creator. A divine year again contains 
860 days ; and the multiplication of these numbers produces the amount 
which appears in the text. Mr. Wilford (see Asiat. Research, iii. SBS) 
asakes this computatioa in a manner, and with a result, somewhat di^ 
ferent. ** One year of mortals,'' he says, " is a day and a night of the 
gods, and SCO of our years is one of theirs : 13,000 of their years, or 

6 



tM lUligion 

ftoOK If. period he caascd fagr Us thoQ§^ the egg to dlnfe 
^U4^. 6. j^g^f^ gg^ ^33 himself born in the ferai of Bisahna, 
the great forefather of all spirits;^ thas^ ^fiom that- 
WHiCH-is» the first cause, was produced the diTiae 
male, famed in aU woiids, vnd^ the appellation c^ 
Brahma." ^ Thb is celebrated in Hindu books as 
the gieat transformation of the Divine Being, from 
neuter to mascoline, for the purpose of creating 
worlds; and under this masculme form of Brahma 
it was that he df&cted the rest of creation. The 
Hindus believe that he was engaged in it for no less 
than 17»064sOOO years.^ Of the two divisions 
of the egg firom which he had just been fi!eed, 
le framed the heaven above, the earth, beneath^ and 
in the midst the subtle ether, the eight rq^ns» and 
the permanent receptacle of waters. The creation of 
mind is next described ; but this will be more conve* 
nientlj considered when we come to appreciate the 
notions of the Hindus in relation to thought* The 
creation however of man, or at least of the Hindus, is 
worthy of our particular regard. ^ Tliat the human 
race might be multiplied. He caused the Brahmen to 
proceed from his mouth, the Cshatriya from his arm, 
the Yaisya from his thigh, and the Sudra from his 
ibot.'' The analogy of ordinary descent is again the 
foundation of this fantastic imagination; and the 
Hindu could picture to himself the production of a 
human being, even by the Deity, only in the way of 
a species of birth. This analogy leads to a still more 
extravagant conceit for the creation of other races of 

4,iS90,000 of onrsy constitute one of their aget, and S/X)0 tudi afe* mn 
Br«liiiMi*8 daj and night, which must be muitiplied by SOD to make OM of 
hia years.'' 
> In other words» he was hatched. 

• Vide the quotation from the Institutes of Menu, in Note A. at the 
ead of the volame. 

• Asiat.. K^eerrh. ii. 9Sr and ^2. 



of the Hindus. 989 

-men, and living creatures. As if " The Mighty book IL 
Power " could not produce them by his male Yirtiife ' "^''' ^ 
aione^ '' He dirided his own subBtance, and becatne 
half ntale^ half female. By this ifemale the male half 
produced Vfaraj, a demigod and saint; Viraj> by the 
virtue of austere devotion, produced Menu, ano*. 
ther detnigod and saint/' Menu again, '' desirous/' he 
says, '« of giving birth to a race of men," pioduced 
ten lords of created beings ; and these lords produced 
at his command ^^ seven other Menus, and deities^ 
and the mansions of deities, and great sagesy and olaio 
benevolent genii, and fierce giants, blood-thirsty ik* 
vages, heavenly quiri^ers, nymjAis and demons,, fatige 
vtrpenU and snakes of smaller siz^, birds of nughty 
wing, and separate companions of Pitris or progenii- 
tors of mankind; lightnings and thunderbi^, clouds 
and cok)ured boiirs of indra,. faUing meteors^ tijtbf^ 
rending vapours, comets, and luminaries of various 
degreed ; horse^-faeed sylvans, apes, fish, and a variety 
of birds, tame cattle, deer, men, and ravenoos beasts 
with two rows of teeth; small and large reptflei^ 
moths, lice, ^as, and comfmon flies, witin every biting 
gnat, and immoveable stubstanees of^ distinct sorts; 
Thus was this whole assemUage of moveafaie and 
stationary bodies framed by those high-minded 
beings."^ 

But in the Hindu books we find i^i^ied to the Di^ 
vinity a great variety of expressions, so elevated, that 
they cannot be surpassed even by those of the men 
who entertain the most subHme yeas of the Drvint 
Nature. In the passage immediately quoted from Me^ 
nu, he is desd^bed as the sole self-existifng power, tht 
soul of all beings, he whom the miffd aione^an per* 
ceive, who exists from eternity, and whom no being 

1 See Note B. at the end of thrvolume. 
VOL. I. U 



390 Religion 

BOOK II. can comprehend. In a passage from the Brahmanda 
HAP. 6. puygjj^ translated by Mr, Wilford, he is denomi- 
nated; " The great God, the great Omnipotent, Onrnis- 
dent one, the greatest in the World, the great Lord 
who goes through all worlds, incapable of decay." * 
In a prayer, translated by Mr. Colebrooke, from 
one of the Vedas, he is called, " the pure Brdune, 
whom none can apprehend as an object of perception, 
above, around, or in the midst; the God who pervades 
all regions, the first-bom ; he, prior to whom nothing 
was bom ; who became all beings, himself the Lord 
of creatures ; he, who made the fluid sky and solid 
earth, who fixed the solar orb and celestial abode, 
whom heaven and earth mentally contemplate; the 
mysterious Being, in* whom the universe perpetually 
exists, resting on that sole support; in whom this 
world b absorbed, from whom it issues." ^ Without 
multiplying instances, it may shcnrtly be stated that 
human language does not supply more lofty epithets 
of praise than are occasionally addressed to theit dei« 
ties by the Hindus. 

To form a true estimate of the religion of this 
people, it is necessary by reflection to ascertain, what 
those expressions in the mouth of a Brahmen really 
mean. We shall incur the risk of completely de- 
ceiving ourselves, if, with the experience how natu- 
rally vague and general expressions, especially in such 
abstract and mental subjects, convey the most diffe- 
rent ideas, to people in difierent stages of society, we 
take the lofty expressions of devotion in Hindu books, 
as ftiU and satisfactory evidence of lofty conceptions or 
the Divine Nature. It is well ascertained that nations^ 
who have the lowest and meanest ideas of tl^e Divine 
Being, may yet apply to him the most sounding epi- 
thets by which perfection can be expressed. 

* Asiat. Research. Tiii. S5e. ^ * Ik 4S7. 



of the Hindus. S^l 

In tracing the progress of natural religion, tfafough BOOKir. 
the different stages of intellectual acquirement, a very ^"^^* ^' 
important fact is discovered ; that language, om this 
subject, has a much greater tendency to improve, 
than ideas. It is well known how vile &nd degrading 
were the notions of the Divine Nature presented in 
the fictions of the Greek poets ; insomuch that Plato 
deemed^ them unfit to be read ; ^ yet the Brahmens 
themselves do not surpass the Greek poets in elevated 
expressions concerning the Deity. Orpheus, early 
and rude as is the period to which his poetry relates, 
thus describes the celestial King ; ** Jupiter, the so* 
vereign; Jupiter, the original parent of all things; 
and. Wisdom, the first procreator; and all-delighting 
Love : For in the mighty frame of Jupiter all ar^ con- 
tained : One power, one godhead: He is the great Re- 
gent of alL"" ^ Caesar informs us that the Druids among 

> He states that the only practical inference the youth could draw 
from the aoooant» delivered by the poets concerning the gods was ; to 
CiMDinit all manner of crimes, and out of the fruits of their villainy to 
oflTer costly sacrifices and appease the divine powers ; aS<Ni|Tto» xm ^i;Tfo»_ 
»KK% rw a^KujuMTrnp. De Repub. lib. ii. 595, 6. 

^ Orphic. Fragm. vi. 306. Numerous passages might be produced : 

Zofg •$-» w^iP) Zwff 8f yq, Zaug tFoopcofOg^ 
Zavf TOt ra veatra, Euphorion. 

'Elf etof fv weufTtffi. Orphic. Frag. iv. 363. 
Jane pater, Jane toeos, Dive biceps, biformis, 
O! cate return sator; O! principium Deorum. 

Verses firom an ancient Choriambic poem, which are 
quoted by Terentianus Maurus de Metris. 
Zwf i wpo rpun Kpmi^, *Ovns •m tw 6\m Znfuoufyog. Procl. in Platon. 
Ttm. p. 95. It is almost needless to quote Homer's 

Zqyoc Ti fATitiotrray ^nm irartp nit km ca^pw, 
*' The Araucanians [the native Indians of Chili] acknowledge a Su- 
preme Being, the Author of all things, whom they call Pillan, a word 
derived from pulli or pilUf the sool, and signifies the supreme essence ; 
they also call him Guenu-pillan, the Spirit of heaven ; Buta-gen, the 
Great Being ; Thai cove, the Thunderer ; Vilvemvoe, the Creator of all; 
Viipepilvoe, the Omnipotent: Mollgelu, the Eternal ; Avnolu, the Infi- 
nite, Sec." Molina, Civil Hist, of Chili, book II. ch. v. 

A passage of Empedocles, contaiiiijig the language of a pure theology, 
nay be seen in Harris's Philos. Arrangements, ch. viii. p. 169. 

u 2 



poOfC II. the WMneot'6fi}il$ 4^Y«ied mwy doctrio^ mivcern* 
.CiiAF.6. ji^g ^ji^ nature of the univprse^ and the powp^ p£ 
the 'ioiinortal gods ; ^ ^nd it 19 reQiarl^aUe thiit %\\9 
Gree]i:9 and the Romany W^ve forcih^ struck with the 
similarity between the i^^ of the Druids^ ^nd thq«^ 
of the Brahmen^ of India^ the Magi of Persia, ti^ 
Chaldeans of Assyria, and the priests pf Jpl^^pt.^ Thf 
creed of the ancient Germans, as we are ini^rmed by 
Tadtus, was, ^1 that God is the Ruler of all : otli^r 
tbjjBgs are to him sub^t and obedient" ° In the an- 
dent Scandinavian mythology, the Sppreme Go4 W9§ 
described, as, ** The author of every thing that existr 
eth; the eternal, the andent, the living and awfujl 
Being, the searcher intp con^aled thiqg^ ; the ^ei^g 
that never changeth." ^ Op the stfitue of tl)e Egyp^ 
tian goddess Isis was this inscrifiliipp ; ^* I am every 
thing past, every thing presents an<i every thing to 
9ome." * The Deity was described by Zoro^ter as 
'* The J'irsI, the Incorruptible, the Eternal withoirt 
generation, without dissolution, without a parallel, the 
charioteer of all which is good^ inacx^essible to bribes^ 
the best of the good, %he wisest of the. wise." ^ The 
Getes asserted their deity Zamolxis to be the true 
God, that besides him there yas none other, and that 
to him they went after death, being endowed with 
spirits immortal.^ Even the rude tribes of America^ 
wandering, naked in the woods, '' appear," says Ro-- 



I Cssar. d« Bel. G«l. lib. vi. cup. 13. 

• S^e Heary*s Hist, of Great Britain, i. 149 ; and the authorities there 
adduced. 

> Regiiator omuiuni Deuji : ci^tera sabjecta atque parentia. Tacit, de 
Moir. Genu, tap* xxxv. 

« See a translation from th^ Edda in Mallet's Introduct. IIi$(. Den* 
mark, i. ch. 5, and ii, p. 7, 8. 

• Plutarch, de Tside et 0»iridc! 

« Euseb. Prcp, Evang. lib. i. p. 4^, 
f Herodot. lib. iv. cap. 93^ 94. 



of the }ii9idus. agS: 

bertson, " to acknowledge a Divine Pbwef to be the BOOKir: 
maker of the world, and the disposer of all eventsr ^^^^' ^' 
They (fenonainate him the Great Spirit;" ' Thas h 
appeals how commonly the loftiest expressions are 
used concerning the gods, by people whose concept 
tioiis of them are, confessedly, mean.^ 

This important fact, however remarkable, is found- i 
dd on^ principles of very powerful operation in the^ 
nature of man. The timid barbarian, who is agitated^ 
by fears respecting the unknown events of nature,: 
feels the moist incessant and eager desire to propitiate' 
the Being on lirhom he believes them to depend; • His. 
ilund works, with laborious stdicitude^ to discover tlie 
best means of retommehding^ hhnself. He niototafiy? 
takes counsel from his own: sentiments and feidaigs^ 
and as nothing to. hss^ rude breast is- ihbre dri^htftiii 
than adulation, he is led by a species of i^stinci to 
expect the favour of his god from praise and* flatteryj 
in an uncultivated mindyh^w strong iki^ sentinvent id,a> 
very superficial knowledge cf human nature ma^ con^ 
vinneuS* Mr. Foster^ in his Travels over hrndfromi 
indiay was overtdten by a stott'nfr in the Caspiab Se9?. * 
arid renoarks that during! the danger '^ every man vfmA 
iknptoring th^ Divine inlerpo^itioi^ kr bis mvir fnadner> 
sm^language/'' '^^ But my attfeni&oii,'' says fib, *^.wm 
efaiefly attratted by ar Persian. E(is ejacuiatioas werer 
\ami aabd fervent; and the whole feroe of his prayenr 
^asr knelled at Air; oil whbm^ he bestowed every titfi' 
thdt oouid denote sanctity ot military process* Her 

■i KdB^tsmi's Hist. AmeH.ii. 107'. ' ' 

«" « C^s iMuples (les Rt)nialhs)'adorent un Dieu fiupreaieet uoitjuej^ 
aa'ik appelleiit toujours Diet/ tret-grand, et tres-boh , cependaot iU ont 
b&ti'un temple a une courtisanne lipmm^e Tl6ra, et Ie8'b6nnekfetatiies de 
lihtnt oiit prlGlsqiie toutes 6h4z ^\k9' de pet'itt di«iii p6nate» haUti dtf 
quutre ou cinq pouce^; une de ces petites dirinit^s est la deesse de tetons, 
Tautre celle de fe^ses ; il y a un peoat qu*on appeile le dieu Pet" Vol* 
laire, Essai 5ur Ics Mcenrs ec YPsptii'de Nations, iv. 373. 

2 



294 Religion 

BOOK n. called on him, by the name of the Friend of God; the 
^''^'^' Ijord of the Faithful ; the Brandisher of the invind- 
hle sword ; to look down on his servant, and shield 
him from the impending evil. Thinking also to de- 
tain the more grace ¥dth the father, he wouU occa- 
sionallj launch out into the praises of his two sonsw" ^ 

When the belief is. once admitted that the Deity is 
pkased with paoegjrric, it is evident to what lengih' 
the agitated and ignorant votary will speedily be car^^ 
ried. Whatever may be the phrases with which he 
begins ; in a short time, the ardour of his fears incites 
him to invent new and stronger ; as likely to prove 
more agreeable and prevalent. Even these, by a short 
use^ become familiar to his mind. When ttey begin, 
to be stale and feeble, he is again }mHnpted to a new- 
invention, and: to mcHre violent exaggerations. 

Exhausting quickly the powers of his language, he 
has other expedients in store. The god, on whom his 
eulogies have been lavishedyiis that one, among the 
invisible powers^ on whom his interests seem more 
immediately to depend : This deity is at first pane^ 
' gyrised on account of those operatians alone whidi 
bdong to his own department : The sun is originally 
^plauded only as the Repent of day : the bountiful 
giver of I%ht, and of all its attendant blessings : But 
when panegyric on this subject is exhausted, the un^ 
wearied adorer opens a new fountain of adulation : 
The operations of some divinity^ whose department 
most nearly resembles that of the &vaurifae deity, 
afibrds some circumstance which, it is imagined, 
might do honour to that patron god: It is accoid- 
ingly, as a very artful expedient, immediately de- 
tracted from the one, and ascribed to the other: No 
sooner is the novelty of this new attribute decayed, 

I Forster'a Trarels, ii. 256. 



of the Hiudus. 295 

than the {xrerogative of some other divinity is iaraded^'B^^K n. 
^and the grdat object of worship is invested with a ^^^' ^' 
new poweir or function of nature : This» it is evident^ 
is a fertile discovery ; The votary has many articles 
to add to his list of powers and functions, before he 
exhausts the provinces of the whole of the gods. He 
proceeds inoessantlyi however ; adding to the wcNcks 
and doininions of the great divinity, one province 
after another^ I9II at last he bestows ixpofu him the 
power and functions of all ^the gods. . He is now th6 
supregie.cjk^ity, and all the rest are suboidinate. He 
is the king of the celestial powefs ; or, what is still 
more sublime, their author or &ther; He from whom 
their very being and powers are derived. They still, 
however, retain their ancient departments: and he who 
was god of the winds remains the god of the winds; he 
who was god of the waters remains god of the waters^ 
But they are no longer independent deities; they have 
now a superior, and are r^arded in the light of his 
ministers or agents* 

The ingenuity of fear and desire sometimes invents 
a higher strain of flattery still. The power, which is 
del^ated to so many extraordinary beings, is re^rd- 
ed as a deduction from that which might otherwise 
be wielded by the supreme. And happy is the man, 
who first imagines he can inform the Divinity, that 
no such division and diminution of his power exists : 
That those supposed agents or ministers are not in 
reality beings endowed with the powers of the Al- 
mighty ; that they are those powers themselves ; the 
different modes in which he manifests himself. After 
this, he is the one God : He is all in all : From him 
every thing begins, in him every thing terminates: He 
unites all possible attributes : Like time, he has no 
beginning and shall have no end : All power belongs 
to him, all wisdom, and all virtue. Such is the pro* 



296 ReligUm 

BOOK n.goess of the language, not of knowledge and cu)- 

Cbap. 6. ^[y^i^ reason, but of the rude and selfish pasrions <tf 

4a barbarian ; and all these high and sounding qnthets 

are invented by men whose ideas of the divine naUire 

are mean, ridiculous, gross, and disgusting. 

Some of the most enlightened of the Europeans 
mh0 have made inquiries coneerning the ideas and 
instil!Utions of the Hindus, have been induced, from 
the lofty cfrithets occasionally applied to the gods, to 
believe abd to assa^ that this people had a refined 
alid elevated religion. Nothing is more certain than 
Uiat siidi language is far from proof of such a refigion. 
Yet ingemous Hien, fi*om some of whom we have 
largety derived instruction, appear to have thought 
that no other proof was requisite ; and, as on this evi- 
dttnee they adopted the opinion themselves, that others 
o«ght to reoHve it on tb^ same foundation.^ 



> Among the similar proofs which might he produced, of sublime 
theological notions, may he quoted the follawing remarkable passage 
from Garcilasso de la Vega (Royal ComroeiUatiee, book IL ch. >i^) ** Be- 
sides the sun, whom they worshipped for the visible God, to uh^m thej 
offered sacrifice and kept festivals, the Inctts, who were kings, and the 
AmfmUi$i wko were pliilosophers, proceeded by tlie mere light of nature, 
to the kuQwledge of the U;ue A^mi^iity (yod cuir Lord, Makej of Heaven 
and Earth, as we shall hereafter prove by their own wqrds ^d testimo* 
nies, which some.of t4iem gave of the Divine Majesty, which they called 
by the Tmifxm .of PkirA««cainfii;, andift a word compounded of.P^hi^ which 
is the uuiyerse^ and Camoc, which is the soul; ^ndis.as.much as he that 
animates the world. * * * Being asked who this Pachacamac was, th^' 
adsweM that it was he who gave life to the onijrerse; sustained and 
nourished; aUtliit»si; but be^^us^ they did iKit'iee him they mold not 
know him ; and for that reason they erected not temples to liim» nor 
offered sacrifice, howsoever tliey worshipp^ in th^ir hearts and esteem.ed 
him for the unknown God." And in book Vltl. cb. vii. he gives us the 
ft>Uowi^ afgpmetit of an ]jie^, Topac Yupaiiq<ii,.<^ Mony say that tbe 
son lives, and that he is the maker of all things : now it is necessary that 
the thing which is the cause of the being of another, should be assistant 
and opecatCkin.the production thereof; iu)w we know that many things 
receive their beings, during the abseuce of the sun, aiid therefore he is not 
the maker of 9II thing^s. And that the sun hath not life is evident, for that 
it always moves in its circle, and yet it is never weary ; for if it had life it 



of the Hindus. 297 

Since the tenguage emplojed by any people is a book u. 
very fidLacioos test of the ideas which they entertain ^*^^^' ^' 
eonceniing the Divine Nature, it is necessary to in- 
▼estigate the circumstances, in their religious practice^ 
or belief, which enable us in any degree to define 
their vague expressions. Those circumstances are 
few; but their evidence determinate. They are the 
operations ascribed to the Divinity, the sendees re- 
puled agreeable to him, and the laws which he is . 
understood to have ordained. If these correspond 
with the ideas: of infinite power, wisdom, and good- 
ness, we may believe with certainty that the sublime 
language is the expression of corresponding concept 
tions; on the other hand, where those operations, 
services^ and laws, are in the highest degree unworthy 
of a perfect nature, we iMy be fully ^sured^ that the 
sublime language is altogether without a meaning^ 
tlie effieet of flattery, and the meanest of pasmms, and 
that it is Erectly suggested, not by the most loftyr 
kit by the most grovellmg and hase ideas -of tlie 
Divine Natnre. 

. Of the host of Hinda Divinities, Bircthma, Vi)shmi|, 
and Siva, are the m^st exalted. (>bher nations hirve 

would require rest, *as we do ; and were it free, it would^'visit other part's of 
(b« heavens, into which itneter itidimis out of it9 own sphere; bur, as ai 
lhiog.obligfd ta.a particalar i^fi^ipn, inovf»ahrays in the* same circle,. 
^p4 ia lik* an arrow wludfis directed by the baud of the archer." The 
Mexicans too, as we are informed by Clavigero, Ilist. of Mexico, book 
VI. sect. 1, besides the crowd of their ordinary Deities, believed in << a 
MipPtfne, absolute, and independent Beings to whoin»thsy acknuwdcidged 
to owefiuir and ack«atioB« They lepresented huniano extariial form^ 
Ihaoaiiae.dbey beUavad faotti to be invisible ; aud named bata only by tha* 
oommon appeUation of Qodi in tbcir laag^ag/s Tiofiy » word maembltiig 
stiU more in its meaniag than ia ifta pronuDciation the TheM of the* 
6r«itks; but tiiey applied to him certain epithets which were highly .ex*. 
pnegsive of the grandear andpov^r vbictithey oonocived him lo possesi* 
They called him Ipalnemoattif that ia^ ^^ Uie by wbooi'we live:" and 
Thqve Nuhuaque, '^Ue who isaUr ia himself." Clavigevoaddsy *< But 
their knowledge and worship of this Supvema' Being was obsoared, and ia 
a manner lost, in the crowd of deities invented by their sapcrstitioiiJ' 



$98 Religion 

BOOK IL most frequentlj carried on the apphi»e of one fa- 
^^^^'^' vourite deity, tUl they bestowed upon him alone all 
power in heaven and earth : The Hindus have distri- 
buted the creation and government of the universe 
among those three, denominating Brahma the creator, 
Vishnu the preserver, and Siva the destroyer. 

Of the highest scene of operation in which the 
Divine Being can be contemplated by mortals, the 
creation of the universe, the conception^ formed ^y the 
Hindus,, is so far from corresponding with high and 
noble ideas of the. creating power, that it is consistent 
only with the most base. Thiis itsdf is a criterion (^ a 
rel^ous system from which there is no appeal. 

Of the pecuUikr functions of Vishnu and Siva no 
determinate conception appears to have been formed. 
They are two beings of mighty power, by whom 
great actions are performed ; but there is no distinct 
separation of their provinces. . Whenevei' indeed we 
seek to ascertain the definite and precise ideas of the 
Hindus in religion, the subject eludes our grasp« All 
is loose, vague, wavering, obscure, and inconsistent. 
Their expressions point at one time to one meaning, 
and another time to another meaning; ^ and their 
wild fictions, to use the language of Mr. Hume, seem 
rather the playsome whimsies of monkeys in human 
shape, than the serious asseverations of a being who 
dignifies himself with the name of rational.^ Vishnu 

> This is admitted even by those wiiom the oocasioiml expressions of 
the Hindus have most strongly convinced of the sublimity of their senti* 
roents. Mr. Colebrooke says, '^ There is indeed moeh disagreement and 
consequent oonfosion in the gradation of persons interposed by Hindu 
theology between the Supreme Bemg and the created world." Asiat. 
Research, viii. 449. Even Sir William Jones is constrained to confesa 
that the Hindu ** scheme of theology is most obscurely figurative, and 
consequently liable to dangerous misconception ; that it is filled with idle 
superstitions, abounds with minute and childish formalities, with cere* 
monies generally absurd and often ridiculous/' Pref. to Institutes of Menu. 

tt Hume*8 Essays^ ii. 470. 

3 " 



of the Hindus. 299 

18 not unfrequently employed in the acts which pro- BOOK 1 1. 
perly belong only to a destructive power ; and Siva is ^^^' 
so far from answering to the title bestowed upon him, 
l^at he is a divinity hardly less beneficent than 
Vishnu himself. 

In the conception which the Hindus have formed 
of the government of the world, the visible agency of 
the Deity is peculiarly required. " I have passed/' 
says the preserving god, '* many births. Although I 
am not in my nature subject to birth or decay, and 
am the lord of all, created beings, yet having command 
over my own nature, I am made evident by my own 
foyireK ; and as often as there is a decline of virtue, 
and an insurrection of vice and injustice in the world, 
I n^ake myself evident ; and thus I appear from age 
to age, for the preservation of the just, the destruc- 
tion of the wicked, and the establishment of virtue."^ 
*\ Aty Sechen himself,'* says another sacred book, 
*f all-Jcnowing as he is, could not number the meta- 
morphoses and different forms under which Vishnu 
has appeared for the salvation of the universe.''^ 
Such are the Hindu ideas of the manner in which the 
power of the Divine Being is exerted in the govern- 
ment of the universe. 

Of these visible appearances or incarnations of the 
divinity;^ ten, known in the Hindu mythology under 
the name of avatars, are peculiarly distinguished. The 
first, which is denominated the avatar of the fish, is 
thus described.^ At the close of the last calpa, there 
w«3 a general destruction, occasioned by the sleep of 
Brahma; his creatures in different worlds being 
drowned in a vast ocean. The strong demon Hagya- 



1 BagvaUSeeta, p. 51, 52. 
* Bagavadam, p. 11. 

s I have merely abridged the accoant which is given by Sir William 
Jooet in a Ikaral translation firom Ae Bbagavat, Asiat. Bea. i. 8S0. 



300 Religion 

BOOK II. giiva came near him and stole the Vedas, which had 
^"^^' ^' flowed from his lips. When the pteservtr of the uni- 
verse discovered this deed, he took the shape of a 
minute fish, called iap'hari. A holy king named 
Satyavrata then reigned. One day, as he was iliaking 
a fibation in the rivef Critamala, the Bttle fish saM to 
him, How canst thou leave nie in this river water, 
when I am too weak to resist the monsters of the 
stream who fill me with dread ? Satyavrata placed 
it under his protection in a small vase fofl of water; 
but in a single night its bulk was so increased, that it* 
could liot be contained in the jar, and thus again ad- 
dressed the prince: I am not pleased with Kving 
in this Kttle vase ; make me a large mansion wliere I 
may dwell in comfort. The king successivefy {Aaced 
rt in a cisrtem, in- a pool, and in a lake, for eadi of 
which it speedily grew too large, and supplicated for 
a rttote sj3acioug place of abode ; after which he tMew 
it into the sea, when the fish again addressed him : 
Here th^ hofned sharks and other monsters of great 
strength will devour me; thou sfaouldest not, O 
Vttliafit ttiiiiv, leave me in this ocean. Thus repea<fe<By 
dbfiided by th<* fish, who ha:d addressed^ him Mth 
gentle words, the king said, Whti aft t?hou thiat be- 
guflest me^ in that alssumed- shsfpe. NeVer before 
have I seeti or heard 6( so prodigious* aii' inhabitant 
of t*ie waters^ who like thee has fflled up, iVi a single? 
day, aJ tekelOD^ leagues in circumference Surtly 
thou art I the gTeat God- whose* dwelling was on the' 
waves. Sstlutartfon and praise tb thee, O first male, 
the lord ' of cieatlon, of preservation; . of destruction ! 
Thou art the Highest object, O supreme' mfer, of utf 
thy adorers, who piously seek thee. AU thy delusive 
descents in this world give existeiiee' to variblis^be- 
iugs ; yet I am aBxious to know fov what c^use.that 
shape has been assumed'by thee. The lord oithe uni- 



of the mndut. SOI 

vers^ loving the pious man, an4 intending to preserve book u. 
\Am ftom the 8^^ of cl^stnictioo, caused by the de- ^^^^' ^* 
pravity of the age, thus told hiqd how he was to act : 
In seven d^ys iVon) the present time, O thou tamer of 
enemies, the three worlds will be plunged in an ocean 
of death ; but in the midst of the destroying waves, 
a large vessel, sent faiy n^ for thy use, shall stand 
before thee. . Then shatt thou take all medicinal 
herbs, all the variety of seeds ; and, accompanied by 
seven ^saints, encircled hf pairs of all brute aiiimak^ 
thou shalt entef the spacious ark, and continue in it 
secure from the flood, on one immense ocean, without 
light, except the radianf^e of thy companions. When 
the ship shall he agitated by m impetuous wind^ 
thoii shalt fasten it with a large sea serpent on my 
liiorn ; for I will be near thee, drawing the vessel with 
thee and thy attendants. Thus instructed, the pious 
king waited humbly fpr the appointed time. T]ie 
sea, overwhelming its shores, deluded the whole ft 
earth; and it was soon perpeived to be augmented 
by showers from immense clouds. He, still medi- 
tating on the divine command, and conforming to 
the divine directions, entered the ship ; when the god 
appeared again distinctly on the vast ocean in the 
form of a fish, blazin^^ like gold, extending a itiilliou 
of leagues, with one stupendous horn, on which the 
king, as he had before been commanded, tied the 
ship with a cable made of a vast serpent. After* 
wards the god, rising, together with Brahma, froni 
the destructive deluge, which was abated, slewHhe 
demon Hagyagriva. 

Such are the operations in the government of the 
universe which the religious ideas of the Hindus lead 
thran to ascribe to the divine Being. The second 
appearance or avatar of the Preserver is of the same 
character, and suggested by similar views. Hirina- 



SOS Religion 

BOOK ir. cheren, a malignant and destructive giant, who de- 
P"^**- ^- lighted in afflicting the earth, at last rolled it up into 
a shapeless mass, and plunged down with it into the 
abyss. On this occasion there issued from the side of 
Brahma, a being shaped like a boar, white, and ex- 
ceedingly small, which in the space of one lioui* grew to 
the size of an elephant of the largest magnitude, and 
remained in the air. This being, Brahma discovered 
to be Vishnu, who had assumed a body and become 
visible. Suddenly it uttered a sound like the loudest 
thunder, and the echo reverberated, and shoc^ all the 
comers of the universe, leaking' the full-flowing 
mane which hung down his neck on both sides, and 
erecting the humid hairs of his body, he proudly dis- 
played his two most exceedin^y white tusks: then 
rolling round his wine-coloured eyes, and erecting his 
tail, he descended from the region of the air, and 
plunged head fdl^most into the water* The whole 
body of water was convulsed by the motion, and be- 
gan to rise in waves, while the guardian spirit of the 
sea, being terrified, began to tremble for his domain, 
and cry out for quarter and mercy. At length, the 
power of the omnipotent having divided the water, 
and arriving at the bottom, he saw the earth lying, 
a mighty and barren stratum ; then he took up the 
ponderous globe (freed from the water) and raised it 
high on bis tusk : one would say it was a beautiM 
lotos blossoming on the tip of his tusk. In a mo- 
ment, with one leap, coming to the surface, by the 
all-directing power of the Omnipotent Creator, he 
spread it, like a car^t, on the face of the water, and 
then vanished from the si^ht of Brahma.^ 



'o' 



I For an accoant of this aTatar, see an extract from the Mahabarat, 
Asiat. Research.!. 154; Bartoloi|ieo*s Travels, book ii. ch. 7. The pe- 
culiar description of the boar is taken from i^ translation by Mr. llalhed, 
of a passage in the Puranas, pablished in Maurice's Hindustan,!. 407. 



of the tiindus. $0S 

Of the thi^d avatar we have so particular and re* BOOR II. 
markablea description) that it merits uncomroon ^°^^'^' 
regard,^ The sobrs, a species of angds, and all the 
glorious host of hearen^ sat on the sumnoit of Mount 
Meru, a fictitious mountain^ highly celebrated in the 
books of the Hindus, meditating the discovery of the 
Amreeta, that is, being translated, the water of im- 
mortality: when Narayan^ said unto Brahma, Let 
the ocean, as a pot of milk, be churned by the united 
labour of the soors and asoors ; and when the mighty 
waters have been stiired up, the Amreeta shall he 
found. A great mountain, named Mandar, was the 
instrument with wMch the operation was to be per- 
formed ; but the dews^ being unable to remove it, 
they had recourse to Vishnu and Brahma. By their 
direction, the king of the serpents lifted up that sove« 
reign of mountains, with all its forests and inhabitants; 
and the soors and asoors having obtained permission of 
the king of the tortoises, it was placed for support on his 
back, in the midst of the ocean. Then the soors and 
asoors, using the serpent Vasookee for the rope, the 
asoors pulling by the head, and the soors by the tail, 
began to chum the ocean ;^ while there issued from 
the mouth of the serpent, a continued stream of fire, 
and smoke, and 'wind; and the roaring of the ocean. 



1 It is Q passage translated irom the Mahabarat, by Mr. Wilkins, in 
one of the notes to his translation of the Bagvat-Geeta, p. 145, 146^ 
note 76. 

« A name of Vishnu. 

3 Dew, written otherwise dewa, or deva, is a general name for a sa« 
perior spirit. 

* By twisting the serpent about the mountain, like a rope, and pulling 
it out first towards the one end, and then towards the other; which 
ftflfords us a description of their real mode of cburoing. A piece of 
wood so formed as best to agitate the mil]^, was placed upright in th^ 
vessel, and a rope being twisted round it which two persons pulled' alter- 
nately, one at the one end, and the other at the other, it was whirled 
round, and thus prodaceddbe agitation requ^red. 



804 RtUgiom 

BOOK II. Tiolentlj afftated with the wfairiii^ of die i 

^^^^'^' was like the bdlowing of a migfaty chwd. Mem* 



while a violent ooDflagratioo was raised oa the ; 
taiD, bj the ooncussioii of its trees and other 
stttfioes, and qoenched by a shower whidi the lord of 
the firmament poured down; wh^ioe an heterogeneous 
stream of the concocted juices of various trees and 
|riants» ran down into the briny flood. It was fimn 
this milk-like stream, produced firora those juices, and 
a mixture of melted gdd, that the socn^ obtamed 
their immortality. The waters of the ocean, being 
now assimilated with those juices, were converted 
into milk, and a species of butter was produced, 
when the churning powers became fatigued; but 
Narayan endued them with fresh strength, and they 
proceeded with greater ardour to stir that butter of 
the ocean. ]|?irst, arose from it the moon; next, 
Sree, the goddess of fortune ; then the goddess of 
wine, and the white horse, Oochisrava; afterwards 
the jewel kowstoobh ; the tree of plenty ; and tiie 
cow that granted every heart's desire. Then the 
dew Dhanwantaree, in human shape, came fi>rth> 
holding in his hand a white vessel filled with the 
immortal juice, amreeta; which, when the asoors 
beheld, they raised their tumultuous voices, and each 
of them clamorously exclaimed. This of right is 
mine! But as they continued to chum the ocean 
more than enough, a deadly poison issued from its 
bed, confounding the three regions of the world with 
its mortal stench, until Siva, at the word of Brahma, 
swallowed the fatal drug to save mankind. In the 
mean while a violent jealousy and hatred, on account 
of the amreeta, and the goddess Sree, sprui^ up in 
the bosoms of the asoors. But Narayan, assuming 
the form of a beautiful female, stood before them, 
whose minds becoming fascinated by her presence^ 



, Of the Hlkdus. 805 

niid depAreA ot reason, they seized the amreetk and fiooK n. 
gave it unto her. But a dreadful battlie arose be- *^"''- *' 
tween the soors and asoors, in wmch Narayan, 
quitting the female figure, assisted the soors. The 
dements ^nd powers of nature were thrown into con- 
fusion by the conflict ; but with the mighty aid of 
Narayan, and his weapon chacra, which of itself, un- 
guided even by a hand, performed miraculous ex- 
ploits, the soors obtained the victory, and the moun- 
tain Mandar was carried back to its former station. 
The soors guarded the amreeta with great care ; and 
the god of the firmament, with all his immortal 
hands, gave the water of life unto Narayan, to keep 
it for their use. This was the third manifestation df 
the Almighty, in the preservation and government of 
the world. 

The fourth I shall describe with greatelr brevity. 
Hirinacheren, the gigantic ruler; who rolled up the 
earth, and plunged with it to the bottbbi of the 
abyss, left a younger brother Hirinakassup, who su(i. 
ce<eded him in his kingdom, and refused to do ho- 
mage to Vishnu, but persecuted his Dwii son, whb 
was an ardent votary of that god. I, said he, alh 
lord of all this visible world. The son replied, that 
Vishnu had no fixed abode, but Was present every 
where. Is he, said his father, in that pillkr ? Theti 
let him come forth; and rising from his seat, he 
struck the pillar with his foot ; upon which Vishnu, 
bursting from it, with a body like a man, but a head 
like a Uon, tore Hirinakassup in piec^, and placed 
his son upon the throne.^ 

In the fifth, the sixth, and the seventh bvatars, 
the Plreserving Power appeared in human shapes for 
the des^uction of impious and ferocious kings, per- 

J Aimt. Rmeaicb. i. 154. 
TOL. 1. X 



.906 Retigim 

HOOK xi. fomritig mmj heroic and roanj iniraeiikAui i^kL 
^^^'^' But, after th« examples which have dieadjr been 
given, a particular description of these extravagaitf 
legends would po^iy compensate the toil of a peru* 
saL The eighth, however^ is one of the most cefe- 
brated of all the -incarnations of V^ishsu. He was 
born the son of Vasudeva and Oevaci, <tf the royal 
£Mnilj of Cansa, and obtained the name of Crishna. 
But as it had been predicted to Cansa, that one bom 
of those parents would occasion his destructioa, 
whence he had decreed the death of all their ddl- 
dren, Crishna was secretly withdrawn, and brought 
up in the family of a shef^erd or herdsman. Manf 
and wonderful were the transadioiis of his childhood, 
in which the wanton pranks of the mischievous, but 
amiable boy, are not less distinguished, than the mi- 
raculous exploits of the god. When he grew up to 
youth, the indulgence of licentious love ^as his great 
ocpupation and eiyoyment. It is a small part of the 
picture which I can, or which I need, to expose to 
view. The scenes with the youi^ shepherdesses are 
painted by the Hindus in all the glowing cdoiuns of 
oriental poetry. A passage from a hymn^ or divine 
song, translated by Sir William Jones, is in the fol- 
lowing words: ''With a gariand of wild flowers, 
descending even to the yellow mantle that girds Us 
a^ure limbs, distinguished by smiling cheeks, and by 
ear-rings that sparkle as he plays, Heri^ exults in the 
assemblage of amorous damsels. One of them presses 
him with her swdling breast, while she warbles with 
exquisite melody. Another, affected by a glanoe 
from his eye, stands meditating on the lotos oi his 
face. A third, on pretence of whisperiing a secret in 
lus ear, approaches his temples and kisses tkrai with 

> A nsmt of Vsibou, 



wdoiir* One leues Jiis niaolle, and inan hkmW^ilU 
towards ker, pointing to the bower on die lianks of _^^"*' 
Yamuna, where elegant yanjulas interweave their 
brandbea* He ^iplauds another who dances in die 
spcHtive circle, widist her bracelets ring, as she beats 
time with her palms. Now he 'caresses one, and 
kisses another^ smiling on a third with coaiplacencj ; 
9nd now he chases her whose beauty has most allured 
him. Thus the wanton Heri frdics, in the season of 
»sweets, among the maids of Vraja, who rush to his 
embraces, as if he were pleasure itself assuming a 
human fbrm ; and one of them, under a pretext of 
hymning his divine perfections, whispers in his ear^ 
Thy Upa, my beloved, are nectar/*^ I shall select 
but another instance, which is from the tran^tion 
before us of the Bhagavat. ^ Crishna, finding him- 
■elf on the banks of the Yamuna,^ began to |Aay on 
his past<Mal flute. All the shepherdesses, ftUed with 
desire, ran in crowds to hear his enchanting sounds. 
Crishna, beholding them burning with de^re, m* 
fimned them, that it was contrary to the ord^ eeta^ 
Uished in the world, to quit their houses to seek the 
embraces of a lover. He added that their &milie8 
might thus, if their ho^ands were jealous, be thrown 
into disorder, and disgrace come upon themselves. 
He advised them accordingly to return. The 
women replied^ that their passion, it was true, were 
it for an ordinary man, would be criminal ; but de« 
siring to unite themselves with the absolute vofi^t^r of 
all things, they could not believe that auch an ioi'- 
pulse was any other than meritorions^ In regard to 
their husbands, they could have np rights which 
tended to the exclusion of 6od« Crishna, who saw 



1 Aiiat. Roeaivh. i. 187. 

• This is spelt Emuney in the French translfttioa. 

X 2 



SOS Religiim 

BOOK n. the innocence of their hearts, graciously gave them 
Chap. 6. entire satisfaction; and by a miracle continually re- 
newed, in all that multitude of women, each was 
convinced that she alone enjoyed the Deity, and that 
he never quitted her an instant for the embraces of 
another."* " Crishna," says Sir William Jones, 
^ continues to this hour the darling god of the 
Indian women. The sect of Hindus,'' he adds, 
^ who adore him with enthusiastic and almost ex- 
clusive devotion, have broached a doctrine which ^ 
they maintain with eagerness, and which seems ge- 
neral in these provinces ;^ that he was distinct from 
all the avatars, who had only a portion of his divi- 
nity ; while Crishna was the person of Vishnu him- 
self in a human form.*'^ *' At a more advanced 
age," continues Sir William, ** he put to death his 
cruel enemy, Cansa; and having taken under his 
protection the king Yudhisht'hir and the other Pan- 
dus, who had been grievously oppressed by the 
Gurus, and their tyrannical chief, he kindled the war 
described in the great epic poem, entitled the Ma^ 
habharat, at the prosperous conclusion of which he 
returned to his heavenly seat in Vaicont'ha, having 
left the instructions comprised in the Gita with 
his disconsolate friend Arjoon/'^ He was after- 



1 Bagavadam, p. 60. This indeed was but a trifle ; for with his 
16,000 or 17,000 wives he could perform the same feat. See Halhed*s 
translation of the Bhagavat,in Maurice's Hind. vol. ii. 
' ^ He meansy the provinces where he then resided, Bengal, See. 

3 Asiat. Research.!. S60. 

« ib. i. 361. He sometimes, however, met with severe repulses. 
" Calijun, a prince who resided in the western parts of India, was very 
near defeating his ambitious projects. Indeed, Crishna was nearly 
overcome and subdued, after seventeen bloody battles ; and according to 
the express words of the Puranas, be was forced to have recourse to 
treachery; by which means Calijun was totally defeated in tha 
eighteenth engagement.'' Wilford, on Chron. of Hindus, Asiat. Re- 
earch.?.S88. 



9f the Hindus. S09 

wards slain, being wounded by an arrow in the BOOK li. 

The ninth incarnation of Vishnu, and the last, yet 
Touchsafed, of the Divine appearances, was in the 
person of Buddha. The object of this avatar is 
described in the following verse of a Hindu poet : 
** Thou blamest. Oh wonderful, the whole Veda, 
when thou seest, O kind-hearted, the slaughter of 
cattle {u^scribed for sacrifice, O Cesava,^ assuming 
the body of Buddha. Be victorious, O Heri,® lord 
of the universe!"* But though Buddha is by the 
Hindus regarded as a manifestation of the Divine 
Being, the sect of Buddhists ai'e regarded as hereti- 
cal, and are persecuted by the Brahmens. It is con* 
jectured that, at one time, a great number of them 
had been compelled to fly from the country, and 
spread their tenets in various directions/ The reli^ 
gion of Buddha is now found to prevail over the 
greater part of the East ; in Ceylon, in the farther 
peninsula, in Thibet, in China, and even as far as 

> Bagotradam^ p. 313. " The whole history of Crishna," (says An- 
<tuetil Duperron, in his Observations on the Bbagavat, in the Recherches 
Historiqnes et Geographiques sur Tlnde) '' is a mere tissue of Greek 
and Roman obscenities, covered with a veil of spirituality , which, among 
tbe fanatics of all descriptions, conceals tlie most abominable enormi- 
ties." Speaking of a temple of Vishnu, at Sat}'mangalam, in the 
Mysore, Dr. Buchanan says, << The rath, or chariot, belonging to it is 
very large, and richly carved. The figures on it, representing tha 
amours of that god, in the form of Crishna, are the most indecent that I 
have ever seen.'' Buchanan's Journey through Mysore, &c. ii. 33?. 

« A name of Vishnu. 

^ Another name of Vishnu, vide supra, p. 306. 

'• Asiat. Research, ii. 181. 

A << As to Buddha," says Sir William Jones, (Disc, on the Gods of 
Greece, Italy, and India) ** he seems to have been a reformer of the 
doctrines contained in the Vedas; and, though his good nature led him 
to censure these ancient books, because they enjoined the sacrifices of 
cattle, yet he is admitted as the ninth avatar, even by the Bruhmena of 
Casi." 



910 lUHgiM 

AbMn^Japam.^ "^ The tenth avatar,"* sajs Sir William 

^ Jones, " we are told is yet to come, and is expootod 
to appear mounted (like the crowned conqueror in 
the Apocalypse) on a white horse, with a cimeter 
bla2ing like a comet, to mow down all incorrigiUe 
and impenitent offenders who shall then be oo 
earth.'** 

It will require the addition of but a few passages 
more of this wild mythology, to convey a satisfactory 
idea of the actions and qualities which the Hindus 
ascribe to their supreme deities. ** It is related," 
toys Mr. Wilford,^ *«in the Scanda,^that when the 
whole earth was covered with water, and Vishnu lay 
extended asleep in the bosom of Devi,^ a lotos arose 
from his navel. Brahma sprang from that flower, 
and looking roimd without seeing any creature on 
the boundless expanse, imagined himself to be the 
first-bom, and entitled to rank above all future 
beings. Resolving, however, by investigation, more 
ftilly to satisfy himself, he glided down the stalk of 
the lotos, and finding Vishnu asleep, asked loudly 

1 A contruversy has been started, whether the religion of Buddha was 
derived from that of Brahma, or that of Brahttia from the religioo of 
Buddha. There seems little chance that data will ever be obtained, li> 
prove either the one or the other. Clemens Alexandrinus would lead 
us to believe, that the religion of Buddha, in his time, mutfl have beea 
in high repute: E<^( h rw ivSwr, says he, (Stfom. bb. i. p. 559) k tmf 
ibvTra irii^o/xfVM itapeeyytX/iaf»^ h h ^tp/3oXi|v rt/untirnt tit Otov mt|t^nmm• 
(See also Hieronym. Cont. Jovias. lib. i. cap. 96.) This divinitj waa 
not confined to the Asiatics. There was aButus, ur Buto of Bgypt* 4 
Battus of Cyrene, and a Bceotus of Greece. (See Bryant's Analjftts of 
Ancient Mythology, iii. 170.y One of the primitive authors of the sect 
of Maiiicheans took the name of Buddas ; another that of Manes; both 
of them names identical with the names of gods and sacred betogs among 
the Hindus. Beausobre Hist, de Manidied, liv. i. ch. t. 

« Asiat. fUsearch. i. ii$6. Sea also Ward s View, fcc of the Hindai, 
(i. d. Lnndon Ed ) for an aeoonnt «f the ten avatars. 

3 Asiat. Research, iii. S74. ^ One of the Pnranas. 

i This means literally the goddess. 



oftkimnJhu. Sll 

who he waa. I am the first^mriH amrwdred Vidiii»,BO0K n. 
waking: and as Brahma contradicted hini^ they had ^''^^'^' 
an obstinate battle, till Mahadeva, or Siva, pressed 
between them. in great wrath, saymg, It is I who am 
trulj the first-bom : but I will resign my pretensioM 
to either of you who shall be able to reach and be- 
hold the summit of my head, or the soks of my feet. 
Brahma instantly ascended; but having fatigued 
himself to no purpose in the regions of immensity, 
yet loth to abandon his claim, he returned to Maha^ 
deva, and declared that he had attained the crown of 
his head, calUng, as his witness, the first-bom cow. 
For this union of pride and falsehood, the angry ged 
ordained, that no sacred rites should be performed to 
Brahma. When Vishnu returned, he acknowledged 
that he had not been able to see the feet of Maha* 
deva, confessed him to be the first-bora among the 
gods, and entitled to rank above them aU.** 

After a passage such as this, who would expect to 
find the following? ** The patriarch Atterien re-^ . 
tired into a forest, and there performed rigorous de» 
Totion, having for his nourishment nothing but the 
wind, and being exposed to all the injuries of the 
atmasphere. One day he addressed his vows to tho 
Eternal in these words : O thou who hast created, 
and who preserves! the universe ; O thou by whom it 
is destroyed ; give me the knowledge of thyself, and 
grant me' the vision of thee ! Then a fire issuing 
from the crown of the votaiy's head, made all the 
gods tremble, and they had recourse to Vishnu, to 
Siva, and to Brahma. Those three divinities, com« 
pletely armed and mounted, accompanied by 
Lacshmi, Guenga, and Seraswati, their wives, pra* 
sented themselves before the saint. Prostrating 
himself, Atterien worshipped them^i and uttered the 
following ^"ords : O you tbitte Lards^ know (hat I 



SIS Religion 

BOQKn. itcognise only one God : inform me which of you is 
• ^: the true divinity, that I may address to him alone 
my vows and adorations ! To this supplication the 
three Gods replied ; Learn, O devotee, that there is 
no real distinction between us : wliat to you appears 
such is only by semblance : the Single Being appears 
under three forms ; by the acts of creation, of preser- 
vation, and destruction : but he is One,"^ Yet this 
** Single" Being,, this One God, is thus again repre- 
sented, a few pages after, in the same Purana: 
*^ Even Brahma, finding himself alone with his 
daughter, who was full of charms and knowledge, 
conceived for her a criminal passion.**^ Thus are we 
taught by the Hindus themselves to interpret the 
lofty phrases which the spirit of exaggeration and 
flattery so frequently puts into their mouths. 

Of the First-bom, Mahadeva, or the One, Eternal 
God, under one of his. forms, we have the following 
sacred story. He was playing one day at diqe with 
Parvati,^ when they quarrelled, and parted in wrath 
to different regions. They severally performed rigid 
acts of devotion, but the fiies which they kindled 
blazed so vehemently as to threaten a general confla- 
gration. The devas,'^ in great alarm, hastened to 
Brahma, who led them to Mahadeva, and suppli- 
cated him to recall his consort; but the wrathful 
deity only answered, that she must come by her own 
free choice. They accordingly dispatched Ganga, 
the river goddess, who prevailed on Parvati to return 
to him, on condition that his love for her should be 
restored. The celestial mediators then employed 
Camadeva,^ who wounded Siva with one of hi3 
flowery arrows ; hut the angry divinity reduced hini 

i Bagavadam, p. 96, et seq. « lb. 178. 

9 One of th6 names of his wife. 

« A general name of the inferior godf . ^ One of the deve.s. 



of ike Hindus. 313 

to ashes with a flame from his eye. Parvati soonfiOOK ii. 
after presented herself before him in the form of a ^'^* ^' 
Cirati, or daughter of a mountaineer, and seeing him 
enamoured of her, resumed her own shape.^ Of the 
various passages of a similar nature presented to us in 
the history of this God, I shall content myself with 
another, extracted by Mr. Wilford, from the Scaiida 
Purana. ** There had subsisted/' says he,? ** for a 
long time, some animosity between Brahma and Ma- 
hadeva in their mortal shapes; and the latter, on 
liccount of his bad conduct, which is fully described 
in the -Puranas, had it appears given much uneasiness 
to Swayambhuva, and Satarupa. For he was libi- . 
dinous, going about stark-naked, with a large club in 
his hand. Be this as it may, Mahadeva, who was 
the eldest, saw his claim as such totally disregarded, 
and Brahma set up in his room. This intrusion th^ 
latter wanted to support ; but made use of such lies 
as provoked Mahadeva to such a point, that he cut 
off one of his heads in his divine form>' Such are 
the ideas which the Hindus entertain of the actions 
and character of their supreme deities; on whom, 
qotwitlistanding, they lavish all the most lofty epithets 
of divinity which human language can supply. 

This theology affords a rem^rkf^ble instance of 
that progress in exaggeration and flattery which I 
have described as the genius of rude religion. As 
the Hindus, instead of selecting one god, to whom 
they assigned all power in heaven and in earth, dis- 
tributed the creation and administration of the 
yniverse among three divinities, they divided them- 



I See this story ai extracted from the Puranas^ Aaiat. Researoh. 
iu.403. 

f Il).Yi.474. 

1 



814 JUKgim 

BOOK IT. selves into sects ; and some attached theimelves more 
^'*^' ^' particularly to one deity, some to another.* 

t Mr. Paterson, in his Difconrae on ibe Origin of the Hinda RefigMW, 
delineates a terrible picture of this Hindu cfentroversj. The people se- 
parated, he tells us, " into sects, each selecting one of the triad, the par- 
ticnlar object of their devotion, in preference to and exclusive of the 
others : the fctllowers of Vishnu and Siva invented new syiohols, each, to 
ascribe to their respective divinity the attribute of creation. This coin 
tention fur pre-eminence ended in the total suppression of the worship 
of Rnihnia, and the temporary submission of Vishnu to the superiority of 
Siva; bat this did not last long; the sects raised crusades against each 
other; hordes of armed fanatics, under the titles of Sanyasis and 
Vairagis, enlisted themselves as champions of their respective faith; 
the former devoted their lives in support of the superiority of Si^; and 
Ibe latter were no less zealous for the rights of Vishnu : alternate viciMy 
and defeat marked the progress of a religious war, which for ages conti« 
lined to harass the earth, and inflame mankind against each other.'' 
Asiat. Research, viii. 45, 46. Dr. Buchanan informs us, ** lliat tha 
worshippers of the two gnds (Vishnu and Siva,) who are of diflferent 
sects, are very apt to (all into disputes, occasioning abusive language 
and followed by -violence ; so that the collectors have sometimes been 
oMiged to have recourse to the fear. of the bayonet, to prevent the cm^ 
troversy from producing bad effects." JBucbanan's Journey through 
Mysore, &c. i. 13. The missionary Dubois observes, that " we see the 
two sects striving to exalt the respective deities whom they worship, and 

to revile those of tlieir opponents The followers of Vishnu veh»>' 

mently insist that he is far superior to Siva, and is alone worthy of oil 
honour The disciples of Siva, on the contrary, no less obsti- 
nately afiirm that Vislmu is nothing, and has never done any aet, but 
tricks so base as to provoke shame and indignation," Sec. Despripltoa^ 
he, of the People of India, p. 58. See too the Missionary Ward^ View, 
kc. of the Hindoos. Lond. Ed. Introd. p. 27. 

The preface to {Bhagavadam) the French translation of the Bhegavat, 
by M. D'Obsonville, eays, <' The Indians are divided into two orthodoa 
sects, which, however, violently oppose one another; the one asserting 
the supremacy of Vishnu, the other of Siva. • • The Puranas," it says, 
** differ in their interpretations of the Vedas, some of them giving fdia 
supremacy to Brahma, some to Vishnu, and some to Siva. These hooka 
are, properly speaking, pieces pf controversial theology. The Brali- 
ntens, who composed them, disputing to which of their three gods the 
sopremacy belongs, support the pretensions of each by an enormous 
mass of mytliological legends, and mystical opinions, in favour of the 
God whom the author adopts. All are equally suppoffed by the autho- 
rity of Ihe Vedas." 

Mr. Colebrooke, describing the diflferent sects of the liindns; inlarms 

6 



o/theHindui. S15 

Presently the usual consequence appeared. Which- boor IL 
ever of the three gods any votary selected for his ^'^^^' ^ 
peculiar patron, he expected to perform to him one of 
the most agreeable of ail possible services, by repre* 
senting him as superior to the other two. This we 
find to have been the practice, invariably, and enthu* 
siastically. In a passage from the Scanda Purana» 
one of the sacred books in honour of Siva, we have 
seen by what legends his votaries endeavour to 
elevate him above Brahma, and Vishnu; while he 
cuts off the head of the one for contesting with him 
the supremacy, and has it expressly yielded up to him 
by the other. It is not, however, sufficient that the 
favourite god should be only superior to the rest; 
whatever honour is derived from their actions, that , 
too must be claimed for him; and he is asserted to be 
himself the author of all their achievements. « 

A still higher strain of flattery succeeds. Not only 
must he absorb their actions, it is accounted still 
nobler if he can be asserted to absorb even them* 
selves ; if Siva, for example, can be affirmed, not only 
to be Siva, and to be at once creator, preserver, and 
destroyer, but can be declared to be Brahma, Vishnu, 
and Siva themselves. Beyond even this, a step re- 
mains. In the same manner as he absorbs the 
gods,* he is finally made to absorb every thing. He ' 
is asserted to be the universe itself. He is then all in 



u6 that '' Sancara Achar^a, the celebrated commentator on the Veda, 
contended for the attributes of Siva, and founded or confirmed the sect of 
Saivas, who worship Mahadeva as the Supreme Being, and deny the in- 
dependent existence of Vishnu and other Deities. Madhava Acharja 
and Vallabha Acharja have in like nuinner establishod the sect of 
Vaishnavaa who adore Vishnu as God. llie Suras (less numerous than 
the two aecM above roeutioned) worship the sun, and acknowledge no 
other divinity. The Ganahatyas adore Ganesa, as uniting in his persqn 
all the attributes of the Deity/' Note A. oq the Religious Ceramoniei 
of the Uindus. Asiat. Research, vii. 



316 • ReUg^on 

boorilbIL We shall find this process pursued witli the 
Chap. 6. {flpdu diviuitieS) one after another. In another 
sacred book/ dedicated to Siva, that god is made to 
declare, '* I have always been, and I always am, and 
I always will be. There is no second of whom I can 
say that I am he, and that he is I. I am the within 
of all the withins. I am in all surfaces. Whatever 
is I am ; and whatever is not I am. I am Brahma; 
and I am also Brahme; and I am the causing cause. 
Whatever is in the east I am; and whatever is in the 
west I am; and whatever is in the south I am ; and 
whatever is in the north I am. Whatever is bdow I 
am; and whatever b above I am. I am man, and not 
man, and woman. I am the truth ; I am the ox; 
and I am all other animated beings. I am more an- 
cient than all. I am the king of kings. And I am 
in alj the great qualities. I am the perfect being. 
Whatever has been, Rudra^ is ; and whatever is he 
is ; and whatever shall be he is. Rudra is life, and is 
death; and is the past, present, and future; and is all 
worlds."^ But if the votaries of Siva, with exag- 
^narating devotion, thus infinitely exalt him above aU; 
the same, or, if possible, stUl greater honours, do the 
adorers of Vishnu lavish upon that divinity. <^ Let it 
not be thought," says the Bhagavat, ** that Vishnu is 
only one of the three divinities, or triple powers. 
Know that he is the principle of all. It is he who 
created the universe by his productive power ; it is he 
who supports all by his preserving power ; it is he, in 
fine, who destroys all by his destructive power. H© 

I The OupneUiat, of which an ancient version into the Persian lan^ 
guage has heen found. Anquetil Duperron published first some spe- 
cimens of a translation from this in the Recherches Historiques et Geo* 
graphiques sur I'Inde, and has since published a translation of the whole 
in Latin. There is a translation of it likewise among the late Mr. AK 
lein's manuscripts in the British Museum. 

< One of the many n^mes of Siva^ or Mahadeva. ' Oupnekhat, ix^ 



oftheHindui. *17 

creates under the form of Brahma^ and destroys under ^^ ^ 
that of Siva. The productive power is nadre excel- V 

lent than the destructive, and the preserving more 
excellent than the productive. To the name of 
Vishnu, therefore, is attached the pre-eminence, since 
the title of preserver or saviour is peculiarly attributed 
to him.*"^ In the Bhagvat-Geeta, Crishna is thus 
addressed; ^* O mighty being! who, greater than 
Brahma, art the prime creator ! eternal god of gods ! 
the world's mansion ! thou art the incorruptible being 
distinct from all things transient! Thou art before 
all gods, and the supreme supporter of the universe! 
Thou knowest all things ! By thee, O infinite form ! 
the universe was spread abroad. Thou art Vayoo 
the god of winds, Agnee the god of fire, Varoon the 
god of oceans, Sasanka the moon, Prajapatee the god 
of nations ! Reverence be unto thee before and be- 
hind, reverence be unto thee on all sides, O thou who 
art all in all ! Infinite is thy power and thy glory ! 
Tliou indudest all things, wherefore thou art all 
things.**^ In a Sanscrit inscription taken from a stone 

1 Bagavadam, p. 8^ 9. 

• BbagvauGeeta^ p. 94: see similar strings of praises. Ibid. pp. 64 to 
t8; pp. 78, 79; p. 70. At p. 80 he is denotnioated, ** The father and 
Che motlierof this world ;^ which affords another curious coinddeoce 
-with the phraseology of other religions. The Orphic verses np* fu(ria^ 
make Jupiter the ^* father and mother of all things r*' 

Hcamtn f/in cv )r«m|p, fii)ri}^, &c.— Hymn. ix. ver. 18. 
Valerias Soranus calls Jupiter *' the father and mother of the gods:'* 
Jupiter omnipotens, regum Rex ipse, DeQmque 
Progeoitori Geoetnxqae DeClm ; Deus unus et idem. 

Apud Augustiu. deCivitat. Dei, lib.iv. cap. xi, et lib. vii*cap. it. 
Synesius uses similar language : 

7u I* etpoJiVf ffv h 9i}\uf.— Synes. Hymn. iii. 
Even Martial, in a sort of a Hymn, or eulogy upon Mercury, beginning 
Hermes Martia seculi voluptas, 
Hermes omnibus eruditas arrais; 

&c. &€., ends thus, 
Herma omnia $oluSf et ter t<7ii<»-*-Mart. £p. lib. iv. ep. S5. 
'^ Da Deo, ejusque cultu, ita Chaldsos fradiditse referont; I. Etu 



318 Religiam 

BOOK II. «t Buddha Gaym Buddlm If tbua Addmaed; '' Reve^ 
^^^' ^' rence be unto thee, O god, in the form of tlie god of 
mercy; the lord of all things^ the gutrdian of the 
universe. Thou art Brahma,' Vishnu, and Mahesa.^ 
Thou art lord of the universe ! Thou art, uuidcr the 
proper form of all things, moveable and immoveaUet 
the possessor of the whole !"^ 

Among the numerous expressions of panegyric and 
adoration which the Hindus af^ly to their divinities^ 
none seem to have made a deeper impnession upon 
some of the most intelligent of our Eng^iiah inquirers^ 
than the epithet one. This has so &r prevailed as 
to impress them with, a belief that die Hindus had a 
refined concepticm of the unity of the Divine Naitutt. 
Yet it seems very dear that the use of such as epithet 
is but a natural link in that chain of unmeaning pa- 
negyric which distinguishes the religion of ignorant 
meiL Wh^i one divinity has been made to engross 
the powers of all the rest, it is the necessary termi- 
nation of this piece of flattery^ to denominate him 
THE ONE. Oriental scholars ought moreover to have 
reflected that one is an epithet of very common, aqd 
vague application in the languages of Asia; and itf by 
no means a foundation whereon to infer among the 
Hindus any conception analogous to that which we 
denote by the term unity of God. The transktion of 
the Institutes of Menu affords us a very satisfact;ory 
example; " Then only is a man perfect when he con- 
sists of three persons united, his wife, himself, and his 
son; and thus have learned Brahmens announced 
this — the husband is even one with his wife.*'^ Yet 

Deum ornnium regem, parefUemgve, cu/ui provideiUia itniaefwntm unrfo 
atque omaiuifactut esf.— Bructeri Hist. Crit. PJulotophite, lib. ii. cap. 

11* 8€Ct. 18. 

1 Another name for Siva. 

• A«at. Rasearcfa. i. SM, 385. 

* loftitutaft of M«Du, ch. ix. .44». 



o^ ih€ Hmius. SI9 

mrdy do uniij of beinf was mpposed in this trittoe book n. 
person* a many his wife, and his son. Ad, we ai« ^^^^* ^' 
tnformed by Macrobiua, was among the Assyrians a 
word which signified one, and was a name conferred 
by them upon their chief divinity.' The Babylonians 
applied it to their principal goddess.^ The god 
Runmon, as we learn from the Bible, had the same 
epithet/'' Mr. Bryant says it was a sacred title among 
all the Eastern nations, and originally conferred upon 
the sun/ Even the Greek poets, who have never 
been suspected of refined notions of the unity of God, 
employ it to profusion. It is applied to Jupiter* to 
Pluto, to the sun, to Dionysius.^ All the gods are 
affirmed to be one/ ^^ One power," says the Orphic 
poetry, " one divinity, Jupiter is the great ruler of 
all/^ Plutarch informs us that Apollo was frequently 
denominated the monad, or the only one;* and - 
from the emperor Julian we learn, that the people of 
Edessa had a god whom they called Monimus, a 
word (^ the same interpretation.^ Few nations shall 
we find without a knowledge of the unity .of the Di- 

I Deo, queni •umiiivm maiiniaiDqtta TMierfintur, Adad nmnen iMe- 
rant. Ejus noroinis interpretatio signiiicat unus. Macrob. Satur. lib. i. 
cap^ f$. This rcdiipiication.Mr. Bryant, with good reason, supposes to 
be a Mperiatfre, hot is wrong in supposing it an ofdinal, i. t9. 

« A8i^ Hoi^ nau 6in BmfivKmm^ 4 H^. Hesychins, ad Terb. The Gre^ 
^ IgKwm it, for a femioina application, a ibminine termination. 

9 Zechariah, ch. sti. ver. 11. ^ As the moaraing of Adad Rinimon, in 
the valley of Megiddoa/' 

* Analysis of Ancient Mythology, i. 40. 

* 'Elf 2«Uf, lif AJSiff, kf *flX«»r uf AiOMMVf , 

*Eiff 4Mr m ir»r<tf'rf.— Orph. Frag. ir. p. 304. 

Afvtfut^ ql* lMmfy»e AtnkK^y Ut ^ vi.—- Uermeiiaiwi* 
f Orphic. Fragna, vi. ^66. 

* Tqv MONA4A ru( K^pmg OM/i^MP AiFoAXM«.F*-PlttiarGh. leif et Otiiis^ d64. 

. Otat. iv. p. 150. See note % ia page S^7> wbe» Jdenwy b dene* 
ounated the Thvke-ont. 



820 Religion^ ' 

BOOK ti.vine Nature, if we take such expressions of it as 
Cpap. a. abound in the Hindu writings for satisfactcny evi- 
dence. By this token Mr. Park found it among the 
savages of Africa.^ • 

In pursuance of the same persuasion, ingenious 
Mithors have laid hold of the term Brahme, or Brahm, 
the neuter of Brahma, the masculine name of the 
creator.^ This they have represented as the peculiar 
appellation of the one god ; Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Siva, being only names of the particular modes of di- 
vine action. But this supposition (for it is nothing 
more) involves the most enormous inconsistency ; as 
if the Hindus possessed refined notions of the unity 
•f God, and could yet conceive his modes of action to 
be truly set forth in the characters of Brahma, Vishnu, 
and Siva ; as if the same people could at once be so 
enlightened as to form a sublime conception of the 
Divine nature, and yet so stupid as to make a distinc- 
tion between the character of God and his modes of 
action. The parts of the Hindu writings, however, 

> '* The belief of ONE God,** saye he, *^ and of a future state of reward 
and punishmenty is eniire and univerMil among them/' Park's Travels in 
Airicay p. S73. 

« Sir W. Jones says, (Discourse on the Gods of Greece^ Italy, and Ib- 
dia,) '< It must always be remembered, that the learned Indians, as th^ 
are instructed by their own books, in truth acknowledge only one supreme 
being, whom they call Brahme, or the Great One, in the neuter gender : 
they believe his essence to be infinitely removed from the comprehensioa 
of any mind but his own ; and they suppose him to manifest iiis power 
by the operation of his divine spirit : whom they name Vishnu, the Per- 
lOader, in the masculine gender, whence he is often denominated the first 
male. ♦ ♦ • • * When they consider the Divine Power exerted in 
creating, or in giving existence to that which existed not before, they call 
the Deity Brahma, in the masculine gender also ; and when they view 
him in the light of Destrcyer, or rather changer of forms, they give him 
a thousand names, of which Sira, Isa or Iswara, Rudra, Hara,Sambhu» 
and Mahadeva, or Mahesa, are the most common/' Mr. Wilford 
(Asiat. Research, iii. 570) says that Brahma, Vishnu, and Mahadeva^ 
** are only the principal forms, in which the Brahmens teach the people 
W adore Brahm, or the great one." 



o/ the Hindus. Jgl 

which are already before us, completely refVite this BOOK if. 
gratuitous notion, and prove that Brahme is a mere p"^^- ^' . 
unmeaning epithet of praise, applied to various gods ; 
and no more indicative of refined notions of the unity, 
or any perfection of the Divine Nature, than other 
parts of their panegjrrical devotions. We have already 
beheld Siva decorated with this title.^ Vishnu is de^ 
nominated the supreme Brahme in the Bhagvat- 
Geeta.^ Nay, we find this Brahme, the great, the 

1 Vide supra, p. S16» 

t Bhagvat-Geta, p. 84. The term Para Brahme, or Great Bfahme, is 
applied, not ooce, but manj times to Crishna, in the Bhagavat. See 
Halhed's translation in Maurice's Hiodostan, ii. S42, 351, 354» 360, 
375, 377, 379. 380, 417, 444. ** The Sri Vaishnavam Brabroens,'' says 
Dr. Buchanan (Journey through Mysore, &c. 1.144), << worship Visfana 
and the gods of bis family only, and all erer the Decan are almost ex- 
olusively the officiating priests in the temples of these deities. They al« 
lege Brahma to be a son of Vishnu, and Siva the son of Brahma. Vishna 
they consider as the same with Para Brahm&'' (thus Dr. Buchanan spells 
k instead of Brahme) <* or the supreme Being.'' Yet of this supreme Be* 
ing, this Para Brahma, they believe as follows ; ** One uf the Asuras, or 
demons, named Tripura, possessed a dty, the inhabitants of which were 
rery troublesome to the inhabitants of Brahma Loka, the heaven of 
Brahma, who attempted in vain to take the place ; it being destined not 
to fall, so long as the women who resided in it - should preserve their 
chastity. The angels at length offared up their prayers to Vishnu, who 
look upon himself the form of a most beautiful young man, and became 
Budha Avatara. Entering then into the city, he danced naked before the 
women, and inspired them with loose desires, so that the fortress soon 
fell a prey to the angels.'' Ibid. Even Vach, the .daughter of Ambhnna, 
is decorated with all the attributes of divinity. Mr. Colebrooke gives us - 
the following literal version of a hymn in one of the Vedas, which Vach, 
he informs us, ** speaks in praise of herself as the tupreme and unisoenal 
tcul** [the title which, it is pretended, exclusively belongs to Brahme]-** 
<' I range with the Rudras, with the Vasus, with the Adityas, and with 
the Viswadevas. I uphold both the snn and the ocean [metre and v»* 
runa], the firmament, and fire, &c. * * Me who am the queen, the con* 
ferrer of wealth, the possessor of knowledge, and first of suofa as merit 
worship, die gods render, universally, present everywhere, and pervader 
of all beings. He, who eats food through me, as he, who sees, who 
hears, or who breathes, through me, yet knows me not, is lost ; hear then 
the fidth which I pronounce. >£ven I declare tki$ Seify who is worshipped 
by gods and men. I make strong whom I choose ; I make htm Bcabme, 
l^y and wise. For Rudra I bend the bow, to slay the .demon, foe of 
VOL. I. , V 



Sflf JUKgiM 

BOOK n. eternal one, the supreme soul, employed in rather m 
^^^'^* subordinate capacity. « The Great Brahm,** says 
Crishna, *< is my womb. In it i place my fetus ; 
and from it is the production of all nature. The 
great Brahm is the womb of all those various forma 
which are conceived in every natural womb, and I am 
the father who so weth the seed." * In one of the mom- 

Brahma: for the people I make war on their foes ; and I perrade heayeo 
and earth. I bore the father on the head of this universal mind ; and 
my origin is in the midst of the ocean : and therefore do I penrade all be- 
ings, and touch tliis heaven with my form* Originating all being^f I pass 
Hke the breese; I am above this heaven, beyond this earth ; and what is 
the OEKAT ONB, that am V Asiat. Research, viii. 403, 408. Mr. Cole- 
biooke says that Vach signifies speech, and that she is persoiufied as ilia 
active power of Brahma, proceeding from him. Ibid. There is a coii- 
oos passage, descriptive of the universal soul, translated from the Vedas 
by Mr. Colebrooke. Several persons << deeply conversant with holy writ^ 
and possessed of great dwellings, meeting together engaged in thaa dia« 
qnisition; what is our soul } and who is firahme f* Going together for 
information to a profound sage, they addressed him thus; ** Thou well 
knowest the universal soul, communicate that knowledge unto ua." Tha 
tage asked each of them, ** whom he worshipped as the scHil." The firat 
answered, ** the heaven." But the sage replied, that this was only the 
head of the souL The second declared that he worshipped '* the sun as 
the souL" But the sage told him, this was only the eye of the souL Tb# 
durd said that he worshipped <' air as the soul ; '* and the sage aasweredt 
that this was only the breath of the soul. The fourth declared that he 
worshipped ** the ethereal element as the souL'^ But the sage replied 
that this was only the trunk of the soul. The fifth answered, that he 
worshipped ^ water as the soul.*' But the sage r^oined that this was 
only the abdomen of the soul. The sixth informed him that he wor- 
•hif^>ed *< earth as the soul." But the sage deehured that this was only 
the feet of the soul. The sage next proceeds -to dehver his own expla- 
nation ; and utters a jargon, whidi has not even a semblance of mean- 
ing. ^ He thus addressed them collectively: You consider this universal 
soul, as it were an individual being; and you partake of distinct enjoy- 
ments. But he who worships as the universal soul, that which is known 
by its manifosted portionsyand is inferred from consciousness, enjoys noo* 
rishment in aU worlds, in aH beings, in all souls : his head is splendid like 
that of thib universal soul; his eye is similarly varied; his breadi is 
equally dlt£Rised ; his trunk is no less abundant ; his abdomen is. alike 
foil; and his feet are the earth ; his breast is the altar; his hair is the 
sacred grass ; his heait the household fire ; his mind the eonseoraccd 
fbme ; and his mouth the oblaltion." 

1 lb. p. tor. . t 



of tke Hindus. 9M 

• 

mg pnyars of the Brafamens^ cited from the Vedas by boor n. 
Mr. Colebrooke, water ia denominated Brahme.' ^"^^' ^ 
^ The sun/' says Y^jnyawalcya, '' is Brahme ; this is 
a certain truth revealed in the sacred Upanishats^ 
and in various sac'has of the Vedas. So the Bha« 
wishya Purana, speaking of the sun : Because there is * 
none greater than he» nor has been nor win be, there- 
fore he is celebrated as the supreme soul in all the 
Vedas/'* Air, too, receives the appellation of 
Brahme. Thus, sajrs a passage in the Veda ; '^ That 
which moves in the atmosphere is air, Brahme.^. Thus 
again ; ^< Salutation unto thee, O air ! Even thou art 
Brahme^ pi^esent to our apprehension. Thee I will 
call, ^ present Brahme :' thee I will n«n^ < the right 
one:* thee I will pronounce, 'the true one/ May 
that Brahme, the universal being entitled air, preserve 
me.**^ Food too is denominated Brahme; so is 
breath, and intellect, and felicity/ Nay, it is af- 
firqied, as jiart of the Hindu belief, that man himsdf 
may become Brahme ; thus in the Bhagvat'^Geeta 
Crishna declares: ''A man being endowed with a 
purified understanding, having humUed his spirit by re* 
solution, and abandoned the objects of the organs ; who 
hath freed himself from passion and disUke, who wor- 
sbippeth with discrimination, eateth with moderation^ 
and is humble of speech, of body, and of mind ; who 
preferreth the devotion of meditation, and who con* 
stantly placeth his confidence in dispassion; who is 
fi*eed from ostentation, tyrannic strength, vain glory, 
lust, anger, and avarice; and who is exempt from 



* Asiat. Retearob. ▼. 849. 

« Ad extract fiPOBi a Sanscrit commentarj bj Mr. Colebrooke, Asiat. 
Bfeaearcb, ▼. 354. 

» Aftiat. Ees. Tiii. 417. * lb. 456. 

-9 Eoctract from the Vedas by Mr.Coiebrooke, AjBiat.Basearch. Tui.455, 
45^ 

Y 2 



SS4 Religiiai 

BOOR II. selfishness, and in all things teknperate/is formed for 

f^;^ being Brahm."^ 

Siich are the proofs on which the opinion has been 
adopted that sublime principles run through the re- 
ligion of the Brahmens.^ I kn6w no supposition 

1 Bkagvat-Geeta, p. 131, 132. 

* Sir W. Jones seems to have found proofs of A pure theism almost 
•vefy wheret Speaking of the Arabs, he says, f* 'the reUgioo of the 
poets^ at.lealty seems to have been pure theism;; and this we may know 
with gertainty^ because we have Arabian verses of unsuspected antiquity, 
Which contain picms and elevated sentiments on the goodness and justice, 
the power aad omuipoteiice/of Allah, or tht God, If an inscriptiou " 
said to have been fouud on marble in Yemen be aulhentic,.the ancient 
inhabitants of that country preserved the religion of Eber, and professed 
a belief in miracles, and a future state.** (As. Res. ii. 8.) Did Sir W. 
not know that the wildest religions abound most in miraclee, aad that 
no religion is without a belief of a future state ? .Did it want an inscrip- 
tion in Yemen to prove to us this ? Sir W. finds proofs of a pure theism 
as easily among the Persiaiis as among the Arabs. ** The primeval 
jelif^ion of Iran/' he says, ^ if we rely on die authorities addaced by 
Molisaiii Fani, wa^ that which Newton calls the oldest (and it may be 
justly called the noblest) of all religions : A firm belief that one supreme 
God made the world by his power, and continaally govemtd it by his 
pcovidenoe; a pious fear, love, and adoration of him ; a.due reverence 
for parents and aged persons; a fraternal affection for the whole 
liuman race, and a compassionate tenderness even for the bmte crea* 
tion." Yet under Hushang, who, it would appear, was the author 
4>f this primeval religion, he tells us, that the popular worship of 
the Iranians was purely Sabian. (Ibid. p. 58.) At the same time he 
assures us, that during his supposed Mahabadian dynasty, when this Has- 
bangism and Sabian ism existed, a Brahmenical system prevailed,^' which 
we can hardly," he says, *' doubt was the first corruption of the oldest and 
purest religion.*' (Ibid. p. 59.) By this account three different religions must 
have all been the prevalent religions of Persia, at one and the same time. 
Unless(which iJs not a theory with slight presumptions in tu favour) w« con- 
clude that all three were originally one and the same. — Even on the most so- 
ber-minded and judicious men, the lofty language of a mean superstition is 
calculated to impose. Theindustrious and intelligent Harris, in his acooant 
of the travels of William de Rubruquis, states it as his opinion, " after 
all the pains that he had been abfe to take, in order to obtain some sort 
of certainty on this head," that the religion of the Tartars includes these 
three points : ** First,— that there is one God, the fouauin of being, the 
creator of all things, the ruler of all things, and the sole object of Di- 
vine worship. Secondly ,-^That all men in general are his creatures, and 
therefore ought to consider each other as brethren descended ftom one 
common parent, and alike entitled to all the blessings he bestows; and 



of the Hindus. 825 

which can be emjployed to reconcile the incioFhsisten- BOOK IL 
des, and to remove the absurdities^ which we have '^' 
found this opinion to involve, unless it be assumed, 
that the legends of the Hindus are all allegorical ; 
and though, in their literal interpretation, they may 
be altogether unworthy of a perfect being, that 
yet a recondite and enigmatical meaning may b^ ex-- 
torted from them, which will tally with the sublime 
hypothesis it is wished to entertain. Undoubtedly, if 
we assume to ourselves the licence of giving to the 
Hindu mythology a meaning to suit our own views; 
we may form out of it not only a sublime theology, 
but a sublime philosophy, or any thing we please; (t 
might, however, have been imagined that the futility^ 
the absurdity, of these arbitrary interpretations harf 
been too well exposed to allow them to mislead such 
men as some of the advocates for the allegorical 
sense of the Hindu scriptures. The latter Platonists, 
and other refiners upon the mythology of Greece and 
Rome, drew from it a pure system of theology, by the 
very same process which is adopted and recommended 
in regard to the fableis of the Hindus. " Without a^ 
tedious detail," says Mr. Gibbon, " the modem rea- 
der could not form a just idea of the strange allusionsy 
the forced etymologies, the solemn trifling, and the im*- 
penetrable obscurity of these sages, who professed to 
reveal the system of the universe. As the traditions 
of Pag^n mythology were variously related, the 
sacred interpreters were at liberty to select the most 

that therefore it is great impiety to abuse those blessings, or to injure 
each other. Thirdly,— That in as much as the common reason of man- 
kind hath taught them to establish property, it is necessary that it shbuld 
be preserved, and that it is therefore the duty of every man to be eon* 
tent with his own." (See Harris's Collection of Voyages, vol. i.) Xes 
Moskani^ns m'ont tons assures unanimement, qu'ils n'avoient jamais en 
d'idoles, ni de^ivinit^ subaltemes, mais qu'ils sacrifioient uniquement \ 
un fctre supreme et invisible. Pallas, Voyage, i. 126. 



826 Religion 

BOOK IL convenient circum^nces ; and as they translated an 
^^^^' ^' arbitrary cipher, they could extract from any feble 
dny sense which was adapted to their favourite 
system of religion and philosophy. The lascivious 
fiorm of a naked Venus was tortured into the dis- 
covery of some moral precept, or some physical truth ; 
and the castration of Atys explained the revolution 
of the sun between the tropics, or the separation of 
the human soul from vice and error/' } But if a 
condemnation thus severe can be justly pronounced 
upon those who allegorize the Greek and Roman 
mythology, what judgment should be formed of those 
by whom the same mode of interpretation is applied 
to the fables of the Hindus?^ The Egyptian religion 
is allowed on ail hands to have possessed the same 
fundamental principles with the Hindu, and to have 
resembled it remarkably in its outward features : yet, 
of all the systems of superstition which were found 
within the Roman empire, Mr. Gibbon pronounces 
this to be *^ the most contemptible and abject."' 
There are satisfEictory reasons for supposing that im- 
provement in the language of the Brahmens, and re- 
finement in the interpretations which they put upon 
their ancient writings, not to speak of what may 
have beeu done by their favourite practice of inter- 
polation, have been suggested by the more rational 
and simple doctrines of Mahomet.^ The natural 

1 Gibbon's Hist, of the Ded. and Fall of the Rom. Emp. iv. 71. 

• The Hinda ideas are so extremely loose, vagae, and UDoertain, thai 
thej are materials unspeakably convenient for workmanship of thia 
descriptioD. ''The Hindu religion/* says an Oriental acbolar of 
lome eminence, ** is so pliant, that there it umrcely €sn opinym ii mill 
noi countenance.'' A Tour to Shiraz by Edward Soott Waring, £sq. 
p. 3, note. 

s Gibbon's Hist, of the Decl. and Fall of the Rom^ Eoop. t. Sfl. 

* Besides ihe invincible reasons afforded by the circumstances of the 
case, the artful pretences and evasions of the Brahmens af« evidence 
enough. Mr. Wilford| having sUted the. genenl opinion^ that the three: 



of the Hindus. S87 

effect of acquaintance with a superior creed is weJl BOOK It. 
described by Mr. Bryant •* It is to, be observed;' ^'^''•^- 
he says, '* that when Christianity had introduced a 
more rational system, as well as a more refined wor- 
ship, among mankind ; the Pagans were struck with 
the sublimity of its doctrines, and tried in their turns 
to refine. But their misfortune was, that they were 
obliged to abide by the theology which had beei^ 
transmitted to them; and to make the history of 
the Gentile Gods the basis of their procedui'e. This 
brought them into immense difficulties and equal ab* 
surdities : while they laboured to solve what was in- 
explicable; and to remedy what was past cure. 
Hence we meet with many dull and elaborate so- 
phisms even in the great Plutarch : but many more 
in after times, among the writers of whom I am 
speaking. Proclus is continually ringing the changes 
upon the terms voo^, vo^poc, and vcvitoc : and explains 
what is really a proper name, as if it signified sense 
and intellect. In consequence of this, he tries to 
subtilize and refine all the base jargon about Saturn 
and Zeus : and would persuade us that the most idle 
and obscene legends related to the divine mind, to 
the eternal wisdom, and supremacy of the Deity. 
Thus he borrows many exalted notions from Chris- 
tianity ; and blends Uiem with the basest alloy, with 
the dregs of Pagan mythology."* Such are the 



prindpal gods of Egypt molf e UiemielTW into one, namely, the sun, 
•ays, ^ The case was nearly the same in ancient India ; but there is no 
aubject on winch the modem Brahmens are more reserved; for wh^n 
Ibcy are closely interrogated on the title of Deva or God, which their 
most sacred books give to the sun, they avoid a direct answer, have re* 
course to evasions, and often contradict one another and themselfes. 
They confess, however, unanimously, that the sun is an emblem ot image 
of the three great divinities jointly and individually ; that is of Brahme, 
•ff the supreme one.'' Asiat. Res. iii. 97f • 
1 Bryant's Analysis of Ancient MyUiology, iii, lOA^ 105, 



^8^ Religion 

BOOK. II, opinions of the greatest men respecting those attempts 
- ^^^' ' to allegorize a rude superstition, which some of the 
most celebrated of our Indian guides so vehemently 
recommend.^ 

Of the pure and elevated ideas of the Divine 
Nature, which are ascribed to the Hindus, or to any 
other people, an accurate judgment may be fotaied, 
by ascertaining the source from which they are de- 



■ Mr. Halhed very judiciousiy condemns the prefect to allegorize and 
refine upon the Hindu mythology. ** Many coi^ectural doctrines," sayt 
hey "have been circulated by the learned and ingenious of Europe upon 
the mythology of the Gentoos ; and they have unanimously endeavoured to 
9on9true the extravagant fables with which it abonnds into sublime and 
mystical symbols of the most refined morality. This mode of reason- 
ing, however common, is not quite candid or equitable, because it sets 
out with supposing in those people a deficiency of faith with respect to 
the authenticity of their own scriptures, which, although our better m- 
formation may convince us to be altogether fialse and erroneous, yet are 
by them literally esteemed as the immediate revelations of the Almighty. 

• • • It may possibly be owing to this vanity of reconciling every other 
mode of worship to some kind of conformity with our own, that allego- 
rical constructions and forced allusions to a mystic moraUty have been 
constantly foisted in upon the plain and literal context of every Pagan 
mythology. * * * The institution of a religion has been in every 
country the first step towards an emersion from savage barbarism. * * 
The vulgar and illiterate have always understood the mythology of their 
country in its literal sense; and there was a time to every nation, when 
the highest rank in it was equally vulgar and illiterate with the lowest. 

* • * A Hindu esteems the astonishing miracles attributed to a 
Brihma, a Raam, or a Kishen, as facts of the most indubitable authen- 
ticity, and the relation of them as most strictly historical." Preface to 
Code of Gentoo Laws, p. ziii. xiv. On the religion of ancient nations, 
Voltaire says with justice, On pourroit firire des volumes sur ce sujet ; 
mais tons ces volumes se reduisent a deux mots, c'est que le gros du 
genre humain a ^t^ et sera tree long-temps insens^ et imbecile ; et que 
peutr^tre les plus insens^ de tous ont ^t^ ceux qui out voulu trouver on 
sens il ces fables absurdes, et mettre de la raison dans la fblie. Voltaire^ 
Philosophie de THistoire, (Euvres Completes, k Gotha, 1785, torn. xvi. 
p. S2. Mr. WilkinS) reprobating some other attempts at refinement on 
the Hindu text, says ** he has seen a comment, by a zealoas Persiaiii 
upon the wanton ode^ of their favourite poet Hafiz, whermn every ob- 
scene allusion is sublimated into a divine mystery, and the host and the 
tavern are as ingeniously metamorphosed into their prophet and his holy 
temple.'' Bbagvat-Geeta, note 114. 



of the HinduM. 829 

rived. It will be allowed that just and rational BOOK IL 
views of God can be obtained from two sources ^^^^' ^' 
alone : from revelation ; or, where that is wanting^ ^ 

from sound reflection upon the frame and govern* 
ment of the universe. Wherever men are sufficiently 
improved to take a comprehensive survey of this 
magnificent system, to observe the order which pre- 
vails, the adaptation of means to ends, and the in* 
credible train of effects which flow from the simplest 
causes ; they may then form exalted notions of the 
intelligence to which all those wonders are ascribed. 
If all the unrevealed knowledge which we possess 
respecting God, the immediate object of none of our 
senses, be derived from his works^ they whose ideas 
of th« works are in the highest degree absurd, mean» 
and degrading, cannot, whatever may be the language 
which they employ, have elevated ideas of the author of 
those works. It is impossible for the stream to ascend 
higher than the fountain. The only question therefore 
is, what are the ideas which the Hindus have reach- 
ed concerning the wisdom and beauty of the universe. 
To this the answer is clear and incontrovertible. 
No people, how rude and ignorant soever, who have 
been so far advanced as to leave us memorials of their 
thoughts in writing, have ever drawn a more gross 
and disgusting picture of the universe than what is 
presented in the writings of the Hindus.^ In the 



1 Even Mr. Maurict saye ; ** The Hindu notions of tho mundane 
system are altogether the most monstrous that ever were adopted by any 
beings, who boast the light of reason; and, in truth, very little recon- 
cileable with those sublime ideas we have been taaght to entertain of the 
profound learning and renowned sagacity of the ancient Brahmens.^ 
Maurice, Hist, of Hindost. i. 490. I have met with nothing in Sanscrit 
literature in any degree to be compared with the following reflection of a 
l^eruvian Inca, ** If the heaven be so glorious, which is the throne and 
seat of the Pachacamac, how much more powerful, glittering, and re- 
splendent must his person and majesty be, who was the ms^Ler and 



«30 Rdigian 

BOOK n. conception of it no coherence^ wisdom, or beauty, ever 

J^^\^ appears: all is disorder, caprice, passion, contest, por* 

tents, prodigies, violence, and defwmity.^ It is pw- 

, creator of them all. Other sayings of his were these, If I were t9 
adore any qflhete terrestrial thingt, it should certainly be a wise and dis" 
creet man, whose excellencies surpass all earthly creatures** Garcilasso 
de la Vega, Royal Commentaries of Pern, book it. ch. 19. There is a 
paesage which I have read since this was written, (which however may 
well be suspected of flowing at a recent date from a foreign source) 
translated bj Mr. Ward, from a work by Cbirunjeem, in which the ia- 
fbrence that a God exists because the universe exists, is very distinctl/ 
expressed. Ward*s View, &c. ii. 302. I»nd. Ed. 

1 In my researches concerning the religious ideas of the Hindus, I 
was much struck with the title of a chapter or lecture in the Bhagvat- 
Geeu, ** Display of the Divine Nature in the form of the universe.'' I 
seized it with eagerness : Here, I thought, will undoubtedly be found some 
reAections on the wisdoqn and order of the universe : I met with only the 
following monstrous exhibition : " Behold/' says Vishnu, io the form of 
Crishna, to Arjoon, " behold things wonderful, never seen before. Behold 
in this my body the whole world animate and inanimate, and all things else 
thou hast a mind to see. But as thou art unable to see with these thy 
natural eyes, I will give thee a heavenly eye, with which behold my 
divine connection.'* — After this Arjoon declares, ^ I behold, O god ! 
within thy breast, the dews assembled, and every specific tribe of beings. 
I see Brahma, that deity sitting on his lotus-throne; all CheKeesbeet 
[saints] and heavenly Ooragas [serpents]. I see thyself, on all sides, of 
infinite shape, formed with abundant arms and bellies, and mouths, and 
eyes ; but I can neither discover thy beginning, thy middle, nor again 
thy end, universal lord, form of the universe ! I see thee with a crowo, 
md armed with club and chacm, [the martial weapon of Crishna, a sort 
of discus or quoit,] a mass of glory, darting refulgent beams around. I 
see thee, difficult to be seen, shining on all sides with light immeasur^ 
able, like the ardent fire or glorious sun. Thou art the supreme being, 
indorruptible, worthy to be known I Thou art prime supporter of the 
universal orb! Thou art the never-failing and eternal guardian of 
religion ! Thou art firom all beginning, and I esteem thee PooitMsh 
[literally man, but here meant to express the vital soul]. I see tbea 
without beginning, without middle, and without end; of valour infinite; 
of arms ioiiumerable; the sun and moon thy eyes; thy mouth a flaming 
fire, and the whole world shining with thy reflected glory ! The space 
between the heavens and the earth is possessed by thee alone, and every 
point around : the three regions of the universe, O mighty spirit 1 be- 
hold the wonders of thy awful countenance with troubled minds. Of the 
celestial bands, some 1 see fly to thee for refuge ; whilst some, afraid, 
with joined hands sing forth thy pniise. The Maharshees, holy bands, 
hail thee, and glorify thy name with adorating praised. The Roodras, 
the Adityas, the Vaaoos, and all those beings & world etteemeth good; 



of iJu Hindut. SSI 

fectly evident that the Hindus never contemplated BOOK IL 
the universe as a 4X)nnected and perfect sfsten, pn "^'''^ 
verned by general laws» and directed to benevolent 
ends; and it follows, as a necessary consequencet 
that their religion is no other than that primary wor- 
ship, which is addressed to the designing and in- 
visible beings who preside over the powers of nature^ 
according to their own arbitrary will, and act only 
for some private and selfish gratification. The ele* 
vated language, which this species of worship finally 
assumes, is only the refinement, which flattery, founded 
upon a base af^irehension of the divine character, 
ingrafts upon a mean supers;^tion.^ 



Asween and Koomary the Marootf and Ooshmapas ; the Gandharos and 
the Yakabat, with the holy tiibes of Soon, all stand gaxinR on thee, and 
all alike amazed. The winds, alike with me^ are terrified to behold thj 
wondrous form gigantic; with many months and eyes; with many arms, 
and legs, and breasts ; with nany bellies, and with rows of dreadful 
ieeth 1 llkus, as I see thee, tonching the heavens* and sfaining with Mich 
glory, of such various hues, with widely opened mouths and bright ex- 
panded eyes, 1 am disturbed within me ; my resolution faileth me, O 
Viahno I and I find no rest I Having beholden thy dreadlbl teedi, and 
gaaed on the oountenance, emblem of time's last fire, I know not which 
way I tarn 1 I find no peace 1 Have mercy, then, O god of gods ! thou 
mansion of the universe 1 The sons of Dhreetarashtra, now, with all 
those mlaiv of the land, Bbeeshsa, Drona the son of Soot, and even the 
fronta of our army, seem to be predptteting themselres hastily into thy 
mouths, discovering such frightfhl rows of teeth ! whilst some appear to 
•tick between thy teeth fi^ltb th«r bodies sorely mangled. As the rapid 
streaass of fulWflowing rivers roll on to meet the ocean's bed ; even so 
these heroes of the human race rash on towards thy flaming mouths. As 
troops of insects, with increasing speed, seek their own destruction in 
the flaming fire; even so these people, with swelling fiiry, seek their own 
destruction. Thou involvest and swallowest them altogether, even untQ 
the last, with thy flaming mouths; whilst the whole world is filled with 
thy glory, as thy awful beams, O Vishnu> shine forth on all sides!" Bhag* 
Tat-Geeta, p. 90, &c. Such is ** the Display of the Divine jNature in the 
form of the universe I ^ 

I In the grant of land, translated firom a plate of copper, (Asiat. Res. 
ill. 45.) among the praises of the sovereign, by whom the donation is 
made, it is said, << The gods had apprehensions in the beginning of time, 
thut Um glory of te gF^at a monarch would leave them without marks of 



383 Reiigion 

BOOK Ti. If it be deemed necessary to inquire into the prin- 
^^''^' ^' eiple of Che Hindu superstition; or which of the powers 
of nature, personified into gods, they exalted in the 
progress of hyperbolical adoration to the supremacy 
over the rest, and the lordship of all things; the 
question is resolved by copious evidence ; and on this 
point inquirers generally coincide. Sir William 
Jones has written a discourse to prove that the gods 
of Greece, Italy, and India are the same. But -it is 
sufficiently proved that the Greek and Roman deities 
ultimately resolve themselves into the sun, whose 
powers and provinces had been gradually enlarged^ 
till they included those of all nature. It follows that 
the sun too is th^ principle of the Hindu religion. 
" We must not be surprised," says Sir William Jones, 
^* at finding on a close examination, that the charac- 
ters of all the Pagan deities, male and female, melt 
into each other, and at last into one or two ; for it 
seems a well-founded opinion, that the whole crowd 
of gods and goddesses, in ancient Rome and modern 
Varanes, mean only the powers of nature, and prin- 
cipally those of the sun, expressed in a variety of ways, 
and by a multitude of fanciful names.'' ^ He says too, 
that ** the three Powers, Creative, Preservative, and 
Destructive, which the Hindus express by the triliteral 
word Aum, were grossly ascribed by the first idola- 
ters to the heat, light, and flame of their mistaken 



distiDcdon ; thence it was, that Purari assamcd a third eye in his fore- 
head; Pedmacsha, foar arms; Atmahhu, foar faces; that Cali held a 
cimeter in her hand ; Rama, a lotos flower ; and Vani, a lyre.^ Sir 
William Jones, in the note says ; " The six names in the text are ap- 
pellations of the gods Mahadeva, Vishnu, Brahma, and the goddesses 
Durga, Lacshmi, Seraswati.'' So that the three supreme deities, with 
their wives, were afraid of being eclipsed by an earthly king, and were 
obliged to assume new distinctions (of a very ingenious and imposing 
sort!) to prevent so lamentable an occurrence. 

1 On the Gods of Greece, &c., Asiat. Research, i. 967. 



of the Hindus. 3SS 

divinity the sun."^ Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, were book ii. 
therefore, the heat, light, and flame of the sun; and ^^^' ^' 
it follows as a very clear deduction, that Brahme, 
whose powers were shadowed forth in the characters 
of those three gods, was the sun himself. This con- 
clusion, too, is established by. many express texts 
of the Hindu . scriptures, as ^well as by the most 
venerated part of the Hindu ritual. " The syllable 
Om (Aum) intends,'" says a passage from the Veda 
translated by Mr.Colebrooke, ** every deity : It belongs 
to Paramesht*hi, him who dwells in the supreme 
abode: it appertains to Brahme, the vast one; to 
Deva, god ; to Adhyatma, the superintending souL 
Other deities bekmgiijg to those several regions, are 
portions of the three gods ; for they are variously 
named and Atscribed, on account of their different 
operations : but in fact there is' only one deity, the 
Great Soul. He is called the sun ; for he is the 
^ul of all beings. Other deities are portions of 
him." ^ I have already quoted a very jemarkable 
passage from Yajnyawalcya, one of the highest of all 
authorities, in which the sun is directly asserted to 
be Brahme, and to be the supreme soul, as is de- 
clared in all the Vedas.^ Another passage translated 
from a Veda by Mr. Colebrooke says ; " Fire is 
THAT ORIGINAL CAUSE, the SUN is that ; such too 
is that pure Brahme. Even he is the god who per- 
vades all regions; he, prior to whom nothing was 
bom ; and who became all beings, himself the lord 
of creatures." ^ A parage in the Veda, translated 
by Sir William Jones, says, " That Sun, than which 
nothing is higher, to which nothing is equal, en-> 
lightens the sky, the earth, the. lower worlds, the 

1 Asiat. Research, i. S73. ^ lb. viii. 39r. 

^ Vide supra, p. 333. ** A^iat. Reseftri^. xm. 431, 432. 



S84 MeHgm 

BOOK n. higher worlds, other worUb^ enlightens the breast, 
^"^'''^' enlightens all besides the breast/' ' In the Bhawishya 
Purana, Crishna himself sajs; ^' The sun b the god 
of perception, the eye of the universe, the cause of 
day ; there is none greater than he among the im^ 
mortal powers* From him this universe proceeded, 
and in him it will reach annihilation; he is time 
measured by instants/' I shall add but one instance 
more. There is a passage in the Vedas, which is 
xegarded by the Hindus with unspeakable venera- 
tion. It has a distinctive appdlation. It is called 
the Gayatri ; and is used upon the mightiest occasions 
of religion. It is denominated the holiest text in the 
Vedas. This extraordinary, this most sacred, most 
wonderful tctxt, is thus translafed by Sir William 
Jones ; *^ Let us adore the supremacy of that divine 
Sun, the godhead, who illuminates all, who re-creates 
all, from whom all proceed, to whom all must return, 
whom we invobe to direct our understandings aright 
in our progress towards his holy seat/',^ Another 
version of it, and somewhat different in its phraseo* 
Icgy, is given by Mr. Colebrooke, in his account of 
the first of the Vedas : ** I subjoin/' says he; " a 
translation of the jnrayer which contains it, as also of 
the preceding one, (both of which are addressed to 
the sun) for th& sake of exhibiting the Indian priests' 
confession of faith with its context : — * This new and 
excellent praise of thee, O splendid, playful Sun! is 
c^red by us to thee. Be gratified by this my 
speedi : approach this craving mind as a fond man 
seeks a wcnnan. May that sun who contemplates 
mid looks into all w<»rlds be our protector ! — Let us 

ICBDITATE ON THE ADORABLE LIGHT OF THE 

DIVINE Ruler; may it guide* our intel- 



.-J.': 



I Atwt. HMMurch. ii. 400. > Sir William Jonts'i Woffcs, W. 417. 
1 



of the Hindus. SSS 

JL.ECT5 !^ Desirous of food^ wo solicit the gift of ttie book il 
spkDdid Suii^who should be studiously worshipped. ^^^^' ^ 
Venerable men» guided by the understanding, salute 
the divine Sun with oblations and praise/''^ Con* 
strained by these and similar passages, Mr. Cole- 
brooke says ; ^ The ancient Hindu religion, as 
founded on the Indian scriptures, recognizes but cuae 
God, yet not sufficiently discriminating the creature 
from the Creator.**^ This is an important admia* 
sion, from one of the most illustrious advocates of the 
suMimity of the Hindu religion. Had he re£Lected 
for one moment, he would have seen that between 
not sufficient lyi and not^at-aU^ in this case, there can 
be no distinction.^ 

In the natural progress of religion, it very fre- 
quently happens, that the spirit of adulation an4 

} This particalar paMa|^e it is, which is pointed oat by Mr. Cole- 
brooke as the gayatri. 

« Asiat. Research, viii. 400. > lb. 397. 

« Nations, uot behind jhe Hindus in civiUsation (the roost eoUiusi* 
astic uf their admirers being judges) agree in these ideas. '< Les nations 
iavantes de TOrient^'' says Dupuis, (Origine de tons les Cultes, i. 4.) 
^ les Egyptians et les Phenidens, denx peuples qui oot la pins infltf6 alif 
les opinions religieuses du reste de Taniversy ne counoissoient d'au(its 
dieuxy chefs de I'administration du monde, que le soleil, la lune, les 
astresy et le ciel qui les renfenne, et ne chantoient que la nature dans 
laurs hynmas «t ieors tfaeogonies." The following is a curious passage : 
^< EutychiuSy apres avoir pris le Sabiisme en Cbaldee^ De la, dit il, il est 
pass^ en Egypte, de I'Egypte il fut port^ chez les Francs, c'est a dire en 
Europe, d'ou il s'etendit dans tons les ports de la Mediterran^e. , Et, 
oomme le coke du Soleil et des Etoiles, la veneration dea ancestres* 
Terection des statues, la consecration des arbres, constituerent d'abord 
i'essence du Sabiisme, et que cette espece de religion, toute bizarre 
qu'elle est, se trouva assez vite repandne dans toutes les parties du 
nonde alors connu, et Tinfecta jusqu'4 Tlnde, jusqu' k la Chine ; de 
sorte que oes vastes empires ont toujours este pleins de statues adored, 
et ont toujours donn^ ia creance la plus'foUe aux visions de Tastrologie 
judiciaire, preove iacontestable de Sabiisme, poisque f 'en est le fond, et 
le premier dogme ; la conclusion est simple, que soit par tradition, soil 
^Mtf imitation et idimtiti^ d'idees, le monde presqu' entier s'est vu,.et se 
voit encore Sabien." lb. 95. Memoires de i'Academie des Inscripitoiia» 
&c. xil. 95. 



336 Keligion 

BOOK II. hyperbole exalts admired or powerful individuals to 
^*^' the rank of gods. The name of the sus, or of some 
other divinity, is bestowed as a title, or as an epithet 
of inflated praise, upon a great prince, or conqueror.* 
Immediately the exploits of the hero are blended 
with the fimctions of the god; and, in process of 
time, when the origin of the combination is forgotten, 
they form a compound mass of inextricable and in- 
consistent mythology. Mr. Colebrooke is of opinion, 
that in the Vedas the elements and the planets alone 
are deified; that the worship of heroes was intro- 
duced among the Hindus at a later period; and 
makes a remarkable figure in the Puranas.^ 

Among the Mse refinements to which the spmt of 
a rude religion gives birth, it is worthy of particular 
remark, that abstract terms are personified, and made 
to assume the character of gods: such as, Health 
and Sickness ; War and Peace ; Plenty, Famine, or 
Pestilence. When the most general abstractions te^ 
begin to be formed, as of space, of time, of fate, of 
nature, they are apt to fill the mind with a kind of 
awe and wonder ; and appear to stretch beyond all 
things. They are either, therefore, apprehended as 
new gods, and celebrated as antecedent, and superior, 
to all the old ; or if any of the old have taken a firm 
possession of the mind, they are exalted /to the new 
dignity, and receive the name of the abstract idea 
which most forcibly engages the attention. Thus, 
among the Greeks and the Romans, Fate usurped a 
power over all the gods. The Parsee books repre- 



1 Adad, the name of the chief AssyriaD deity, was hdd by ten Syrian 
kings in succession. Micol. Damasc. ap. Josephnin, Antiq. lib. -Tii. 
cap. 5. Even among Christians, kings and great men have received all 
the general titles of the deity, lord^ m<^est^ kigkneitf exedkncCf 
grace. 

> Asiat. Research, viii. 3^8, note. 



of the Hindus. 'SST 

^ent Ormusd and Ahritnan, the Good Principle and BOOK 11. 
the Evil Principle, sometimes as independent beings ; ^"^^' ^' 
sometimes as owing their existence to something 
tibove them ; in a manner extremely resembling the 
language of the Sanscrit books respecting BAhma, 
Vishnu, and Siva. At times, however, the Persians 
express themselves more precisely. ^ In the law d£ 
Zoroaster,** says one of their sacred books, ** it is po- 
sitively declared that God [Ormusd] was created by 
Time along with all other beings ; and the creator is 
Time; and Time has no limits; it has nothing 
above it; it has no root; it has always been, and 
always win be. No one who has understanding 
wiM ever say. Whence did Time come? In tJiat 
grandeur wherein Time was, there was no being 
who could caU it creator, because it had not yet 
created. Afterwards it created fire and water, and 
from their combination proceeded Ormusd. Time 
was the creator, and preserved its authority over the 
creatures which it had produced.***I said in the be- 
ginping that Ormusd and Ahriman came both from 
Time."^ The Brahmens, on the other hand, rather 
appear to have advanced the dignity of the acknow- 
ledged divinities, so far as to make it embrace the 
extent of the abstract ideas ; and to have regarded 
them as the abstract ideas themselves. Thus Mr, 
Wilkins supposes, that Brahme represents nature; 
Brahma, matter; Vishnu, space; Siva, time. But 
this is a refinement which is very sparingly, if at all, 
introduced in any writings of the Brahmens, which 
have yet been laid open to European eyes. Direct 
contradictions of it, though plentifully diffused, are 
no proof that it is not at all a Hindu doctrine. 
Thus Chrishna, in the Geeta, says, " I am never- 

f Anquetil Du perron , Zeudaresta, ii. 344. 
VOL. I. Z 



38S Religion 

BOOK u. fittling Time, the Preserver, whose face is turned on 
^^^^' ^' all sides ;'^* a point of view in which it well agrees 
with the peculiar attributes of Vishnu. But in the 
very same discourse, Crishna says again, *' I am 
Tim#, the destroyer oL mankind,""^ in which case it 
agrees only with the character of S&va. But it b 
9tiU more remarkable that Brahma is said to have 
^^ given being to time^ and the divisions of time ;*'^ 
and that space is said to have been produced £nmi 
the ear of the first victim immolated by the gods.^ 
Nay, tiiere are passages in which the Hindus ac- 
knowledge a destiny or fate, which over-rules the 
Supreme Beings themselves* ^^ The future condi- 
tion of great beings is destined with certainty, boUi 
the nakedness of Mahadeva, and th^e bed of Vishnu, 
on a va^t serpent. What is not to be, that will not 
be ; apd if an event be predoomed» it cannot happen 
otherwise." * 

* Bfaagvat^Geeta, p. 87. < lb. p. 93. 
< iDStitutes of Menn, ch. i. 24. 

* A passage translated from the Veda bj Mr. Colebrooke, Asiat Re- 
search. vii.dM* 

* Hetopadesa, book I., Sir William Jones*s Works, vi. 7*. A personi- 
fication, and mysterious deification of some very abstract idea, as Time, 
or Space, is by no means unnatural to rude nations^ It h rema^able 
that the Scandinavians had a notion of some mysterious power, superior 
to their gods ; for after the great catastrophe, in which Odin, Thor, and 
the other deities, lose their lives, ^ comes forth the powerful, thk 
VALiAiiTi HE who oovebks Aix THINGS, from his lofty abodes, to render 
divine justice, in bis palace the just will inhabit, and enjoy delights for 
evermore.'^ (See extracts from the Edda, the sacred book of the Scan- 
dinavians, in Mallet's lotrodnct. to the Hist, of Denmark, vol. i. ch. vi.) 
That historian observes, in a style which almost appears to be copied by 
those to whom we owe the specimens of the Hindu religion, that a capi- 
tal point among the Scythian? was, tiie pre-eminence of ** One only, all- 
powerfal and' perfect being, over all the other intelligences with which 
universal nature was peopled.'' The Scandinavians, then, were oo a 
level with all that is even claimed for the Hindus. But these sane 
Scandinavians draw terrible pictures of this perfect One; describing him 
as a being who even delights in the shedding of human blood ; yet they 
calliiim, the Father and creator of men, and say, that <«he livetb and 



o/* the Hindus. SS9 

Whm the exaggerations of flattery ave in this book n.. 
manner engrailed upon the oxigioal deification of the ^^^^•^' 
elements and powers of nature ; and when the war- 
ship of heroes and of abstract ideas is incorporated 
with the whole ; then is produoed that heterogeneous 
and monstrous compound which has formed the reU- 
gious creed of so great a portion of the human race ; 
but composes a more stupendous mass in Hindustan 
than anj other country; because in Hindustan a 
greater and more powerful section of the people^ 
than in any other tsountry, have, during a long series 
of ages, been solely occupied in adding to its volume^ 
and augmenting its influence*^ ^ 

govemeth daring the ages ; he directeth every thing which is high, ana , 
every thing which is low ; whatever is great, and whatever is small ; he 
hath made the-beaven, the air, and man who is to live for ever ; and be* 
ibre the heaven or the earth existed, this god lived already with tba 
giants." Ibid. Bat what this god was, whether matter, or apace, or 
lime, the Scandinavian monuments -are too imperfect to det^mine. 

1 Bemier, one of the most intelligent and futhfal of all travellecs, who 
spent a number of years in great favour at the court of Aurengaebe, 
formed an opinion of the religion of the Hindus, with which respect was 
tittle connected ; for one of his Letters he thus entitles, ** Lettr?,.&c« 
touchant les superstitions, etranges fa^ons de foire, et doctnne det 
Indous ou Gentils de I'Hindoustan. D'ou I'on verra qu'il n'y a opinions 
si ridicules et si extravagantes dont Tesprit de I'homme ne soit capable.^ 
(Bcrnier, Suite des Memoires sur TEmpire du Grand Mogol, i. 119.) 
He appears to have seen more completely through the vague language of 
the Brahmens respecting the divinity, (a language so figurative, and 
loose, that if a man is heartily inclined, he may give it any interpreta* 
tion,) than m<Mre recent and more credulous visitors. A.fter giving a 
very distinct account of the more common notions entertained of the 
three deities, Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, he says, Tondiant ces trota 
Estres j'ai vu des Missiooaires Burop^ens qui pretcadent que les Gentils 
ont quetque id^e du mystere de la Trinity, «t qui disent qu'il est eipres* 
sement por^ dans leurs livres que ce sont trois Personnes un sen! Dieu ; 
pour moy j'ai fait assez discourir les Pendets sur cette matiere, mait iU 
Vtxpliquent ft pau/orement que je n*ai jamais pu eon^rendre netUmeat 
leur tentmewt ; j'en al meme vu quelques^uns qui disentnque se sont 
trois veritabies creatures tres parfahes qu*i)s appellant Deutas y comma 
nos andens idolatres n'ont k mon avis jamais bien expliqu^ ce quails 
entendoient par oes mots de Genius, et de Numina, qui est, je penee, U 
mdme que Ueuta ches les Indiens; il est vrai que j 'en ai vu d'autres, et 

z 2 



S40 ReHgim 

OOOK II. So little dcrmen regard incxriierenoe of thou^it; so 
^^^' ^' little are they accustomed to trace the relations of 
one set of opinions to another, and to form on any 
subject a consistent and harmonious combination of 
ideas, that while many persons of eminence loudly 
contend for the correctness and sublimity of the spe* 
culative, there is an universal agreement respecting 
the meanness, the absurdity, the foUy, of the endless 



des pltfs a^ttms, qni disoient que ces trois Etres n'estoient effecthre- 
meat qa*un meme dteu consider^ en trois fiipoii6» a a^avoir, en taotqn'U 
est Producteur, Cooservateur, et Oestructeur des choses, mais ils ne 
disoieut rien des trois personnes distlnctes en un seul Diea. Ibid, 
p. 173.— «* The history of these gods" (says Mr. Oniie, Hist, of di© 
Milit. Trans. &c. iu Indostan, i. 3,) " is a heap of the greatest absurdir 
ties. It is Eswara twisting off the neck of Brahma; it is the Sun who 
gets his teeth knocked out, and the Moon who has her fiftce beat black, 
and blue at a feast, at which the gods quarrel and fight with the spirit of 
a mob.^ In the Zendavesta, as translated by Anquetil Duperron, 
many passages are as expressive to the full of just ideas of the Divine 
Nature as any in the Vedas. The absurdities too, with which they are 
mixed, are certainly not greater, they are many degrees less, than those 
with which- the sublime phrases in the Vedas are mingled. The ancient 
magi, we are told, had a most sublime theology .r—Nunqoam adorabant 
solem : et mox addiderunt, se non adhibere aliquam adorationem soli, 
aut Uius, ant planetb, sed tantum erga solem se couvertere inter oran- 
dum. Hyde, p. 6. Je vois, ma soeur, says the Guebre in Montesquieu, 
(Lettres Persanes, Lei. Ixvii.) que vous avez appris parroi les musulroans 
i calomnier notre sainte religion. Nous n'adorons ni les astres ni les 
elemens ; et nos peces ae les ont jamais ador^ ../... Ils leurs ont 
settlement rendu m\ culte religieux, maisinferieur,comme 4 des ouvrages 
et des manifestationft de la divinity. Beausofare, with his usual critical 
sagacity, said, in regard to the pictures dr%wn by Hyde^ Pooocke, and 
Prideaux, of the religious system of the niagi, Rien de plus beau, nen de 
plus ortliodoxe que ce systeme. Je crains seulement qu'il ne le soil un 
peu trop pour ces tems-la. Hist, de Manich. lib. ii. ch. ii. Voltaire 
thus expresses himself; ** On ne peut lire deux pages de rabominable 
iatras attribue k ce Zoroastre, sans avoir piti^ de la nature humaine. 
Nostradamus et le medecin des urines sont des gens raisonables, en com- 
parison de cet energumeue. £t cependant on parle de lui, et on en par- 
lera encore.*' He hadliowever rematked a little be£6re, that the book 
contained good precepts of morality, and asked, " Comment se pourrait- 
il que Zoroastre eut joint tant d'enormes iadaises k cet beau precepce de 
s'abstenirdans les doutes si on ferabien ou mal ?*' Dictionnaire Pbilo- 
sopliiqae, Mot Zoroastre. 



of the Hindus. '341 

ceremonies, in which the practickl part of the Hindu BOOK ii. 
religion consists. For the illustration of this part of. ^^^^' ^/ 
the subject, I shall content myself with a reference to - 
the documents in the appendix.^ Volumes would 
hardly suffice to depict at large a ritual which is 
more t^ediou^, minute, and burthensome; and en- 
grosses a greater portion of human life, than any 
which has been found to fetter and oppress any 
other portion of the human race. 

No circumstance connected with a religious sys- 
tem more decidedly pronounce on its characti^r, than 
the ideas which it inculcates respecting merit and 
demerit, purity and impurity, innocence and guilt. " 
If those qualities which render a man amiable, re* 
spectable, and useful; if wisdom, beneficence, self- 
command, are celebrated as the chief recoromen* 
dation to the favour of the Almighty ; if the produc- 
tion of happiness is steadily and consistently repre- 
sented as the most acceptable worship of the Creator; 
no other proof is requi^te, that they who framed, 
and they who understand this religion^ have arrived 
at high and refined notions of an All-perfect being. 
But whqre, with no more attention to morality, 
than the exigencies and laws of human nature £>rce 
upon the attention of the rudest tribes, the sacred 
duties are made to consist in frivolous observances, 
there, we may be assured, the religious ideas of the 
people are barbarous. The train of thought which 
tends to this conclusion is extremely similar to that 
which gives birth to other deformities in the reli- 
gious system of ignorant minds. From the imbeci- 
lities which usually accompany exalted station, it is 
found, even when society is considerably improved, 

» Sec Note C. at the end of the vohime. - 



342 Religion 

BOOK II. that assiduous attendance upcHi the person of the great 
^^^^^ man or prince, and unwearied contrivances for the ex- 
pression of devotion and respect, are the path whidi 
leads the most surely to his attention and favour/ To 
the rude mind, no other rule suggests itself for pay- 
ing court to the Divine, than that for paying court 
to the Human Majesty; and as among a barbarous 
people, the forms of address, of respect, and com- 
pliment, are generally multiplied into a great Yasnetj 
of grotesque and frivolous ceremonies, so it happens 
with regard to their religious service. An endless 
succession of observances, in compliment to the god, 
is supposed to afford him the most exquisite delight; 
whUe the common discharge of the beneficent duties 
of life is regarded as an object of comparative indif- 
ference. It is unnecessary to cite instances in sup- 
port of a representation, of which the whole bis^ 
tory of the religion of most nations is a contiswai 
proof. 

Even those inquirers who have been least aware of 
the grossness of the Hindu rdUgion, have seen that 
wretched ceremonies constituted almost the whbte of 
its practical p^rt. The precepts, which ar^ lavished 
upon its ceremomes, bury, id their exorbitant ma^ 
the pittance bestowed upon all other duties taken 
together. On all occasiions ceremonies meet tht 
attention as the pre-eminent duties of the Hindu. 
The holiest man is always he, by whdm the cere- 
monies of ins religion are most strictly perforfiaed 
Never among any other pecfie did the ceremonial 
part of religion pievail over the moral to a greater, 
probably to an equal extent^ Of the many rules 

1 That one campaign in the coort is better than two in the 6eld, has 
|>assed into ^ proverb onder the monafchies of modem Europe. 

2 



of the Hindus. 843 

of -conduct prescrRted to the householder, almost the^oOR u. , 
whole concern religious^ observances.^ Beside the 
general strain of the hol^r text, many positive deck- 
rations ascribe infinite , superiority, to rites and oe>' 
remomes, above morality. ** Devotion," says Menu, 
<< is equal to the performanee of all duties; it is 
divine knowledge in a Brahmen ; it is defence of the 
people in a Cshatriya; devotion is the business of 
trade and agriculture in a Vaisya; devotion is 
dutiful service in a Sudra. By reading each day 
as much as posnble of the Veda, by performing the 
five great sacraments, and by forgiving all injuries, 
even sins of the highest degree shall soon be 
effaced."^ In the following list of conditions, a 
small space is allotted to useful virtue. ^* By injur* 
ing nothing animated, by subduing all sensual ap- ^ 
petites, by devout rites ordained in the Veda, and by 
rigorous mortifications, men obtain, even in this life, 
the state of beatitude."^ " It is through sacrifices," 
says the Calica Purana, ** that princes obtain Uiss, 
heaven, and victory ov« their enemies."^ 

In coinceiving the honours with which the divine 
powers should be treated, it is supposed that there 
are certain qualities with which it is holy or unholy 
to approach them. As there are certain pollfitions 
with which it would be held disrespectful to ap 
proach an earthly superior^ the same sentiment, i^ 
usual, is transferred to the heavens ; and the notion 



i The perfermaoce (e. g.) of the five dfdiy secrametits, of -which so 
ene, not even that which is liilseLjF rendered hospiUditj, has, prope^ 
speaking, any reference to the duties of humanity. A few general pre- 
cepts respecting the acquisiCion of the means of subsistence, in the modes 
preacrtbed to the different orders of the Ifindos, are in fsLCt ef the oere- 
roonial and religious cast. Laws of Menu, ch. iii. and iv. where the du* 
ties of the householder are described. 

• Laws of Menu, ch. zi. 336, &c. s had, cb. vi. 7S. 

« Asiat. Res. ▼. 371. 



344 Rellgi&n ^ 

2KX)Kn.of a religious impurity is eng^eddered. This is a 
CnAP.g. circumstance of considerable importance* By the 
nature of the particulars^ to which the belief of reli- 
gious purity and impurity is attached, a criterion is 
afforded of the mental qualities which the Divine 
Being is supposed to possess. The causes of impu- 
rity among the Brahmens are exceedingly numerous; 
that they are proportionally strange, a fe^ instances 
will evince, " When a child has teethed," says the 
law of Menu, " and when, after teething* his head 
has been shorn, and when he has been girt with his 
thread, and when, being full grown, he dies, all his 
kindred are impure : oil the birth of a child, the law 
is the same/'^ Among a variety of other instances 
it is declared, that he who has touched a Chandala, a 
woman in her courses, an outcast, a new-bom child» 
a corpse, or one who has touched a corpse, is impure 
A Brahmen who has touched a human bone is im- 
pure.^ The rules of purification, which form a re- 
markable part of this subject, are not less exorbitant 
in their number, or extravagant in thdr forms. On 
the death of a kinsman, the modes of purification are 
various, according to various cases : one, which we 
may select as an example, is prescribed in the follow- 
ing words ; *' Let them eat vegetable food without 
factitious (that is, only with native) salt ; let them 
bathe for three days at intervals; let them. taste no 
flesh-meat; and let them sleep apart on the 
ground."® " Should a Brahmen touch a human bone 
moist with oil, he is purified by bathing; if it be not 
oily, by stroking a cow, or by looking at the sun, 
having sprinkled his moiith with water."* All those 
functions of the body, by which, its offensive dis* 



I institutes of Menu, ch. v. 58. * lb. 85, 87. 

3 lb. 73. ' * lb, 87. 



of the Hindus. 345 

charges are effected, or its vital- powers coimnu* book ii. 
nicated, afford occasion for the ceremonies of purifi- ^^^^ 
cation.^ ** Oilj exudations,'' says' the law of Menu, 
f^ seminal fluids, blood, dandruff, urine, feces, ear- 
wax, naiUparings, phlegm, tears, concretions on the 
eyes, and sweaty are the twelve impurities of the hu« 
man frame, and for cleansing these earth and water 
must be used."^ " He who carries in any manner 
an inanimate burthen, and is touched by any thing 
impure, is cleansed by making an ablution, without 
laying his burden down."*^ " He who has been 
bitten by a dog, a shakal, or an ass, by any car- 
nivorous animal frequenting a town, by a man, a 
horse, a camel, or a boar, may be purified by stop- 
ping his breath during one repetition of the gtiyatri."^ 
After the rules for the purification of living bodies, 
follow precepts for the purification of things inani- 
mate. Fot each of a great many species, a separate 
mode is prescribed. Land, for example, is cleansed, 
by sweeping, by smearing with cow-dung, by sprink- 
ling with cow's urine, by scraping, or by letting a 

\ The Hindus, among whom the id^ of delicacy, in regard either to 
physical or moral objects, appears never to have taken rise, describe 
these occasions of purification, in the plainest, or in other words the 
grossest terms. There is a kmg series of ppeoepts about voiding the exr 
crements, (Laws of Menu, ch. iv. 45 to 52): And for purification after- 
wards, *' Let each man,'' says the law, " sprinkle the cavities of his 
body, and taste water in doe form when he has discharged urine or feces : 
First, let him thrice taste water; then twice let him wipe his month, but 
a woman or servile man may once respectively make that ablution;'' 
(Ibid. ch. V. 138, 139.) ** Having vomited, or been purged, let him bathe 
and taste clarified butter: for him ^o has been connected with a wo- 
man, bathing is ordained by law;'/ (Ibid. 144.) In one instance there 
is a curious contrariety: It is declared, (Ibid. 108.) *^ A woman whose 
thoughts have been impure is purified by her monthly discharge." Yet 
'tbds same peculiarity of the female constitution is a cause of impurity; 
for which she is separated by bathing. Ibid. 66. 

« Laws of Menu> ch. v. 134, 135. ^ Ibid. 143. 

« Ibid, xi/ 200. 



"346 Religmu 

BOOK TI. cow pass a day and a night on it* ** The purificap 
^'^''•^' tion ordained for all sorts of liquids, is hy stirring 
them with cusa grass ; for doths f(dded, by spri^* 
ling them with haUowed water ; for wooden utensils, 
by planing them. The purification by sprinkling is 
<nrdained for grain and cloths in laige quantities ; but 
to purify them in small parcds, such as a man may 
easily carry, they must be washed."* These in- 
stances, selected merely as a smaU specimen of a 
great whole, will suffice to show what moral ideas 
are conveyed and inculcated in the notions of puri^ 
and impurity comprised in the religion of the 
Hindus. 

As the purifications, to likewise the penances, 
prescribed by the various systems of religion, afford a 
remarkable indication of the qualities really ascribed 
to the object of worship. All penance consists in suffer- 
ing. In the same d^ree in which the ol^ect of worAiq> 
is supposed to be delighted with penance, in the same 
degree he is delighted with human sufiering ; and so 
&r as he delights in suffering, for its own aaite, so 
far he is a malignant being ; whatever epithets, in 
the, spirit of flattery, his votaries may confer upon 
him. It is natural to a rude and ignorant mind to 
regflird the object of ks worship as naKgnaiit« 
Things appear great or little by comparison. Amid the 
incessant efforts which are made to ascend another 
step in adulation, after nil the epithets of gre a tness 
and honour are lavished upon the god, to make his 
greatness and honour still higher, by contrast, every 
epithet of meanness and contempt is heaped by the 
worshipper upon himself and his kind. The same is 
the case with bis happinese: it w9i appear the 

> Laws of Menu, ch. ▼. 124. t l\»L 115» 11& 



of the Hindus. 847 

greater, the higher it is raised above that of other BOOK il. 
beiD^ ; rf course, the deeper the misery of other ^^' 
bdings. Hence it is, that the prayers and praises, ad* 
dressed to the deity by rude nations, abound with 
the most hyperbolical expressions of human misery 
as well as human depravity ; that in the religion of 
rude minds pleasure in general bears a strong mark 
of reprobation, and the voluntary creation of pain is 
the strongest of all recommendations to him on 
whom the issues of life depend. In the language of 
the Greeks and Romans, the gods were envious of 
human happiness;^ just as the proud and haughty 
mind of the earthly despot, the archetype and model 
according to which, in certain stages of knowle<i^« 
the idea of the heavenly is regularly formed, likes 
not that the happiness of. other peof^ should ap« 
proach to thai of himself, and reaps a pleasure from 
their pain, both as enhandng the idea of his own 
happiness, and lessening the sense of his misery.^ 
*' A sin, involuntarily comndtted," says the sailed 

> Solon asks Croesus why be interrogates him about fauroan happiness 

— 0. Kpufft, txtfo/Anot fit TO dfioy voa lov f^otapet hou rapce^fitZis I Herodot. Ub. I* 
top. XXMl. 

« ^ Tis eiident we most receive a greater or less satasfactioii or onear 
siness from refleeting on our own condition and circumstaqces^ in pro^ 
portion as they appear more or less fortunate or unhappy; in proportion 
to the degrees of ridses and power, and merit, and reputation, wtiich we 
think ourselveis possessed of. Now, as we seldom judge of objects from 
their intrinsic value, but form our notions of then^ from a comparison 
withodier objects; it follows, that according as we obser\'e a' greater or 
lew shai^ of happmess or misery in others, we most make an estimare cf 
our own, and feel a consequent pain or pleasure. The misery of another 
gives us a more lively idea of our happiness, and his happiness of our mi- 
sery. The former, therefore, produces delight; and the latter uneadf- 
nese/' Hume's Treatise of Human Nature, ii. 174. If this piincipie 
have a real existence in human nature; and if the rode mind invariably 
fiishions the divine mind after itself, the belief, so wonderfully common, 
that the Divine Being is delighted with the self-inflicted torment of his 
worshipper^ is sufficiently accounted for. 



348 Religion 

BOOK I£. text of Menu, " is removed by repeating certain 
^"^^' ^' texts of the scripture, but a sin committed inten- 
tionally, by harsh penances of different sorts/'* The 
foDowing account of the reason for performing pe-^ 
nances, has the effect of exposing to religious anti- 
pathy all those {persons who are affected with a 
bodily infirmity. " Some evil-minded persons/' says 
the same sacred volume, ** for sins comniitted in 
this life, and some for bad actions in a preceding 
state, suffer a morbid change in their bodies : a 
stealer of gold from a Brahmen has whitlows on his 
nails; a drinker of spirits, Uack teeth; tlie slayer 
of a Brahmen, a marasmus ; the violator of his pre^ 
ceptor's bed, a deformity in the generative organs ; a 
malignant informer, fetid ulcers in his nostrils; a 
false detractor, stinking breath ; a stealer of grain, 
the defect of some limb ; a mixer of bad wares with 
good, some redundant member ; a stealer of dressed 
grain, dyspepsia ; a stealer of holy words, or an un- 
authorised reader of the scriptures, dumbness; si 
stealer of clothes, leprosy ; a horse stealer, lameness ; 
the stealer of a lamp, total blindness ; the mischievous 
extinguisher of it, blindness in one eye ; a delighter 
in hurting sentient creatures, perpetual illness ; an 
adulterer, windy swelling in his limbs : Thus, accord- 
ing to the diversity of actions, are bom men despised 
' by the good, stupid, dumb, blind, deaf, and de- 
formed : Penance, therefore, must invariably be per- 
formed for the sake of expiation, since they whd 
have not expiated their sins, will again spring to 
birth with disgraceful marks."^ " Any twice-born 
man, who has drunk spirit of rice through perverse 
delusion of mind, may drink more spirit in flame, and 

I Institutes of Menu, ch. li. 46. ^ Jb. 48 to54i 



ef the Hifidus. 849 

atone for his oflTence by severely burning his body ; book ir. 
or he may drink boiling hot, until he die, the urine ^^^^- ^' 
of a cow, or pure water, or milk, or clarified butter, 
or juice expressed from cow-dung."* A curious 
reason is assigned for the heinous guilt ascribed to 
the drinking of intoxicating liquors by a Brahmen ; 
Because, ** stupafied by drunkenness, he might fall on 
something very impure, or might even, when in- 
toxicated, pronounce a secret phrase of the' Veda, or 
mi^t do some other act which ought not to be 
done."^ ** If a Brahmen kill by design a cat, or an 
ichneumon, the bird chasha, or a frog, a dog, a lizard, 
an owl, or a crow, he must perform the ordinary pe- 
nance required for the death of a Sudra;"^ as if the 
crime of killing a man were the same with that of 
killing a frog. *^ Should one of the twice-born eat 
the food of those persons with whom he ought never 
to eat, or food left by a woman or a Sudra, or any 
prohibited flesh, he must drink barley gruel only for 
seven days and nights."'* ** Having tdken goods of 
little value from the house of another man, he must 
procure absolution by performing the penanc^ santa- 
pana, or by eating for a whole day the dung and 
urine of cows mixed with curds, milk, clarified butter, 
and water boiled with cusa grass, and then fasting 
entirely for a day- and a night."* The penances fot 
venereal sin, and the description of its various species^ 
are unfit to be transcribed.^ Something might be 
said for penances, if they were attached solely to 
inoral offences, and proportioned in painfulness to the 
motives to offend ; because the eflScacy of the punish- 
ment which is reserved to a subsequent life is com- 

1 Institutes of Menu, cb. xi. 9i, 9«. « Ibid. 97. 

3 Ibid 132. ♦ Ibid. 153. * Ibid. 165, 213. 

fi See the Institutes of Menu, ch. xi. 171 to 179, where every species 
of sexual abomination is deliberately specified. , 



850 Religion 

BOOK II. moDly annihilated by remotenass. Hour much of 
^_^^|[_^ this useful character belongs to the penances <rf the 
Hindus, a few passages will, desdoae. *^ He, who 
has officiated at a sacrifice iox outcasts^ or burned the 
corpse of a stranger, or performed lites to destroy the 
innocent/' (a strao^e association of crimes) **niay 
expiate his guilt by three prajapatyjt penances."'^ 
. '* A total fast for twelve days and nights, by a pe* 
nitent with his organs controlled, and his mind atten- 
tive, is the penance named paraca, which expiates all 
degrees of guilt." ^ He who for a -whole month eats 
no more than thrice eighty mouthfuls of wild grains* 
as he happens by any means to meet with them* 
keeping his organs in subjection, shall attain the 
same abode with the regent of the moon."^ " Six- 
teen suppressions of the breath, while the holiest of 
texts is repeated with the three mighty words, and 
the triliteral syllable, continued each day for a month, 
absolve even the slayer of a Brahmen from his hidden 
faults/'^ ^^ A priest who should retain in his me- 
mory the whole Bigveda would be absolved firom 
guilt, even if he had slain the inhabitants of the 
three worlds, and had eaten food from the foulest 
hands." ^ To such a degree are fantastic ceremonies 
exalted above moral duties ; and so easily may the 
greatest crimes be compensated, by tlie merit of 
riiual, and unmeaning services.^ 

1 Institutes ofMenu, chap. xi. 198. ** When a twice-bom man perfbrms 
the penance prajnpati, he must for three days eat only in the morning ; 
for three days only in the evening ; for three days food unasked^ but pre- 
sented to bioi; and for three more days, nothing.** Ibid. 212. 

* Ibid. 216. J Ibid. 221. « Ibid. 214. ^ Ibid. 262. 
^ C'est une superstition tres dangereuse que le pardon des crimes at- 
tache a certaines ceremonies Voux pensez que Dieu oubliera votre 

homicide^ si vous vous baignez dans uii fleuve» si vous inimolez une bre- 

/ bis noire, et si on prononce sur vous d^s paroles. Un second homicide 

vous sera done pardonn^ au meme prix, et ainsi un troisieme, et cent 

mcortres ne vous couteroat <|ue cent brebis noires et oeut ablutions I 



of the Hindus. SM 

But the excess to which religion depraves the mo- BOOK n. 
ral sentimeBts of the Hindus is most remarkably «x- ''^^' 
amplified in the supreme, the ineffable merit which 
they ascribe to the saint who makes penance his trode» 

Repairing to a forest^ with no other utensils Of 
effects, than those necessary in making oblations to 
consecrated fire: and leaving all property, and all 
worldly duties behind him, he is there directed to live ^ 
on .pure food, on certain herte^, roots, and fruit, which 
he may collect in the forest, to wear a black antelope's 
hide, or a 'vesture of bark, and to suffer the hairs of 
his head, his beard, and his nails to grow conti^iuelly. 
He is commanded to entertain those who may visit 
his hermitage with such food as he himself may u^e^ . 
to perform the five great sacraments, to be constantly 
engaged in reading the Veda ; patient of all extremi* 
ties, universally benevolent, with a mind intent on 
the Supreme Being ; a perpetual giver, but no re- 
ceiver of gifts ; with tender affection for all animated 
bodies. '' Let him not eat the produce of ploughed 
land, though abandoned by any man, nor fruits and 
roots produced in a town, even though hunger oppress 

him. Either let him break hard fruits with a 

stone, or let his teeth serve as a pestle. — Let him slide 
backwards and forwards on the ground ; or let him 
stand a whole day on tiptoe ; or let him continue in 
motion rising and sitting alternately ; but at sunrise, 
at noon, and at sunset, let him go to the waters, and 
bathe. In the hot season let him sit exposed to five 
fuce&ifouT blazing around him with the sun abme ; 
in the rains let him stand uncovered, withottt even a 
mantle, where the clouds pour the heaviest showers ; 
in the cold season, let him wear humid vesture; and 

Faites tnieuxyiniserables hu mains, point de meprtras, et point de brebis ' 
BoirM. Voltaire, Diction. Philos. au mot Superstition. 



852 Religioh 

BOOK II. enduring harsher and harsher mortifications, let him 
^^^^' ^- dry up his bodily frame. Let him live without exter- 
nal fire, without a mansion, whoUy ^ent, feeding on 
roots and fruit, sleeping on the bare earth, dwelling at 
the roots of trees. From devout Brahmens let him 
receive alms to support life, or from other house- 
keepers of twice-born classes, who dwell in the forest* 
Ory if fie has any incurable disease, let him advance 
in a straight path, towards the invincible north eastern 
point, feeding on water and air, till his mortal frame 
totally decay, and his soul become united with tiie 
Supreme.'' ^ 

In conformity with these principles are formed 
those professors of mortification and piety, who are 
known under the modem name of Fakeers, and pre- 
sented to Europeans a spectacle which so greatly sur- 
prised them. Of all the phenomena of human na- 
ture, none appears at first view^ more extraordinary 
than the self-inflicted torment of the holy saints of Hin- 
dustan. Some of them keep their hands closed till they 
are pierced through by the growth of the nails. Others 
hold them above their heads, till the power of the 
arms is extinguished. They make vows to remain in 
the standing posture for years. Three men were seen 
by Fryer, whose vow extended to sixteen years. One 
of them had completed his dreadful penance ; of the 

' Institutes of Meno, ch. ?i. 3 to 8, and 16 to 32. There is a certaiii 
stage ill the progress from extreme barbarity to some degree of intellect 
tual improvement, in which worship by self-inflicted torments seems na- 
turally to suggest itself. Thus, the priests and people of Mexico come 
next, perhaps, to the Hindus, though certainly at a prodigious distance 
behind them, in the devotion of pain and suffering. *' It makes one 
shudder/' (says Clavigero, book vi. sect. 22.) *' to read the austerities 
which Jthey exercised on themselves. They mangled their flesb, as if it 
had been insensible, and let their blood run in such profusion, that it ap- 
peared to be a superfluous fluid of the body.'' Their fastings, watdiingSy 
and other efforts of abstinence, were pushed to the greatest extremities. 
Ibid. 

5 



of the Hindus. 358 

rest, one had passed five years in torment, the other book ir. 
three. Their legs were prodigiously swelled, and Chap. 6> 
deeply ulcerated; and became at last too weak to 
support- their bodies, when they leaned on a pillow 
suspended from a tree. Others turning their heads 
to gaze at the heaven over their shoulder, remain 
fixed in that posture, till the head can no longer be 
ii6stored to its natural position, and no aliment, except 
ifi the liquid state, can pass down their throats. 

The ceremony, commanded, by Menu, ** of sitting, 
in the hot season, between five fires,'' cannot be con^ 
ceived without horror. A yogee, or penitent, actually 
seen by Fryer, had resolved to undergo this penance 
iSwr forty days, at a public festival, where an immense 
ooncourse of spectators were assembled. Early on the 
morning, after having seated himself on a quadrangu- 
lar stage, he fell prostrate, and continued fervent in 
his devotions, till the sun began to have considerable 
power. He then rose, and stood on one leg, gazing 
steadfastly at the sun, while fires, each large enough, 
says the traveller, to roast an ox, were kindled at the 
four comers of the stage, the penitent counting his 
beads, and occasionally, with his pot of incense, 
throwing combustible materials into the fire to in* 
crease the flames. He next bowed himself down in 
the centre of the four fires, keeping his eyes still fixed 
upon the sun. Afterwards, placing himself upright 
on his head, with his feet elevated in the air, he stood 
for the extraordinary space of three hours, in that in- 
verted position ; - he then seated himself with his legs 
across, and thus remained sustaining the raging heat 
of the sun and of the fires, till the end of the day. 
Other penitents bury themselves up to the lieck in the 
ground, or even wholly below it, leaving only a little 
hole through which they may breathe. They tear 
themselves with whips; they repose on beds of iron 

VOL. I. 2 a 



S54 Relighn 

BOOK II. spikes ;^ thqr chain themselves for life to the £bot of 
^^^^' ^' a tree : the wild imagination of the race appears in 
short to have been racked to devise a sufficient variety 
of &ntastic modes of tormenting themselves. The 
extent to which they carry the penance of fasting is 
almost incredible. They fix their eyes on the blaz- 
ing sun till the power of vision is extinguished.^ The 
following description, in the drama entitled Sacontala^ 
how much soever partaking of tiie hyperbolical cha* 
racter of oriental poetry, conveys a most remarkaMe 
image of the length of time, the patience, and steadi- 
ness, with which the devotees of the forests must have 
remained immoveable in their solitary positicms. 
** You see," says one of the personages of the drama» 
" in that grove a pious Yogee, motionless as a pollard, 
holding his thick, bushy hair, and fixing his eyes on 
the solar orb. — Mark; his body is covered with a 
white ants* edifice, made of raised clay ; the skin of a 
snake supplies the place of his sacerdotal thread, and 
part of it girds his loins ; a number of knotty plants 

1 See a carious description in the Asiat. Res. ▼. 49, of a fokeer, seen aC 
Benares by Mr. Duncan^ who had used this bed for 35 years. 

« See Fryer's Travels, pp. 102, I03.*-Sonnerat's Voyage, i. 181, 149, 
153, 176. — Hamilton's Voyage to the East Indies, i. 874. — Voyage d« 
Tavemier, iv. 118. Mr. Richardson, in his Arabic and Persian Dic- 
tionary, under the word Fakeer, says, '' Every invention of perverted in- 
leenuity is exhousted in deforming and distorting nature." And lir. 
Wilkins (Note 113, subjoined to his translation of the Bbagvat-Geeta) 
aays, " The word zeal, in the vulgar acceptation, signifies the volontaiy 
infliction of pain, the modes of doing which, as practised to this day by 
the zealots of India, are as various as they are horrible and astonishing*" 
Bernier, who describes most of the penances alluded to in the text, meo- 
tions their standing on their hands, with the head down, and the feet up; 
^ D'autres qui se tenoient les heures entieres sor leurs mains sans bran- 
ler, la tete en has et les pieds en haut, et ainsi de je ne spat combiea 
d*autres sortes de postures tellement contraintes et tellemeut diffidlcsy 
que nous n'avons de bateleurs qui les pdssent imiter ; et tout cela, ce 
iemble, par devotion comme j'ai dit, et par motif de religion, ou on n*ea 
tfpfturoit seulement deconvrir Tombre." Lettre des Gentilt de TflindoB* 
ttaiiyp. 153, 154. 



of tht Hindus. 855 

encirde and wound his neck ; and surrounding birds' BOOK m 
nests almost conceal his shoulders.** * The same vene- ^^^^' ^* 
Table character is thus farther described in the Bhag* 
7at-6eeta; "The Yogee constantly exerdseth the 
spirit in private. He is recluse, of a subdued mind 
and spirit ; free from hope, and fi^ee from perception. 
He planteth his own seat firmly on a spot that is un« 
defiled, ndther too high, nor too low, and sitteth upon 
the sacred grass which is called coos, covered with a 
skin and a cloth. There he, whose business is the 
restraint of his passions, should sit, with his mind 
fixed on one object alone, in the exercise of his devo^ 
tion for the purification of his soul, keeping his head^ 
his neck, and his body, steady, without motion, his 
eyes fixed on the point of his nose, looking at no 
other place ardund. The man who keepeth the out- 
ward accidents from entering his mind, and his eyes 
fixed in contemplation between his brows; who maketh 

1 SaciHilala, Act ni. in Sir William Jones's Works. One of the Mw- 

hommedaD travellers, whose voyages are described by Renaudot, says of 
these recluses, ^* They for the most part stand motionless as statues, 
with their faces always tomed to the son. I formerly saw one in the 
posture here described, and returning to India about sixteen years after- 
wards, I found him in the very same attitude, and was astonished he had 
not lost his eyesight by the intense heat of the sun/' Renaudot's ancient 
Account of India and China, p, 3S. Bemicr describes them thus; ^' On 
en voit quantity de tout nuds assis ou coudi^s les jours et les nuits sur 
les cendres, et assex ordinairement dessoos qoelques uns de ces grands 
arbres, qui sont sur les bords des Talabs on reservoirs, ou bien dans des 

galeries qui sont antour de leur Deoras on temples d'idoles II n'y 

a Megere d'enfer si horrible a voir que ces gens*]a toat nuds avec leur 
peau noire, ces grands cbeveux^ ces fuseanz des bras dans la posture que 
j'ai dit) et ces longues ongles entertilles. Lettres des Gentils de lliin* 
doustan,'' p. 151. Orme accounts in part at least, and that vety satis&o- 
torily, for these astonishing efforts of patience and self-denid. ** The 
many temporal advantages which the Brahmens derive from their spiri- 
taal authority, and the impossibility of being admitted into their tribe, 
have perhaps given rise to that number of Joguees and Facquires, who 
torture themselves with such various and astonishing penances, only to 
gain the same veneration which a Brahmen derives from his birth.** 
Orme's Hist. Milit. Trans. Indostan, i. 4. 

2 AS 



356 S^gion 

BOOK 11. the fareadi to pass through both his nastrib aKke in 
expiraticM) and inspiration, who is of subdued facidtie8» 
mind, and understanifing ; the Yogee, who thus con* 
stantly exerciseth his soid, obtaineth happiness incor- 
poreal and supreme.** ^ This pure state of meditation, 
which obtains the name of devotion^ is even more ex- 
idted than that of penance. ** The Yogee,'* says 
Crishna, '' is more exalted ths^n Tapaswees, those to- 
taries who afflict themselves in peribrming penance, 
respected above the learned in science, and*' (which is 
worthy of peculiar regard,) *^ superior to those who are 
attached to moral w(H*kp." ^ '^ Be thou at all times,** 
says this supreme god to Arjoon in another places 
'^ employed in devotion. The fruit of this surpasseth 
all the rewards of virtue pointed out in the Veds, in 
worshippings, in nMHrtifications, and even in the gifts 
of charity.** « 

It is abundantly ascertained that the Hindus at 
one time, and that a time comparatively recent, * 
were marked with the barbarity of human sacrifices. ^ 
It even appears that the remainder of that devotional 
service is now in existence. When it is {M-oposed to 
resist, as exorbitant, the demands of government, the 
Brahmens erect, what they denominate a koor, 

1 Bhagvat-GeeU, p. 60, 63. • Ibid. p. 67. ^ Ibid. p. 76. 

* It is agreed among the Sanscrit schoLars » that the Puranas are xno- 
dern, compared with the Vedas and other ancient monuments of the 
Hindus. Mr, Colebiooke is of opinion that the worship of heroes is 
altogether unknown to the author of the Vedas ; though it was eyidentl j 
part of the popular belief at the time the Puranas were composed. A 
facrifice, therefore, enjoined in the Puranas, must have prevailed at a 
pretty late period. 

> See a translation of what is denominated ^ The Sanguinary chap- 
ter*' of the Calica Purana, by Mr. Blaquiere, Asiat. Res. v. 371., and 
Wilkins's Hetopadesa, note M9, and p. Sll . In the Bhawishya Purana, 
it is declared that the head of a slaughtered man gives Dai^gai, a thousand 
times more satts^Eu^tion than that of a. buffalo. This sacrifice however 
ie forbidden in the Brahma and the Bhagawat Puranas. Asiat. Ret. iii. 
p. 960. 



of the Hindus. $57 

which is a drcahr pile of wMd, wHh a cow, or an BOOK IL 
old woman on the top of it. If urged to extremity ^^*^** *' 
they set fire to the pile, and consruHie the tictim, a sa* 
crifice by Which they ^te un^wtood to involve their 
oppressor iii the deepest gmlt. * The British Go- 
vernment has interfered to prevent the sacrifice of 
cMlck'en by throwing them t6 the *arfes in the 
Ganges.* 

Though the progress of improvemeidt h^ broug^ht 
into comparatire disuse the mode of' seeking d(^n€( 
favour by the sacrifice of a fellow creature, horrid 
rites, which have too near an affinity with it, are still 
the objects of the highest veneration, tt is one of 
the grandest achievements of piety, for individuals to- 
sacrifice themselves in honour of the gods. There 
are solemn festivals, in which the images of certain 
deities are Carried in procession in vast ponderous 
machines, denominated raths, or chariots, drawn* by a 
multitude of devotees and priests; when it is customary 
for numbers of the congregated people to throw 
themselves under the wheels, and even fathers, ittrd 
mothers, with their children in their arms. The 
chariot passes on, as if no impediment existed, and 
crushing them to death, is supposed to convey them 
immediately to heaven.^ The practice of sacrificing 

1 An instance of tbii, in which an old woman was the Tictim, was at- 
tempted at Benares, so late as the year 1788. See the account by Lord 
Teignmouth, Asiat. Res. v. 333. 

* Papers, relating to East India affairs, ordered by the House of 
Commons to be printed, June 3, 1813, p. 437. 

3 A distinct description of this human sacrifice, performed at the feast 
of Juggernaut, is to be found in the voyage, (i. 131) of Sonnerat, who 
was an eye-witness. It is also desaibed by that faithful traveller 
Bernier, Lettre sur les Gentils de THindoustan, p. IdS. It attracted in 
a peculiar degree the attention of the Rev. Dr. Buchanan : see his 
work, entitled, Christian Researches in Asia. The Missionaries have 
given us several descriptions, published in the Traasaetions of the Mis* 
sionary Societies. 



358 MeHgi&n 

BOOK n. themsdyes in the flames is a noted ceremony of the 
^'^''' ^' Hindus, It is sometimes executed with circumstances 
of studied atrocity ; the victim striking himself in 
front with his sabre, so as to lay open his bowds to 
the spectators, tearing out part of his liver, cutting it 
off with the salnne, giving it to a relation or by* 
stander, conversing all the time with indifference 
apparently coipplete, then with unchanged coun-, 
tenance leaping into the flames, and exiHring without 
a movement ^ In some parts of India a Brahmen de- 
votes himself to death, by eating till he expires with 
the surfeit. ^ On great solemnities, the votaries strike 
off their own heads, as a sacrifice to the Ganges, ^ and 
many drown themselves in the hallowed streams.^ Of 
the modes adopted by the Hindus of sacrificing 
themselves to the divine powers, none however has 
more excited the attention of the Europeans, than the 
burning of the wives on the funeral piles of their 
husbands. To this cruel sacrifice the h^;hest virtues 
are ascribed. *^ The wife who commits herself to 
tiie flames with her husband's corpse, shall equal 
Arundhati, and reside in Swarga ; accompanying her 

1 Such was the instaDce witnessed by one of the Arabian travellers of 
ftenaudoL See Ancient Relations, p. 80. 
* Orroe, on the Govemment and people of Indostan, p. 434. 

3 See Ridiardson's Dictionary at the word Fakeer. 

4 The place where the Jumna and the Ganges meet, is a spot of pe- 
culiar sanctity. ** Some of the victims of superstition/' says Dr. Ten- 
nanty ^annually drown themselves at the junction of the streams; and 
this being the most acceptable of all offerings, it is performed with much 
solemnity. The rapidity with which the victim sinks, is regarded aTa 
token of his favourable acceptance by the god of the river. To secure 
the good inclination of the deity, they carry out the devoted person to 
the middle of the stream, after having fastened pots of earth to his feet. 
The surrounding multitude on the banks are devoutly contemplating the 
ceremony, and applauding the constancy of the victim, who, animated 
by their admiration, and the strength of his own faith/ keeps a steady 
and resolute countenance, till be arrives at the spot, when he springs 
from the boat, and is instantly swallowed up> amidst universal acdama* 
tions.'' Indian Recreations^ ii. 250. 



of tht Hindus. 859 

husband, she shall reside so long in Swai^, as are BOOK n. 
the thirty-five millions of hairs on the human body. ^ ^°^^' ^' 
As the snake*catcher forcibly drags the serpent from 
his earthy so, bearing her husband from hell, with 
him, she shall enjoy the delights of heaven, while 
fourteen Indras reign. If her husband had killed a 
Brahmana, broken the ties of gratitude, or murdered 
his friend, she expiates the crime."^ Tliough a 
widow has the alternative of leading a life t>f chas- 
tity, of piety, and mortification, denied to the 
pleasures of dress, never sleeping on a bed, never ex- 
ceeding one meal a day, nor eating any other than 
simple food, it is held her duty to bum herself along 
with her husband ; and ^' the Hindu legislators," says 
Mr. Colebrooke, ** have shown themselves disposed 
to encourage'* this barbarous sacrifice.^ 



1 Tlie Brahmens are alwa}r8 audacious enough to form a peremptory 
opinion. We have seen^ before, that they never hesitated to assign a 
fixed nomber to the veins and arteries of the human body, though tliey 
are totally unacquunted with dissection. Tliey here assigp, with per- 
fect confidence^ a determinate number to the hairs on the human 
body. 

* Sanscrit text, quoted by Mr. Colebrooke, in his discourse on the 
duties of a faithful Hindu wife, Asiat. Bes, iv. 308. The custom of 
burning wives on the funeral piles of their husbands, was common to the 
Hindus with the northern nations. See Jamieson's Scottish Dictionary^ 
ad verb. BayU'Fire.-^The principal among the wives of a Scandinavian 
chief accompanied him to the funeral pile. Mallet. Introd. Hist. Den- 
mark, vol. i. c. IS.— The Scandinavians did not scruple to expose their 
children. Ibid. — Robertson, who informs us that the wives of the chiefs 
of the Natchez, an American tribe, were burnt along with them at theii 
death, says that the custom arose from the excessive veneration in which 
they were held, as brothers of the sun, and representatives of the deity; 
and that from this impulse, the wives, as well as the domestics who 
shared the same fate, welcomed death with exaltation. Hist, of Amc^ 
rica, ii. 140. 

3 Asiat. Res. iv. 210. See the whole of that discourse, wliere a nun>- 
ber of authorities are collected. The circumstances of the transaction 
can be so easily cc^nceived ; that, horrid as they are, I have not thought 
proper to describe them. The prayers and ceremonies are exactly of the 
usual character. See an account by fiemier, of several cases of which 



»eo Religion 

BOOK II. Such are the acts» by which, aocordiDg to the 
^°^^'^' Hindu religion, the favour of the Almighty Power 
is chiefly to be gained ; such are the ideas respecting 
purity and merit, which it is calculated to inspire. 
Yet ^ any one coi^cludes that the Hindus were un* 
aqquaint^d with the ordinary precepts of morality^ he 
i^riU be greatly deceived. ^* By Brahmens/* says the 
law of Menu,^ ^^ placed in the four orders, a tenfol4 
system of duties must ever be sedulously practised.; 
Content; returning good for evil; resistance ta 
sensual appetites ; abstinence from illicit gain ; puri- 
fication ; coercion of the organs ; l^nowledge of scrip- 
ture; knowledge of the supreme spirit; veracity; 
and freedom from wrath." ^ In-* this enumeratiao of 
duties, though a large proportion is allowed to acts 
purely ceremonial and useless ; yet some of the 
noblest virtues are included. ** Action," says the 
same sacred code, ^^ is either mental, verbal, or cor- 
poreal. Devising naeans to appropriate the wealth of 
other men, resolving on any forbidden deed, andcon^ 
ceiving notions of atheism oir materialism, are the 
three bad acts of the mind : scurrilous language^ 
falsehood, indiscriminate backbiting, and useless tat- 
tle, are the four bad acts of the tongue : Taking 
effects not given, hurting sentient creatures without 
the sanction of law, and criminal intercourse with 
the wife of another, are three bad acts of the body ; 
and all the ten have their oj^osites, which are good 
in an equal degree."^ Though there is some- 
thing extremely whimsical in the consequence as- 
cribed to the following acts of injustice, yet they are 
with great propriety forbidden : " He who appro- 
he was an eye-witness, (Lettjre sur les Gentils de rHindoustan, p. 131); 
and a variety of ca&es in the works of the Missionaries, Ward, and 
Dubois. 

1 Institutes of Menu, cb. n. 91, 92, > Ibid. ch. xii. 3, 5,6, 7. 



of the Hindus. 861 

priates to hid own use, the carriage, the bed, the seat,.BOOK ii. 
the wdl, the garden^ or the house of another man, ^^^^' ^' 
who has not delivered them to him, assumes a fourth ~~~"^ 
part of the guilt of their owner.'* ^ The following 
observations are in a pure and elevated strain of mo- 
rality : ** Even here below an unjust man attains no 
felicitj ; nor he whose wealth i»roceeds from giving 
&lse evidence ; nor he, who constantly takes delight 
in mischief. Though oppressed by penury, in con^* 
sequence of his righteous dealings, let him never give 
his mind to unrighteousness ; for he may observe the 
speedy overthrow of iniquitous and sinful men. In* 
iqiuity^ committed in this world, produces not fruit 
immediately, but, like the earth, in due season ; and^ 
advi^ncing by little and little^ it eradicates the man who 
committed it. Yes ; iniquity, once committed, fails not 
of producing fruit to him who wrought it. He grows 
rkik for a^ while through unrighteousness ; then he be* 
hoMs good things ; then it is that be vanquishes his 
fees; but he perishes at length from his whole root 
upwards* Let a man continually take pleasure la 
truth, in justice, in laudable practices, and in purity ; 
let him chastise those, whom he may chastise, in a 
leg^ mode; \^t him keep in subjection his speech^ 
his arm, and his appetite : wealth and pleasures, re-* 
pugnant to law, let htm shun ; and even lawful acts, 
which may cause future pain, or be offensive to 
mankind." ^ 

Sir William Jones, whom, it is useful to quote^ 
because his authority may have influence with those 
whose opinions I am constrained to controvert, ob- 
serves, that " the principles of morality are few, 
luminous, and ready to present themselves on every- 

1 Ijutitates of Mmia, ch. iv. 203. ^ Ihid. 170 to 177. 



862 Religion 

BOOK II. occasion." * Descanting on the rudeness, and igno- 
'^^' ^' ranee, of the Scythian nations ; ** of any philosophy,** 
he says, " except natural ethics, which the rudest 
society requires, and experience teaches, we find no 
more vestiges in Asiatic Scythia, than in ancient 
Arabia/'^ He was not surprised to find natural 
ethics, where not a vestige of philosophy was found ; 
because '* natural ethics," are what ^* the rudest 
society requires, and experience teaches.^ If we 
search a little further, we shall discov» that nations 
differ less from one another in the knowledge of 
morality, and of its obligations, (the rules of morality 
have been taught in all nations in a manner remarkably 
similar), than in the degrees of steadiness, with whidi 
they assign the preference, to moral, above other act». 
Among rude nations it has almost always been found, 
that religion has served to degrade morality, by ad- 
vancing to the place of greatest honour, those ex- 
ternal performances, or those mental exercises, whicb 
more immediately regarded the deity ; and with 
which, of course, he was supposed to be more pecu- 
liarly delighted. On no occasion, indeed, has religion 
obliterated the impressions of morality, of which the 
rules are the fundamental laws of human society : mo- 
rality has every where met with the highest applause; 
and no where has it been celebrated in more pompous 
strains, than in places where the most contemptible, 
or the most abominable rites, have most effectually 
been allowed to usurp its honours.^ It is not so 

> Disooorse on the Fhilotopfay of the Asiadcs, Asiat. Res. iv. 166. 

* Discourse on the Tartars, Asiat. Res. ii. 33. 

* Few states of society are more low and degraded than that of the 
Mnssalmans in modern Egypt. Hear what is said of their ethics : ** On 
remarqae chez les prindpanx chefs de la religion, nomm^ en ^gjpta 
chetks de la loi, I'astuce commime it tons les prfetres, q^ui, pour mieaz 
dominer, chercbent i s'emparer de Tesprit des hommes. Lear oooverr 



rf the Hindus. d6a 

much, therefore, by the mere words in which mora- BOOK lU 
lity is mentioned, that we are to judge of the mental ^^*^'' ^' 
perfections of different nations, asT by the place which ' 
it clearly holds in the established scale of meritorious 
acts. In a moment *of hyperbolical praise, it may 
even receive a verbal preference to ceremonies ; as in 
one passage of the Institutes of Menu : ** A wise 
man should constantly disdiarge all the moral duties, 
though he perform not constantly the ceremonies of 
religion; since he falls low, if, while he performs 
ceremonial acts only, he discharge not his moral 

sation est remplie de belles sentences morales, et de grandes images 
poetiqoes qn'ils pillent dans les livres Arabes, c'est toat leur savoir; ou 
ne doit pas chercber en eux d'autres connoissances sur la politique, les 
sciences, &c. ; ils n'en soup^onnent pns plus I'existence que rutilit^/' 
(De TEgjpte par le Gen. Reynier, p. 63.) Voltaire remarks, with that 
felicity with which he sometimes touches an important truth ; '* La reli- 
gion de ce Siamois nous prouve que jamais legislateur n'enseigna nne 
mauvaise morale. Voyez, lecteur, qne celle de Brama, de Zoroastre, d% 
Noma, de Thaut, de Pythagore, de Mahomet, et memo du poissoii 
OanneSy est absolument la m^me. J'ai dit souvent qu'on jeterait des 
pierres h nn homme qui viendrait pr^cher une morale relftch^.'' Diction** 
naire Philosophique, an mot Savmonocodoh. 

Garcilasso de la Vega giTes os a list of the moral sayings of a cele.i^ 
brated Inca of ancient Peru, named Pachacatec, of which the following 
are a specimen : 

" Better is it, that thou sbooldst be envied by others for being goodj^ 
than that thou shooidst envy others because thou art bad. 

** Envy is a cancer, which eats and gnaws into the bowels of the 
envious. 

'* Drunkenness, anger, and folly, are equally mischievous; differing 
only in this, that the two first are transient and mutable, but the third 
permanent and continuing. 

** Adulterers, who take away the good reputation and honesty of ano- 
ther family, are disturbers of the common peace and quiet, and are as bad 
as thieves and robbers, and therefore to be condemned to tlie gnllows 
without mercy. 

" A truly nobl^ and courageous spirit is best tried by that patience 
which he shows in the times of adversity. 

<< Impatience is the character of a poor and degenerate spirit, and of 
one that is ill Uught and educated.'' Royal Comm^taries, book IV. 
cb. xuviw 



964 Meligion 

BOOK II. duties." * Yet in the entire system of rules 
'^^' ^' cerning duty, the d^;ree of stress which is laid upoii 
moral acts, may, as in the case of the Hindus, hear no* 
comparison to the importance wfaich is attached to 
useless or pernicious ceremonies. Such a maxim aa- 
that which has just been quoted, can be regarded as 
but of little value, when it is surrounded by nuineroiMr 
maxims of the following tendency ; *^ Not a mortal 
exists more sinful than he, wIh^ without an oMation 
to the manes or gods, desires to enlarge his own flesh 
with the flesh of another creature."^ '' From the 
three Vedas, the lord of creatures, incomprehensibly 
exalted, successively milked out the three measures of 
that ineffable text, beginning with the word tad and 
entitled, savitri, or gayatri ; whoever shall repeat, 
day by day, for three years, without n^Ugence^ that 
sacred text, shall hereafter approach the divine es- 
sence, mov« as freely as air» and assume an ethereal 
Ibrm.** * •* Studying and comprehending tiie Veda, 
practising pious austerities, acquiring divine know- 
ledge, command over the organs of sense and acti(Hi» 
avoiding all injury to sentient creatures, and showing 
reverence to a natural and spiritual father, are the 
chief branches of duty which ensure final happiness."' ^ 
^ Even three suppressions of breath made according 
to the divine rule, accompanied with the triverbal 
phrase, and the triliteral syllable, may be cooddered 
as the highest devotion of a Brahmen ; ibr as the' 
dross and impurities of metallic ores are consumed by 
fire, thus are the sinful acts of the human organs 
consumed by suppressions of the breath.** * ' If we 
examine that highest degree of merit to which the 
imagination of the Hindu can ascend^ that of the 

' Institutes of Menu^ ch. iv. 204. « n>. v. 5f. 

3 lb. ii. 77, 82. ♦ lb. xii. 85. ^ lb. vi. 70, 71. 



oftheHindw. 965 

Sftnyassi, or professor of austere devotikn, we skall BOOR ii. 
find it to cMsiat in an absolute renunciation of all '"^^'^' 
moral duties, and moral affections. ^ Exemption 
from attachments, and affection for children, wife, and 
home f ^ nay, ^' the abandonment of all earthly at- 
tachments," ^ f(Mrm a necessioy part of that perfeo 
tion after which he aspires. 

It is by no means unnatural for the religion of a- 
rude people to unite opposite qualities, to preach the 
most harsh austerities, and at the same time to 
encourage the loosest morality* It may be matter of 
controversy to what degree the indecent objects 
employed in the Hindu worship imply depravity oi 
manners; but a religion which subjects to the ejext of 
its votaries the grossest images of sensual pleasure^ 
and renders even the emblems of generation ol^ects 
of worship 7 which ascribes to the supreme God an 
immense train of obscene acts ; which has these en- 
graved on the sacred cars, pourtrayed in the temples^ 
and presented to the people as objects of adoration, 
which pays worship to the Yoni, and the Lingam, 
cannot be regarded as favourable to chastity*^ Nor 

1 Bhagvat-Geeta, p. 102. * Institntet of Menu, cb. vi. Z%, 

* See a fanciful accoant of the origin of this worship by Mr. Paterson, 
Asittt. Res. viii. 54. His description of the moral effects of this soper* 
fltition is more to our purpose : '' It is probable,** says be, ** that tb« 
idea of obscenity was not originally attached to these symbols ; and, it is 
Kkely, that the inventors themselTos might not have foreseen the dis* 
orders which this worship would occasion amongst mankind. Profljgai^ 
eagerly embraces what flatters its propensities, and ignorance follows 
blindly wherever example excites : it is therefore no wonder that a gene* 
ral corruption of manners should ensue, increasing in proportion as ths 
«tistance of time involved the original meaning of the symbol in darkness 
and oblivion. Obscene mirth became the principal feature of the 
popular superstition, and was, even in after times, extended to, and 
intermingled with, gloomy rites and bloody sacrifices. An beterogeoeous 
mixture which appears totally irreconcileable, unless by tracing the steps 
which led to it. It will appear that the ingraftine of a new symbol, upon 
the old superstition, occasioned this strange medley. The sect of Vishnu 
was not wholly free from the propensity of the times to obsesoe rites; it 

$ 



$66 lUUgian 

BOOK II. can it be supposed, when to all these drcumstanoed 
^^^^' ^' is added the institution of a number of girls, attadied 



Lad been united in interest with that of Siva, in their league against the 
sect of Brahma, as was expressed by an image, called Har-Heri, half 
SiTa, and half Vishnu. This union seems to have oontinned till the 
' time when an emblem of an abstract idea, having been erected into an 
object of worship, introduced a revolution in rehgion, which had a violent 
and extended efect upon the manners 1M opinions of mankind. It was 
then that a gloomy superstition arose, which spread its baneful influeooa 
with rapidity amongst manidnd ; which degraded the Deity into an im- 
placable tyrant ; which filled its votaries with imaginary terrors ; which 
fMiescribed dreadful rites; and exacted penances, mottiBcatioos, ami 
expiatory sacrifices.^' (Ibid. p. 55.) Se6 also a picture of these religiotta 
immoralities by Bemier, Lettre sur les Gentils, pp. 139, ISO). But the 
writer who, above all others, has furnished superabondant evidence of 
the immoral influence of the Hindu religion, and the deep d^rmvilj 
which it is calculated to produce, is Mr. Ward, in his " View of the His* 
tory, literature, and Religion of the Hindoos." From the facts which 
he records in great detail, the following are the results : " The chai^cteis 
of the gods, and the licentiousness which prevailf at their festivals, and 
abounds in their popular woriu, with the enervadng nature of the cli- 
mate, have made the Hindoos the most efieminate and corrupt people on 
earth. I have, in the course of this work, exhibited so many proo6 of 
this fact, that I will not again disgust the reader by going into the sub- 
ject. Suffice it to say, that fidelity to marriage vows is almost unknown 
among the Hindoos ; the intercourse of the sexes approaches very near to 
that of the irrational animals .... Bat to know tlie Hindoo idolatry, as 
it is, a person must wade throogh the filth of the thirty-six pooranlis, 
and other popular books^he must read and hear the modem popular 
poems and songs— he must follow the Bramhttn through his midnight 
orgies, before the image of Kalee, and other goddesses; or he moat 
accompany him to the nightly revels, the jatras, and listen to the filthj 
dialogues which are rehearsed respecting Krishna and the daugh^n of 
the milkmen; or he must watch him, at midnight, choking with the mud 
and waters of the Ganges a wealthy relation, while in the delirium of m 
&ver; or, at the same hour, while murdering an unfaithful wife, or a 
supposed domestic enemy ; or he must look at the Bramhfin hurrying the 
trembling half-dead widow round the funeral pile, and throwing her 
like a log of wood by the side of the dead body of her husband, tyva% 
her and then holding her down with bamboo levers, till the fire has 

deprived her of the power of rising and running away This 

system of heathenism commnntcates no purifying knowledge of the 
divine perfections, supplies no one motive to holiness while living, no 
comfort to the afflicted, no hope to the dying; but, on the cootrfuy, 
excites to every vice, and hardens its followers in the most flagrant 
crimes." (IntrodOctory Bemarks, pp. 94, 95.) 



of the Hiniui. 367 

to the temples, whose busiiiess is dancmg and pros- BOOK n. 
titution> that this is a virtue encouraged by the reli- ^°^^' ^\ 
gion of the Hindus. 

Another contrast to the tortures and death nvhich 
the religion of the Hindus exhorts them to inflict 
upon themselves, is the sacredness which it imprints 
upon the life of animals. Not only are the Hindus 
prohibited the use of animal food» except at certain 
peculiar sacrifices; even the offerings to the gods 
consist almost entirely of inanimate ol^'ects; and to- 
deprive any sensitive creature of life« is a heinous 
transgression of religious duty. Many of the inferior 
creatures^both animate and inanimate, are theobjects of 
religious veneration ; such, in particular, are the cow, 
the lotos, and cusa grass. Nor, in this enumeration, 
must the dung and urine of the cow be forgotten ; 
things so holy as to be of peculiar efficacy in the 
oeremonies of purification. To whatever origin we 
may ascribe this strange application of the religious 
principle, it has at least been very widely diffused. 
It is known that many negro tribes worship animals 
and reptiles; and that they carry the solicitude for 
their preservation to a still more extravagant pitch 
than even the Hindus; punishing with death those 
who hurt them even casUaUy.^ The sacred cha- 
racter in Egypt of the ox, and of many other ani- 
mals, is too familiarly known to require any proof. 
The cow was oracular, and sacred among the Amo- 
nians.^ Not only cows, but horses, eagles, lions, 
bears, were divine animals among the Syrians.^ 
The Egyptian priests respected as sacred the life of 
all animals, and animal food seems to have been in- 

1 Edward's Hist, of tbe West lDdies,.ii. 77. 4to. Ed. 
* Bryant's Aoalysis of Aadent Mythology, i. 333. 
9 Ivneiao, Oe Syria Dea. 



368 . Median 

BOOK n. terdicted not less in Egypt than in HindiMtan^^ At 
^'^'^' an early period, the Greeks^ and even the Ronians, 
punished with death, the killing, of an ox*' The 
worshq) of this species of quadnipeds appears indeed 
to have been common to all the idolatrous nations 
from Japan to Scandinavia.^ That, in India, it was 
a worship directed to no moral end, is evident upon 
the slightest inspection. To renounce the ben^ta 
which the inferior animals are fitted by nature to 
render to man, is not humanity, any more than 
swinging before an idol, by an iron hook, forced 
through the muscles of the back, is the virtue of self- 
command. And that this superstition took not its 
rise from a sensibility to the feelings of animated 
creatures, is evident from the barbarous character of 
several of the nations where it prevails; from the 
proverbial cruelty suffered by the labouring' ammals 
of Hindustan; and from the apathy with wfai^ 
human beings are left to expire by hunger and dis- 
ease, while reptiles are zealously tended and fed.^ 

1 The priests of "Egypt, says Herodotus, aocount it unholy to kill any 
thing which has life, saving what they use in sacrifice; Herod. Hist, 
lib. 1. cap. 140: and Porphyry informs us that it was not till a late pe- 
riod of their history that animal sacrifices were introduced. De Abstio. 
lib. ii. et iv. 

* Ab hoc antiqui manus ita abslinere voluerunt, ut capite sanxerint, 
si quis occidisset. Varro. De Re Rustica, lib. ii. cap. 5. 

^ See the satisfiictory proofs adduced in the very learned and instruc- 
tive^ though erroneous work, of Dupuis, Origine de tous les Cultes, liv.iii. 
ch. viii. 

* <^ Although the killing an animal of this'' (the ox) ''kind is by all 
Hindus considered as a kind of murder, I know no creature whose suffer* 
ing^ equal those of the labouring cattle of Hindustan.'' (Buchanaa, Jour- 
ney, &c. i. 167.) See also Ward on the Hindus, Introd. p. xliii. An 
hospital for the sick poor, says Dr. Tennant, was never known in Ifidia, 
before the establishment of the British ; though there were fi>r d<^, cats, 
&c. (Indian Recreations, L 73.) The aathors of the Universal History 
inform us gravely, on the authority of Ovington, that the Hindus have a 
care fotr the preservation of fleas, bugs, and other venoiBf which suck thm 



of the Umdut. 369 

Religion consists of two great doctrides, that con- BOOK IT. 
ceming the nature and service of God; and that ^^^^* ^' 

blood of man : for in a hospital near Surat, built for their reception, a 
poor nmn is hired now and then to rest all night upon the hot or bed 
where the vermin are put; and lest their stinging should fbroe him to 
take his flight before morning, he is tied down to the place^ and there lies 
for them to glut themselves with human gore/' (Modem Univ. Hist, 
vi. 069.) Anquetil Duperron, who describes a temple near Surat, fuU 
of those sacred animals, adds : ** La vue de Fhopital des animaux, en- 
tretenu par des etns raisooables avec tout I'ordre, le soin, ie zele mem* 
que Ton pourroit exiger d'eux, s'ii etoit question de leur semblable, et 
cela meroe dans un pays, ou il n*y a d'etablissemens publics, ni poor 
les malades, ni pour les vieitlards ; la vo dW pareil hopitai awroit do 
quoi etonner, si I'on ne s^avoit pas que la nature se plait aux disparates 
On Asie comme en Europe. (Voyages aux Indes Orient. Disc. Prelim. 
Zendavesta, i. ocdxii.) ** The Gentoos, though they will not kill their 
neat, make no oonscience to work tbom to death, allowing thorn hanUy 
food to keep them alive. Neither are they less inhuman towards their 
tick, a woman being brooght to die among the tombs ia my sight.'' 
Fiyer^s Travels, ch. v. sect. 3. See to the same purpose, the Abb6 
Dubois, p. 139 ; Ward on the Hindoos, Introd. p. Iv. It is worth ob- 
serving that Milton, the universality of whoso knowledge is not the least 
remarkable particular of his wonderful mind, was acquainted with tho 
disgusting superstition of letting the vermin devour the man : ** like tho ' 
vermin,'' says he, ^''of an Indian Catharist, which his fond religion for- 
bids him to molest." Tetrachordon, MiHon's Prose Works, ii. 12S, 8vo. 
Edit. Tenderness to animals was a part of the religion of Zoroastor. 
Wo aro informed in tho Sadda, that he obtained from God a view of tho 
regions of infernal torment, where he saw a number of kings, and among 
the rest one without a foot. Re begged to know the reason, and God 
said to him; ** that^vidied king never peri^)rmed but one good action 
in his life. Ho saw, as he was going to the chase a dromedary tied at 
too great a distance from its provender, endeavouring to eat, but unahla 
to reach it: ho pushed the provender towards it with his foot. I have 
placed that foot in heaven; all the rest of him is here." Voltaire, Essai 
inr les Moeurs et TEsprit de Nations, ch. v. Tlie following, Porphyry 
tells us, (De Abstin. lib. iv. p. 431) were laws of Triptolemus, 1. To 
honour our parents; 3. To offer nothing to the gods hut the fruits of tho 
earth ; 3. Never to hurt animals. ** The inhabitants of Miniana," (a 
place not far fiom Sego^ in the heart of Africa) ** eat their enemies, and 
strangers, if they die in the country. They eat the flesh of horses. But 
such is their veneration for the cow, that she is never killod." Park's 
last Mission to Africa, p. 166. 

Mr. ilichardson (see his Dissertation on Eastern Manners, p. 16) 

deJkioB the authenticity o( the firagmenu of the Zendavesta collected by 

Anquetil Duperron, on account of *< the uncommon stupidity," as he is 

pleased to express it, << of the work itself." Yet it is in a strain remark* 

VOL. I. 2 B 



3T0 ReKgioH 

BOOR n. concerning the nature and destination of the human 

^^^'^' soul, in the complicated superstition of the Hindii8» 

the first presented many questions which it needed a 

considerable accumulation of evidence to solve. Of 

the latter, a just idea may be speedily conveyed. 

It is well known that the metempsychosis, or the 
transmigration of the soul into various orders of 

•bly reseml>Uog that of the Vedas ; the same sublime pndses bestowed 
upon the Divinity; saperstitioDs equally gross; discourses eqfuallj 
childish. We must not however on this account question the antheiw 
ticity of the Vedas and the Poranas, though we must renounce the vttl> 
gar beUef of the great wisdom of the Brahmens. In truth, the stupidity, 
as Mn Richardson calls it, of the Zendavesta, and its remarkable simi» 
larity to the sacred books of the Hindus, is the most striking proof of its 
authenticity. There is the strongest reason to conclude that the ancient 
. Magi, and the ancient Brahmens, were people very much upon a level ; 
and that the fame of Zoroaster for wisdom is no better founded than that 
of the Indian sages. There is a radical difference, he says, between the 
language of the Zendavesta, and the modern Persian (Ibid.) But the 
same is the case with the Sanscrit, which Sir William Jones thinks, from 
this circumstance, can never have been vernacular in Hindustan., (See 
Disc, on the Hindus, Asiat. Researches, i. 483.) The languagei he 
says, of the Zendavesta has many words, which a modem Persian 
could not pronounce, but there are ^many words in the German 
language which an Englishman or Frenchman cannot pronounce, 
though the German is the basis of the languages of both. The 
Zendavesta, he says, contains Arabic words; but it contains Arabic 
only as the Greek contains Sanscrit. In fact, the identities which can 
be traced in all languages is one of the most remarkable circumstances 
in the bistoiyof speech. Of the Vedai, a man. who had undvalled. op- 
portunities of information informs us, <' They contain nothing important 
or rational'. In fact, they have nothing but their antiquity to recom- 
mend them. As to auy thing further, they include all the absurdities of 
Hindu paganism, not only such as it has originally been, but also the 
pitiful details of fables which are at present current in the country, re- 
lating to the ftmtastical austerities of the Hindu hermits, to the meta- 
morphoses of Vishnu, or the abominations of thci lingam. The fourth of 
them, called Atharvana-veda, is the most dangerous of all for a people 
so entirely sunk in superstition, because it teaches the art of magic, or 
the method of injuring men by the use of witchrafb and incantation.'' 
(Description, &c. of the people of India, by the Abb6 Dubois, p. 109«) 
Even the gayatri^ the most holy of all holy things, is an assemblage, 
says the Abb^, of unmeaning terms, *< uninteliigible to the Brahmeas 
themselves. I have never met with any one who could give me a tolor- 
able eiplication of it.'' lb. p. 79. 



Bf the Hindus. 871 

being, reviving in one form, when it ceases to e;^t BOOK u. 
in another, is the tenet of the Hindus- This is a ^"^''- ^' 
theory well calculated to present itself to the mind of 
the nide inquirer, when first excited to stretch his 
views beyond the present term of sensation and 
action. The vegetable life, which expires in the 
plant, in autumn, revives in the seed in spring. The 
sluggish worm, which undergoes a species of death, 
and buries itself in a tomb of its own formation, 
springs again to life, a gay and active creature, as dif- 
ferent in appearance, as in appetites and powers. 
Every thing on earth is changed, nothing annihilated ; 
and the soul of the man who expires to day, revives 
in something else, to which life is at that instant im- 
parted. 

Some very obvious, and very impressive appear- 
ances must have suggested the notidn of the me- 
tempsychosis, since it is one of the most ancient, and 
one of the most general of all religious opinions. 
** No doctrine," says Dupuis, " was ever more uni- 
versally diffused ; none claims an origin so ancient. 
It reigned in the East, and in the West, among rude 
nations, and polished nations ; and it ascends to anti- 
quity so high, that Burnet ingeniously declares, one 
would believe it to be descended from heaven; so 
much it a|^)ears without &ther, without mother, and 
without. descent."^ The Brahmens grafted upon it» 
in their usual way, a number of £euitastic refinements* 
and gBve to their ideas ^on this subject, a more syste- 
matic form than is usual with those eccentric theo- 
logians. They describe the mind as characterized 



1 Dapoisy Origpw^de toas \m Cnitrea, torn. ii. pw. % p. 181 ; whtie 
the reader will find authorities to prove the antiquity and dtAuion of 
this peculiar doctrine. See too the learned Beausobre, Hist, de Manicb. 
torn. ii. liv. vii. ch. 5, sect. 4. For its existence among the Mencaas, 
■ee Clavigero, book vi. sect. 1. . _ . 

2BS 



878 Relipan 

BOOK 11. by three qualities, goodness, passion, darkness. Ac- 
^°^^' ^' cording as any soul is distinguished by one or ano- 
ther of those qualities in its present life, is the species 
of being into which it migrates in the life to come. 
Souls endued with goodness attain the condition of 
deities ; those filled with passion receive that of men; 
those immersed in darkness are condemned to that 
of beasts. Each of these conditions, again, is divided 
into three degrees, a lower, a middle, and a higher. 
Of the souls distinguished by darkness, the lowest 
are thrust into mineral and vegetable substances, 
into worms, reptiles, fishes, snakes, tortoises, cattle; 
shakals; 'the middle pass into elephants, horses, 
Sudras, MlecTias, (a word of very opprobrious import, 
denoting men of all other races not Hindu,) lions, 
tigers, and boars ; the highest animate the forms of 
dancers, singers, birds, deceitful men, giants, and 
blood-thirsty savages. Of the souls who receive 
their future condition from the quality of passion, the 
lowest pass- into cudgel players, boxers, wrestlers, 
actors, those who teach the use of weapons, and those 
who are addicted to gaming and drinking ; the mid- 
dle enter the bodies of kings, men of the fighting 
class, domestic priests of kings, and men skilled in 
the war of controversy; the highest become gand- 
harvas, (a species of supposed aerial spirits, whose 
business is music,) genii, attending superior gods, 
together with various companies of apsarases, or 
nymphs. Of the souls who are characterized by the 
quality of goodness, the lowest migrate into hermits, 
religious mendicants, other Brahmens, such cnrders of 
demigods as are wafted in airy cars, genii of the 
signs and lunar mansions, and Daityas, another of 
their many orders of superior spirits; the middle 
attain the condition of sacrificers, of holy sages, 
deities of the lower heaven, genii of the Vedas, 



of the Hindus. S7S 

regents of stars, divinities of years, Pitris, and Sad* book n. 
hyas, two oth^ species of exalted intelligences ; the -^^^* ^' 
highest ascend to the condition of Brahma with four 
faces, of creators of worlds, of the genius of virtue, 
and the divinities presiding over the two principles 
of nature.^ Besides this general description of the 
future allotment of different souls, a variety of par- 
ticular dooms are specified, of which a few may be 
taken as an examjde* *^ Sinners in the first degree,** 
says the ordinance of Menu, *' having passed through 
terrible regions of torture, for a great number of 
years, are condemned to the following births at the 
close of that period. The slayer of a Brahmen must 
enter the body of a dog, a boar, an ass, a camel, a 
bull, a goat, a sheep, a stag, a bird, a Chandala, or a 
Puccasa* He, who steals the gold of a priest, shall 
pass a thousand times into the bodies of spiders, of 
snakesr and camelions, of crocodiles, and other aquatic 
monsters, or of mischievous blood-sucking demons. 
He who violates the bed of his natural or spiritual 
father, migrates a hundred times into the forms of 
grasses, of shrubs, with crowded stems, or of creeping 
and twining plants, carnivorous animals, beasts with 
sharp teeth, or cruel brutes."^ After a variety of 
other cases, a general rule is declared, for those of tlie 
four castes who neglect the duties of their order: 
'' Should a Brahmen omit his peculiar duty, he shaU 
be changed into a demon, with a mouth like a fire- 
brand, who devours what has been vomited; a 
Cshatriya, into a demon who feeds on ordure and 
carrion ; a Vaisya, into an evil being who eats puru- 
lent carcases ; and a Sudra, who neglects his occupa* 
tions, into a foul embodied spirit, who feeds on lice." ' 



t Institutes of Mena, ch. sii. 34, 40 to 51. • U>« 54 to 58. 

» lb. 71, 72. 



$7^ Meltgion 

BOOK 11, The reward of the most exalted piety, of the mort 

' profound meditation, of that exquisite abstemiousness 

which dries up the mortal frame, is peculiar : Such a 

perfect soul becomes absorbed in the Divine essence, 

and is for ever exempt from transmigration.* 

We might very easily, from the known laws of hu- 
maii nature, conclude, notwithstanding the language 
held by the Hindus on the connection between future 
happiness and the virtue of the present life, that re- 
wanls and punishments, very distant and very ob- 
scure, would be wholly impotent against tem])tations 
to crime; though, at ^ the instigation of the priests, 
tfcey might engage the people in a ceaseless train of 
wretched ceremonies. The fact corresponds most 
exactly with the anticipation. An admirable wit- 
ness has said, ** The doctrine of a state of future 
rewards and punishments, as some persons may 
plead, has always been supposed to have a strong in- 
fluence on public morals : the Hindoos not only have 
this doctrine in their writings, but are taught to con- 
sider every disease and misfortune of life as an un- 
doubted symptom of moral disease, and the terrific 
appearance of its close-pursuing punishment. Can 
this fail to produce a dread of vice, and a desire to 
merit the favour of the Deity? I will stiU farther,"" 
he adds, " assist the objector ; and inform him, that 
the Hindoo writings declare, that till every immoral 
taint is removed, every sin atoned for, and the mind 
has obtained perfect abstraction from material ob- 
jects, it is impossible ' to be re-united to the great 
spirit ; and that, to obtain this perfection, the sinner 
must linger in many hells, and transmigrate through 
almost every form of matter.** Our informant then 
declares; ** Great as these terrors are, there is no- 

1 Institutes of Menu, cb. xii. 195. 



of the Hindus* S7A 

thing more palpable than that, with most of the BOOK li. 
Hindoos, they do not weigh the weight of a feather, ^^^' 
compared with the loss of a roopee. The reason is 
obvious: every, Hindoo considers all his actions as 
the effect of his destiily; he laitients, perhaps, his 
miserable fate, but he resigns himself to it without 
a struggle, like the malefactor in a condemned cell." 
This experienced observer adds, what is still more 
comprehensive, that the doctrine of future rewards 
a^d punishments has, in no situation, and among, no 
people, a power to make men virtuous.) 

' " To this/* he says, " may be added, what must have forced itself 
on the observation of every thoughtfal observer, that, in the absence of 
the religious prindpld, no outward tenors, especially those which are 
iovisible and future, not even bodily sufierings, are sufficient to make 
men virtuous. Painful experience proves, that even in a Christian 
country, if the religions principle does not eiist, the excdlence and the 
rewards of virtue, and the dishonour and misery attending vice, may be 
held up to men for ever, without making a single convert." Ward, 
f' View, 8cc. of the Hindoos," Introd. p. Ixzxiv. Here, however, Mr. 
Ward ought to have explained what he meant by the ** religious princi- 
ple," by which different persons mean very different things. This was 
- the moie necessary, that, having taken away all efficacy from the doc- 
trine of future rewards and punishments, he strips religion of all power 
over the Kves and actions of men, except in as far as good effects may be 
expected from the ** religious principle," which, whatever else it may not 
be, is at any rate, in his estimation, not the expectation of future rewards 
and punishments. 



S76 Mannen 



CHAP. VII. 
Manners. 

BOOK n. By the manners of a nation are understood the pe- 
"^^* culiar modes in which the ordinary business of human 
life is carried on. The business itself is every where 
essentially the same. In all nations men eat and 
drink ; they meet, converse, transact^ and sport toge- 
ther. But the manner in which these and other 
things are performed is as different as the nations are 
numerous into which the race is divided. 

So much of the entire business of life, among the 
Hindus, consists in religious services, that the delinea- 
tion of their religion is a delineation of the principal 
branch of their manners. 

The singular distinctions, attached to the different 
dasses, present another remarkable feature in the man- 
ners of this people. The lower orders, in other coun- 
tries, are often lamentably debased; in Hindustan 
they are degraded below the brutes. With the single 
exception of the Vaisya caste, to whom is appro- 
priated the business of agriculture and of barter, tlie 
whole of the productive classes, according to the 
standards of law and religion, are vile and odious, 
unworthy to eat, to drink, or to sit with a member of 
the classes above them. 

There are four remarkable periods into which, 
with respect to the three honourable classes, human 
life is divided. Of these periods ; or orders, as they 
are denominated by the Hindus; the first is that 
of the student ; the second, that of the householder ; 



of the Hindus. 377 

the third, that of the man who performs penance or book ii. 
other religious acts, residing continuallj in a forest ; ^^^^' ^* 
the fourth, that of the Sannyasi, or the ascetic ab- ^ 
sorbed in divine contemplation.^ 

The period of the student commences at the era of 
investiture.^ Prior to this age, the situation of diil- 
dren is remarkable; even those of a Brahmen are not 
held superior in rank to a Sudra.^ The condition of 
the student much more closely resembles that of an 
European apprentice than that of a pupil in literature. 
He dwells in the house of his preceptor, and tends 
him with the most respectful assiduity. He is com- 
manded to exert himself in all acts useful to hb 
teacher ; ^ and of course performs the part of an as- 
sistant in all the offices of religion.^ *^ As he who 
digs deep with a spade comes to a spring of water, so 
the student, who humbly serves his teacher, attains 
the knowledge which lies deep in Ids teacher's mind." 
Upon the student of the priestly order a peculiar bur* 
den^ or distinction, is imposed : to acquire daily his 
food by begging.* 

The gift of sacred instruction is not bestowed indis- 
criminatdy ; but the text, which regulates the choice 
of pupils, is so vague as to leave the seleetion nearly 
at the discretion of the master. ** Ten persons," it is 
declared, ** may legally be instructed in the Veda ; the 
son of a spiritual teacher ; a boy who is assiduous ; one 
who can impart other knowledge ; one who is just ; 
one who is pure ; one who is friendly ; one who is 

1 See Laws of Menu, cb. ii. iii, aod vi. 

• See the acoooot of this ara, p. 257 of this volume. 

•9 Inslitutes of Mena, ch. ii. 173. * Ibid. ch. ii. 191. 

* <* Let him carry water-pots, flowers, cow-dung, fresh earth, and cusa 
grass, as much as may be useful to'>is preceptor." Ibid. 182. 

c ** The subsistence of a student by begging is held equal to fasti^ ia 
i^igioQs merit.'' Ibid. SIS. There are numerous precepts respecting the 
niceties of begpog. ibid. 48 to 50, aad 188 to 190. 



378 Maumn 

BOOK II. powerful ; one who can bestow wealth ; one who is 

Cuap 7 

' honest; and one who is related by blood. Where 
virtue and wealth are not found, or diligent attention 
proportioned, in that soil divine instruction must not 
be sown ; it would perish like fine seed in barren 
land."^ 

The instruction which is bestowed may soon be de* 
scribed. *' The venerable preceptor, having girt hia 
pupil with the thi'ead, must first instruct him in puri- 
fication, in good customs, in tiie management of the 
consecrated fire, and in the holy rites of mornings 
noon, and evening." ' The grand obfect of attention 
and solicitode is the reading of the Veda. ^ Some 
dasses of the Brahmens have united with their religi- 
ous doctrines certain speculations concerning the intel- 
lectual and material worlds ; and these speculations 
have been dignified with the name of philosophy ; but 
the \i(Aj rites, and the Veda, form the gre^t, and on 
most occasions the exclusive object of that higher in- 
struction which is bestowed <m the pupil :of the Brah^*^ 
men. 

On this important occasion, as on other ckxrasions, 
tiie attention of the Hindu is much more -engaged by 
frivic^us observances, than by objects of utility. 
While the directions laid down respecting the instruo* 
tion of the pupil are exceedingly few and insignificant^ 
the forms, according to which he must pay his duty 
to the master, are numerous, minute, and emphatiGally 
enjoined. * 

1 Insdtates of Menu, ch. ii. 109, 11^. * IbUI. 69. » Ibid. ro. 

« When the student is going to read the Veda, he must pederni an ab- 
lution, as the law ordains, with his face to the north ; and at the begin- 
ning and end of each lesson, he most clasp both the feet of hit preceptor, 
and read with both his hands closed. ** In the presence of his praceptar 
let him always eat less ; and wear a coarser mantle, with worse appea- 
dages : let Um rise before, and go to rest after his tator. Let him not 
answer his teacher's orders, or ooAvexse with him, recbntag on a%ed| 



ef the Hindus. $79 

The duration of the period of study is very itidefi- BOOK II, 
nite. « The discipline of a student in the three Vedas ^^^^-^^ 
may be continued for thirty-six years^ in the house of 



nor sittiog, nor eating, nor standing, nor with an averted face : But let 
him botii ammer and convene^ if his preceptor sit, standing op; if he 
stand, advancing toward him; if he advance, meeting him; if he run, 
hastening after him ; if his face be averted, going round to front him, 

from left to right ; if he be at a Uttle distance, appoaching him ; if re- 
clined, bending to him; and. if he stand ever so far ofiF, ranoing toward 
him. When his teacher is nigh, let his couch or his bench be always 
placed low ; when his preceptor's eye can observe him, let him not sit 
carelessly at his ease. Let him never pronounce the mere name of his 
tutor, even in his absence ; by censuring his preceptor, though justly, he 
will be bom an ass. He must not ^erve his tutor by the intervention of 
another, while himself stands aloof; nor must he attend him in a pas- 
sion, nor when a woman is near : from a carriage or raised seat he most 
deecend to salute his heavenly director. Let him not sit with his pre- 
ceptor CO the leeward, or to the windward of him; nor let him say any 
thing which the venerable man cannot hear/' Institutes of Menu, ch. ii. 
70, 71, and 194 to 199, and 901 to SOS. Even to the sons and wires of 
the preceptor must oomeroos tokeus of profound respect be showo» Ibid. 
S07 to 318. For bis general conduct ^ these following rules,'' says 
Menu, ** must a Brahmacbari, or student in theology f observe, while he 
dwells with his preceptor ; keeping all his members under control, for 
the sake of increasing bis habitual devotion. Day by day, having bathed 
and being purified, let him offer fresh water to the gods, the sages, and 

.. the manes ; let him show respect to the images of the deities, and bring 
.wood for the' oblation to fire. Let him abstain from honey, from flesb- 
ineat, from perfumes, from chaplets of flowers, from sweet vegetable 
juices, from women, from all sweet substances turned acid, and from 
injory to animated beings; from unguents for bis limbs, and from black 
powder for his eyes, from wearing sandals and carrying an umbrella, 
from sensual desise, from wrath, from covetousness, from dancing, and 
fh)m vocal and instrumental music ; from gaming, from disputes, from 
detraction, and from falsehood, from embracing or wantonly looking at 
women, and from disservice to other men. Let him sleep constantly 
alone.*' Next are forbidden several acts of sensual impurity which are 
too gross to be described ; and the holy text thus again proceeds; '^Let 
him carry water-pots, flowers, cow-dung, fresh earth and cusa grass, aft 
much as may be useful to his preceptor. Having brought logs of wood 
frgm a distance, let him place them in the open air; and with them let 
him make an oblation to fire, without remissness, both evening and 
morning. Let the scholar, when commanded by his preceptor, and even 
when he has received no command, always exert himself in reading. 
Let not the sun ever rise or set while he lies asleep in the village."- In- 
stitutes of Menu, ch. ii. 175 to 183, 186, 191, 219. 



380. Mannen 

BOOK II. his preceptor; or for half that time, or for a quarter 
°^'' of it, or until he perfectly comprehend them : A 
student, whose rules have not been violated, may as- 
sume the order of a married man, after he has read in 
succession a sac'ha, or branch from each of the three 
Vedas, or from two or from any one of them/* * It is 
even permitted to pass the whole period of life in the 
state of a pupil; and to this merit so exalted is as- 
cribed, that the very highest rewards of religion are 
bestowed upon it. ^ If a student anxiously desire to 
pass his whole life in the house of a sacerdotal teacher, 
he must serve him with assiduous care, till he be re- 
leased from his mortal frame. That Brahmen who 
has dutifully attended his preceptor till the dissolution 
of his body, passes directly to the eternal mansion of 
God.*"^ Should the teacher die, the student must 
attend upon his widow, his son, or one of his paternal 
kinsmen, with the same respect as to the deceased 
preceptor. Should none of these be living he occu- 
pies the seat of the preceptor himself.^ 

I iDstitates of Mena, cfa. iii. 1. * Ibid. ii. ?43, S44. 

3 lb* 847, 848. The foUowiog modes of living are pointed cot to the 
Brahmen; 1. lawfal gleaning and gathering ; 8. what is given unasked; 
8. what is asked as alms; 4. tillage; 5. trafEc and money lending: evpa 
by these two last^when distressed, he may live; but service for hire is 
named dog-living» which he must always avoid, iv. 4, 5, 6. His hair, 
nails, and beard being clipped; his passions subdued; his mantle while; 
his body pure; let him diligently occupy himself in reading the Veda. 
Liet him carry a staff of Venu, an ewer with water in it, an handful of 
cusa grassi or a copy of the Veda : with a pair of bright golden rings in 
bis ears. He must not gaze oa the sun, whether rising or setting, or 
eclipsed, or reflected in water, or advanced to the middle of the skj. 
Over a string to which a calf is tied, let him not step; nor let him run 
while it rains; nor let him look on his own image in water: tliis i« a 
settled rule. By a mound of earth, by a cow, by an idol, by a Brahmen, 
by a pot of clarified butter or of honey, by a place where four ways 
meet, and by large trees well known in the district, let him pass with hu 
right hand toward them, 3.5, 36, 37, 38, 39. 

Let him neither eat witli his wife, nor look at her eating, nor sneexingy 
or yawning, or sitting carelessly at her ease, 43. 

Some precepts are ludicrous. ** Let him not eat his food, wearing 



of the Hitulus. S81 

To the state of the student succeeds that of the BOOK IL 
married man, or the housekeeper. It is at this epoch ^^^' ^' 
that the Hindu begins to sustain a part as the member 
of society. 

Marriage is a religious duty ; and a duty of the 
highest order. • Except for some grand plan of devo- 
tion, as that of remaining a student, or of becoming a 
fakeer, no man neglects at an early age to fulfil this 
sacred obligation. As the sacrament of obsequies to 
the manes of ancestors can b^ performed only by a 
male descendant, and as any failure in these obse- 
quies deeply affects the spirits of the dead, to die 
without a son is regarded as one of the greatest of all 
calamities.^ 



only a single cloth, nor let him bathe quite naked ; nor let him eject 
urine or feces in the highway, nor on ashes, nor where kine are grazing, 
nor on tilled ground, nor in water, nor on wood raised for burning, nor^ 
unleu he be in great need^ on a mountain, nor on the ruins of a temple, 
nor at any time on a nest of white ants, nor in 'ditches with living crea- 
tures in them, nor walking, nor standing, nor on the bank of a river, nor 
on the summit of a mountain : nor let him ever eject them, looking at 
things moved by the wind, or at fire, or at a priest, or at the sun, or at 
water, or at cattle : But let him void his excrements, having covered 
the earth with wood, pot-herbs, dry leaves and grass, or the like, care- 
fully suppressing his utterance, wrapping up his breast and bis head: By 
day let him void them with his face to the north ; by night, with his face 
to the south; at sunrise and sunset, in the same manner as by day; In 
the shade or darkness, whether by day or by night, let a Brahmen ease 
nature with his face turned as he pleases; and in places where he fears 
if^ury to life jVcmwUd beatts or from reptilei,*' 45. to 51. 

*' Let not a man, desirous to. enjoy long life, stand upon hair, nor upon 
ashes, bones, or potsherds, nor upon seeds of cotton, nor upon husks of 
grain,'' 78. 

An infinite number of things relative to food are to be attended to, 
307 to 225. 

1 A man is nevertheless forbidden to marry before his elder brother. 
Ibid. 173. But if among several brothers of the whole blood, one have 
a son bom. Menu pronounces thent all fathers of a male cliitd, by means 
of that son. Ibid. 183. There is a singular importance attacheid to the 
having of a son : '^ By tf son a man obtains victory over all people ; by a 
sous son be enjoys immortality; and afterwards by a son of that grand- 



332 Manners 

QOORIL The ceremonjes of marriage, entirely religious. 
Chap. 7. ^y^ y^^j^ already described. Marriages are distin- 
^ guished into eight kinds ; of which one half are ho- 
nourable, and differ from one another only in some 
minute circumstances ; in the fifth the bridegroom be- 
stows gifts upon the bride» her father, and paternal 
kinsman ; the last three are rather species of unlawful 
connexion, than forms of nuptial contract ; one being 
voluntary and by mutual consent ; the other forcible, 
when a woman is seized, ^' while she weeps, and calls 
for assistance, after her kinsmen and friends have 
been slain in battle;** the last, ^* when the damsdl is 
sleeping, or flushed with strong liquor, or (Usordered 
in her intellect.** ^ With the grand rule to prevent 
the intermixture of the castes, the reader is already ac- 
quainted. ** For the first marriage of the twice-born 
classes," says the law of Menu, '* a woman of the 
same class is recommended ; but for such as are im<- 
pelled by inclination to marry again, women in the 
direct order of the classes are to be preferred: a Su- 
dra woman only must be the wife of a Sudra ; she and 
a Vaisya of a Vaisya ; they two and a Cshatriya, of a 
Cshatriya ; those two and a Brahmani, of a Brah- 
men.** * The Hindu law-givers, who commonly mis- 
take minuteness for precision, and are apt to be most 



SOD he reaches the solar abode.'' Ibid. 137. Kinsmen, as among the 
Jewst ^®i^ allowed to raise up seed to one another. Not only was a 
widow, left without children, pennitced to conceive by a kinsman of her 
husband ; but even before his death, if he was supposed to be attacked 
by an incurable disease. Ibid. ix. 59> 162, 164. A daughter, too, when 
a man had no sons, might be appointed for the same purpose. Ibid. 127. 
In Egypt, in the same manner^ a widow left without children cohabited 
with the brother of the deceased. Becherches Philosoph. sur les Egyp- 
tiens et les Chinois, i. 70. 

1 Institutes of Menu, ch. iii. S7 to 34. The crimes implied in the last 
two cases must have been frequent to make tbem be distinguished for- 
mally in books of sacred law as two species of marriage. 

• Ibid. 12, 13. 

5 



9f the Hindus. * 88S 

particiilar wh^ it is least required, make rules for the book ir. 
choice of a wife. " In connecting a man's sdf with a ^^^^' ^' 
wife, let him," sajs Menu, ^ studiously avoid the ten 
following families, be they ever so great, or ever so 
rich in kine, goats, sheep, gold, and grain : The fa« 
mily which has omitted prescribed acts of religion ; 
that which has produced no male children ; that in 
which the Veda has not been read ; that which has 
thick hair on the body ; and th6se which have been 
subject to hemorrhoids, to phthi^s, to dyspepsia, to 
epilepsy, to l^osy, and to elephantiasis. Let him 
not marry a girl with reddish hair, nor with any de* 
formed limb ; nor one troubled with habitual siickness *, 
nor one either with no hair, or too much ; nor one 
immoderately talkative ; nor one with inflamed eyes ; 
nor one with the name of a constellation, of a tree, of 
of a river, of a barbarous nation, or of a mountain, of 
a winged creature, a snake, or a slave ; nor with any 
name raising an image of terror. Let him choose for 
his wife a girl, whose form has no defect ; who has an 
agreeable name ; who walks gracefully like a pheni- 
<x>pteros, or like a young elephant ; whose hair and 
teeth are moderate respectively in quantity and in 
size ; whose body has exquisite softness." * 

The condition of the women is one of the most re- 
markable circumstances in the manners of nations. 
Among rude people, the women are generally degrad- 
ed ; among civilized people they are exalted.^ In the 
barbarian, the passion of sex is a brutal impulse, which 
infuses no tenderness ; and his undisciplined nature 
leads him to abuse his power over every creature that 
is weaker than himself. The history of uncultivated 
nations uniformly represents th^ women as in a state 

1 iDstitQtes of Mena, ch. iii. 6 to 10. 

* This important salject is amply and pbilosophicaUj ilkstraCM) by 
Professor Millar, in his Inquiry into the Distinction of Ranks, ch. i. 



S84 Manners 

BOOK II. of abject slavery, from which they slowly emerge, as 
^°^^' ^' civilization advances. Among some of the negro 
tribes on the coast of Afirica, the wife is never permit- 
ted to receive any thing from the hands of her hus- 
, bandy or even to i^pear in his presence, except on her 
knees. ^ In the empire of Congo, where the people 
are sufficiently advanced to be united in a large com- 
munity ; and in most of the nations which inhabit the 
southern regions of Africa, the women are reckoned 
unworthy to eat with the men. ^ In such a state of 
society property is an advantage which it may natu- 
rally be supposed that the degraded sex are by no 
means permitted to enjoy. Not only among the Afri- 
can and other savage tribes, and the Tartars of the 
present day, but among the ancient inhabitants of 
Chaldea and Arabia, and all the nations of Europe in 
their ancient uncivilized state, the women were ex- 
cluded from the inheritance of the family. ^ Being* 
condemned to severe and perpetual labour, they are 
themselves regarded as useful property. Hence a 
father parts not with his daughter but for a valuable 
consideration ; hence the general custom, among bar- 
barous nations, as in Pegu, in Siberia, among the 
Tartars, among the negroes on the coa^ of Guinea, 
among the Arabs, and even among the Chinese, of 
purchasing the bride by a dower.^ It is only in that 
improved state of property sand security, when the 
necessities of life have ceased to create perpetual soli- 
citude, and when a large share of attention maybe 

1 HUtoire Genende des Voyages, torn. v. liv. x. ch. iii. 

• Ibid. torn. vi. liv. liii. ch. iii. sect. 2, and torn. iv. liv. vii. ch. liii. 
sect. 1. 

9 See Inquiry into the disUnction of Ranks, ch. i. sect. 1. They were 
admitted to inheritance among the Jews plainly as a novelty, and an 
institution unknown to their neighbours. Numbers, ch. x&vii. 

* See the authorities quoted by Millar, Distinction of Ranks, ch. i. 
sect. 1 ; and Goguet, Origin of Laws, i. 36, S6. 

7 



qJ the Hindus. S8fl 

given to its pleasures ;.that the women, from their in« BOOK IL 
fluencc.on those pleasures, begin to be an object, of ^''^^*^" 
regard. As society refines upon its enjoyments, and 
advances into that state of civilization, in T^hich vari- 
ous corporeal qualities become equal or superior in va* 
lue to corporeal strength, and in which the qualities 
of the mind are ranked above the qualities of the body, 
the condition of the weaker sex is gradually improved, 
till they associate on equal terms with the men, and 
occupy the place of voluntary and useful coadjutors. 

A state of dependance more strict and humiliating 
than that which is ordained for the weaker sex among 
the Hindus cannot easily be conceived. *^ Day and 
night,'* says Menu, ** must women be held by their 
protectors in a state of dependance." ^ Who are meant 
by their protectors is immediately explained : " Their 
fiithets protect them in childhood; their husbands 
protect them in youth, their sons protect them in age.: 
a woman," it is added, ** is never fit for independence. 
Let husbands consider this as the supreme law, or*- 
dained for all classes ; and let them, how weak soever, 
diligently keep their wives under laXvful restrictions/'* 
•* By a girl, or by a young woman, or by a woman 
advanced in years, nothing," says the same code, 
** must be done, even in her own dwdUng-plaoe, ac- 
cording to her mere pleasure. In childhood must a 
female be dependant on her father ; in youth, on her 
husband ; her lord being dead, on her sons : a woman 
must never seek independence.**® The deference 
which is exacted towards her husband is without li- 
mits. ** Though inobservant of approved usages, or 
enamoured of another woman, or devoid of good qua* 
lities, yet a husband must constantly be revered as a 



1 Institutes of Menu, ch. ii. 2. < Ibid. 3, 6. 

« Ibid. V. 147, 148. 

VOL. I, ,2c 



S86 Manners 

BOOK u. god by a virtuous wife. No sacrifice is allowed to 
Chap. r. ^omen apart from their husbands, no religious rite, no 
&stiDg : as far only as a wife honours her lord» so far 
^e is exalted in heaven." ^ ^' She who n^lects her 
lord, though addicted to gaming, fond of spirituous 
tiquors, or diseased, must be deserted for three 
months, and deprived of her ornaments and house- 
hold furniture." ^ To every species of , ill-usage, she 
is bound to submit ; ^ neither by sale nor desertion," 
says the ordinance of Menu, ^ can a wife be released 
from her husband : thus we fully acknowledge the 
law enacted of old by the lord of creatures." ^ This 
is a remarkable law ; for it indicates the power of the 
husband to sell his wife for a slave, and by conse- 
quence proves, that her condition, while in his hous^ 
was not regarded as very difierent from slavery* A 
law is even made to direct the mode in which she 
is beaten ; ^' A wife, a son, a servant, a pupil, taA 
a younger /whole brother, may be corrected, when 
they commit faults, with a rope, or the sinall shoot of 
a cane ; but on the back part only of their bodleis, and 
not on a noble part by any means " * 

Nothing can exceed the habitual contempt which 
the Hindus entertain for their women. Hardly are 
they ever mentioned in their laws, or other booki but 
as wretches of the most base and vicious inclinations, 
on whose nature no virtuous or useful qualities can 
be engrafted. ** Their husbands," says the sacred 
code, « should be diligently careful in guarding 
them; though they well know the disposition with 
which the lord of creation formed them; Menu al- 
lotted to such women a love of their bed, <rf thdr 

» Institutes of Menu, ch. v. 154, 155. " « Ibid. ir. 78. 

3 Ibid. 46. 

* IWd. ch. viii. 299, 300. Beadng their wives is a common discipIiBe. 
See Buchanan's Journey, i. 347, 349. 



of the Hindusi gg^f 

seat^ and of ornament^ impure appetites, wratb, weak boor il 
flexibility, desire of mischief, and bad conduct.*' ' « Be ^'^^^'^' 
there no place, be there no time, be there no one to 
tempt them/' says the Hetopadesa^ « then, O Na- 
rada, doth women's chastity appear. Women at all 
times have been inconstant, even among the celestials^ 
we are told. In infancy the father should guard her^ 
in youth her husband should guard her, and in old 
age her children should guard her ; for at no time is 
a woman proper to be trusted with liberty/' ^ The 
same author declares again ; ^* Unto woman no man 
is to be found disagreeable, no man agreeable. They 
maybe compared to a hdfer on the plain, that still 
longeth for fresh grass. Infidelity, violence, deceit^ 
envy, extreme avaridousness, a total want of good 
qualities, with impurity, are the inq^te faults of 
womankind/' ^ 



1 Institues of Menu, ix. 16, 17. ^ Wilkiris' Hetopadesa^ p. 54. 

^ Ibid. p. 78. In Halhed's Code of Gentoo Laws, the character of 
women is depicted in terms which, were they not strong evidence to an 
important point, delicacy would forbid to be transcribed: <^ A woman/' 
says the law, ^ is never no mora 

than fire is satisfied with burning fuel, or the main ocean with receiving 
the rivers, or the empire of deaih with the dying of men and animals : in 
these cases therefore a woman is not to be relied on.'' (Gentoo Code^ 
cb. XX,) *' Women have six qualities; the first an inordinate desire for 
jewels and fine furniture, handsome clothes^ and nice victuals; the 
second, immoderate lust; the third, violent anger; the fourth, deep 
resentment; the fifth, i^ioth^r person's good appears evil in their eyes; 
the sixth, they commit bad ^tions.'' (Ibid.) Six faults are likewisa. 
ascribed to women, in the Institutes of Alenu, but they are differently 
stated ; '^ Drinking spirituous liquors, associating with evil persons, 
absence firom her husband, raniblipg abroad, unseasonable sleep, and 
dwelling in the house of another, are six faults which bring infamy on a 
married woman. Such women examine not ^eauty, nor pay attention 
to age ; whether their lover be handsome or ugly, they think it enough 
that be is a man, and pursue their pleasures. Tbgrough their passion for 
men, their mutable temper, their want of settled ioffection, and their pqp- 
verse nature (let them be guarded in this world eyer so well,) they soon 
befxune alienated from tbepr husbands." Institutes of Menu, ch, ix. 
13,14,^5. 

2 c a 



888 -- Manntri 

BOOK IT. They are held^ accordingly, inr extreme degrade- 
^^^' ^' tion. They are* not accounted worthy to partake of 
religious rites but in conjunction with their hus- 
bands.^ They are entirely excluded from the sacred 
books ; " Women have no business with the texts of 
the Veda; thus is the law fully settled: having, 
therefore, no evidence of law, and no knowledge of 
expiatory texts, sinful women must be as foul as 
falsehood itself. To this effect many texts, which 
may show their true disposition, are chanted in the 
Vedas." ^ "A minor,'* says the law, " one single 
person, a woman, a man of bad principles, &c. may 
not be witnesses." ^ We have already seen, as in the 
most barbarous nations^ that the women among the 
Hindus are excluded from sharing in the paternal 
property.* They are, by system, deprived of educa- 
tion.* That remarkable proof of barbarity, the wife 
held unworthy to eat with her husband, is prevalent 
in Hindustan.^ 



I'See Institutes of Menu, quoted in note 1, p. 386. 

■ Institutes of Menu, ch. ix. 18, 19. 

• Halhed's Gentoo code, cb. iii. sect. 8. 

« See ch. iv. p. 214; Menu, ch. iv. 43. 

4 The Hindu women, says Mr. Forstcr, (Travels, i. 59) are debarred 
the use of letters. The Hindus hold the invariable language, that ac- 
quired accomplishments are not necessary to the domestic classes of cha 
female sex. 

' < ** The husband and wife never eat together; for the Indians consider 
it as indecent, and contrary to that respect which is due to the former." 
Bartolomeo's Travels, book i. ch. 7. Sonnerat says, ^ Tlie women are 
ugly, slovenly, and disgusting. The husband does not permit them to eat 
¥rith him. They are honourable slaves, for whom some regard is enter- 
tained.'' Voy. liv. iii. ch. i: ** So indelicate are the men with respect 
to the women," says Mr. Motte, speaking of the province of Sumb- 
bulpoor, '^ that I have been introduced and obliged to show respect to a 
man of consequence in the morning, whose wife has in the afternoon 
brought a load of wood of her own cutting, as much as she could stagger 
under, and sold it me for a penny.'' Motte's Journey to Orissa, Asiatic 
Annual Register, i. 76. In another part of the same Journey, p. 07, 
Mr. Motte says, << I was first struck with the sight of women plooghiag^ 



/ of the Hindus. 889 

An almost imlimited power of rejection or divorce BOOK IL 
appears to be re8a*ved to the huedband. In the code "^^'^* 
of Gentoo laws, among various other ordinances to 
the same purpose, it is declared that, *^ a woman who 
dissipates or spoils her own property, or who pro* 
cures abortion, or who has an intention to murder her 
husband, and is always quarrelling with every body, 
and who eats bef(»re her husband eats, such women 
shall be turned out of the house." ^ On grounds like 
these, ^ man can never be without a pretence for dis- 
missing his wife. But on the other hand we haye ' 
seen that no species of barbarous treatment, not even 
desertion and salet, ever absolves the woman from her 
obligations to her lord.^ 

-while their female children drove the oxen; but this is the practice 
- through the whole mountainous country, while the men, strolhng through 
the forests with a spear and hatchet, plunder every thing they can master. 
This abuse of the fair sex is characteristic of a barbarous people/' 

The Hindus are quite accustomed to beat their wives. Buchanan, 
Travels in Mysore, &c. i. 247, 849. Women in Kamata carry out the 
dung to the fields, in baskets on their heads. Ibid. 135, 4S. The Abb^ 
Dubois describes the following, as the common, the standard, condition of 
conjugal life : '' the young vrife, beaten by her husband, and harassed 
by her mother-in-law, who treats her as a slave, finding no remedy for 
ill usage but in flying to her father's house— -recalled by fair promises of 
kinder treatment— the word broken-^recourse had to the same remedy- 
but at last the children which she brings into the world, and other cii^ 
cumstances, compelling her to do her best, by remaining in her husband's 

house, with the show of being contented with her lot The object 

for which a Hindu marries is not to gain a companion to aid him in 
enduring the evils of life, but a slave to bear children, and be subservioac 
to his rule.'' Description, &c. of the People of India, p. 145. 

I Halbed*s Gentoo code, ch. xx. 

• See above, p* 386. Even after the death of her hnsband, if she did 
not sacrifice herself to his manes, she was held inviolably bound to his 
memory; and, besides other penances and mortifications of the severest 
kind^ was expressly forbidden to accept of a second husband. Institutes 
of Menu» ch. v. 157, 158, 169, 163. The same mark of bondage and 
inferiority was imposed on the Athenian women during the barbarous 
times of Greece. Goguet, Origin of Laws, ii. 59. Mr. Richardson, 
who is one of the most nervous in assertion, and the most feeble in proo^ 
of all oriental enthusiasts, raaintains that tbf women en||oyed high ooop 



%90 Mmneri 

:B0OK II. That pofygamy was an estab&hed custom dT the 
CuJLP.r. Hindus, we learn from various documents, and among 
others from the following story, which at the same 
time conveys no evidence of their domestic gentleness: 
^— ** In the city of Devee-kotta, there was a Brah- 
man, whose name was Deva*Sarma, One ludcy 
evenii^ he foand a curious dish, which he took with 
him into a potter's warehouse flill of earthen-ware, 
and throwing himself upon a bed which happened to 
•be there, it being night, he began to express liis 
thonghts upon the occasion in this manner :-^f I dis- 
•pose of this dish, Ishidl get ten kapardakas (cowries) 
tor it ; and With that sum I may purchase many pots 
and pans, the sale of which will increase my cajHtal 
so much that I shall be able to lay in a large stock of 
doth and the like ; which having disposed of at a 
'great advance, I shall have accumulated a fortune of 
a lack of money. With this I will marry four wives ; 
and of these I will amuse myself with her who 

wderation among the Arabians and Persians, nay among the very Tar- 
tars ; so generally was civilization difiPused in Asia. In proof, he tells us 
that' the Arabian women *^ had a right by the laws to the enjoyment of 
independent property, by inheritance^ by gift, by mairiage settknent, or 
by any other mode of acquisition/' The evidence he Adduces of these 
rights is .three Arabian words ; which signify a marriage patiion, para- 
pbemdUa in tAe dUpatal of the loife, a marriage iettiemenL (Sea 
Kichardson's Dissertations on the Lapgnages, Literature, and Manners 
of Eastern nations, pp. 198, SSI, 479.) But snrely a language may 
poaeess three words, of the signification which he ass^ns, and yet the 
women of ^ people who use it be in a state of melancholy dejgradatioo. 
In the times of Homer, though a wife was actnaUyipni^ased from her 
father, still the father gave with her a dower. Iliad, lib. ix. ver. 147. 
148. If the Tartars carry their women with them in their wars, and 
even consult tbftm, f < the north American tribes/' i^ys Mr. Millar, ** are 
often accustomed to admit their women into their public councils, and 
even to allow them die priyilege of being first called to give their opinion 

upon every subject of delibemtion Yet," as he adds immediately 

after, " there is no country in t]ie worid where the femaie sex are in 
general more n^lecCed and despised." See Distbotion of Ranks, ch. i. 
sect. S. From insulated expressions, or facts, no general conclusion can 
safely be drawn. 



o/theUiMdus. 90} 

may prove .tiie handsooiesfe. Thb will create jealousy ; BOOR n. 
80 when the rhral wives shall be qwircjeSing, then will ^^^^' ^' 
I, ovefTwheiaied with anger, hud my stick at them 
thfls ! Saying wMcfa he flung his walking-stick out of 
his hand with sueh foroe, that he not only hrcke his 
emious idish, but destroyed many of the pots and pans 
in the shop/' ^ 

^ The Hiadiis were, notwithstandhig, so far advaiiced 
in civilizatien, ^Loept in the mountainous and most 
barbarous tracts of the country, as to have improved 
IB some degcee upon the manners of savage tribes. 
They have some general precepts, recommending inh 
dnlgence and humanity in favour of the weaker sex. 
" Married women," says the law of Menu, ^^ must be 
honoured and adorned by thdr fathers and brethren* 
by their husbands, and by the brethren of their hus- 
bands, if the^ seek abundant prosp^ity. Whene 
female relations are made miserable, the family of 
him, w)io makes them so, very soon wholly perishes." ^ v 

When particulars indeed are explained, the induU 
gences recommended are not very extensive. It is 
added, *^ I/et tiiose women, therefore, be continually . 
supplied with ornaments, apparel, and food, at festi- 
vf^, and at jubilees, by men desirous of wealth." ^ 
When it is commanded by law, as an extraordinary 
exten^on of liberality, to give th^n ornaments, and 
even apparel and food, at festivals and jubilees ; this 
is rather a proof of habitual degradation than of ge* 
neral respect and tenderness. The idea, however, of 
purchasing a wife, as a slave, from her relations, had 
become odious ; and though it is stated as one of the 
>eight species of nuptial contract, it is classed among 



1 Wilkins' Hetopadesa, p. 248. 

• Institutes of Menu, ch. iii. 6^, 57. ^ Jb. 59. 



392 Mannen 

BOOK IT. the dishonourable species, and fortndden.^ As the 
Chap. t. necessity of such a law indicates a state of society 
"" but one remove from tha^ in which the unhappy bride 

is purchased and sold ; so the customary, and original 
purchasing gift, the bull and the cow, still remained; 
but it hadacquired a religious character,and was at last 
commanded to pass by another name. '* Some say,'* 
observes the law of Menu, ** that the bull and cow 
given in the nuptial ceremony of the Rishis, are a bribe 
to the father; but this is untrue: a bribe indeed, 
whether large or small, is an actual sale of the 
daughter.'' ^ There are texts, however, which directly 
recognize the transaction as a purchase : ** He who 
takes to wife,'' it is said, ** a damsel of iull age, shall 
not give a nuptial present to her &ther; since the 
father lost his dominion over her, by detaining her at 
a time when she might have been a parent."® The ob- 
ligation of the marriage contract is stated in the In^ 
stitutes of Menu, under the head of purchase and 
sale ; and it is expressly said, ** If, aft» one damsel 
has been shown, another be offered to the bridegroom, 
who had purchased leave to marry her from her next 
kinsman, he may become the husband of both for the 
same price: this law Menu ordained."^ The $ame 



» " Let no father who knows the law receive a gratuitj, however small , 
for giving his daughter in marriage; since the man who throug)i avarice 
takes a gratuity for that purpose, is a seller of his offspring/' lastitutas 
of Menu, ch. iii. 51. 

« Ibid. 53. a Ibid. ch. ix. 93. 

« Ibid. viii. S04. Our travellers &nd direct and avowed pmt:h«se 
still in practice in many parts of India. See Buchanan's Journey 
through Mysore, &c. i. 247, 249. " To marry, or to buy a wife^ are 
synonymous terms iu this country. Almost every parent makes his 
daughter an article of traffic. This practice of purchasing the young 
women whom they are to marry, is the inexhaustible source of disputes 
and lidgatiou, particularly amongst the poorer people. These, after the 
f»arriage is solemnised, not finding it cooveoieot to pay the stipnlnted 



of tht Hindus. 399 

undoubtedly is the purport of the followiog sacred book il 
text : " The recitation of holy texts, and the sacri- ^^'^''^ ^' 
fice ordained by the lord of creatures, are used ia 
marriages for the sake of procuring good fortune to 
kides ; . but the first gift by the husband is the 
primary cause of marital dominion/' ^ It is to be 
observed, besides, that the women have no choice in 
their own. destiny ; but are absolutely at the disposal 
of their fathers, till three years after the nuptial 
age. If, until that period, the father have neglected 
what is reckoned one of his most sacred duties, to 
place his daughter in a situation to become a parent^ 
he forfeits, through his sin, the dominion over her, 
and she may choose a husband for herself.^ 

It has been doubted whether immuring the women 
was an original part of Hindu manners, or adopted 
in consequence of the intercourse and dominion of 
the Mahomedans, But they have been found in a 
state of seclusion and confinement beyond the range 
of Mahomedan influence.^ The practice is fully re- 
turn, the father-io-law oommeooes an action/' &c. Description, &c. of the 
Hindus, by the Abb^ Dnbois, p. 137. " Apud plerasque tamen gentes 
dotem oiaritus uxoriy non uxor marito oiFerebat. Ista sane consuetudo 
viguit inter Germanos, teste Tadto (de Mor. Germ. cap. 18>-«^s»yriof, 
Ceste ^iiauo, {Hi$t. Var. iv. 1>—Babylonio8, teste Herodot. (i. 196)--et 
Armenios, ceu patet ex Nou. xxi. Heinecdi Antiquit. Roman, lib. ii. 
tit. viii. sect. d. 

' Institutes of Menu, ch. ▼. 152. The commentator Cullnca, after 
the words Jir$t gifly by his usual plan, of trying to graft the ideas of a 
recent period, improved a little by external intercourse, upon the ori- 
ginal text, has foisted in the words, or trM plighted, as if that was a 
gift, or, as if, had that been meant, the legislator would not have rather 
said troih plighted, ihsLaJiritt g^i. See what I have observed on the inter- ^ 

polating practices of Culluca, Note A. at the end of the volume, p. 429. 

« Ibid. ch. ix. 88, 90, 93. 

3 Mr. Forster declares himself to have been at one time of opinion, 
that the Hindoos had secluded their women firom the public view that 
tbey might not be exposed to the intemperance of the Mahometan con- 
querors ; but after perceiving, says he, the usage adopted among the se- 
questered mountaineers, and also amongst the various independent Mah- 



S94 Manners 

BOOK n. cognized in the ancient writings. We are told i« th« 
^^^^' ^' Bhagavat, that, on the day of the yug of Judishter, 
* the women who, buried in harams, were seldom 
permitted to see the sun, came out, on that day, to 
View rajah Judishter.'* * The monarch who fornas 
th^ hero in the drama entitled Sacontala had many 
wiv^, and they are represented as residing in the 
secrtt apartments of the palace.* The whole ^irit 
^ the Hindu maxima lead to confinement : diere are 
numerous precepts which respect the guarding of 
women : and the punfishtnent for vitiating those who 
are not guarded is always less than the punishmeirt 
in the case of those that are.^ Among these proofe of 
confinement are klso appearanees of freiedom. The 
law of secdufiSon is made only for the few. Among 
ihe jealous Ottomans themselves, the great body of 
the community must leave their women at large, be- 
cause an indigent man can neither dispense with the 
iisefttl services of his wife, nor afford the cost of re- 
taining her in confinement. In the earlier and ruder 
states of society, when men are in general poor, few 
can afford the expense of cc^ifiinement ; but among^ 
the Hindus, as in general among the nations of Asia, 
^ce their emerging frpm the rudest barbarism, it 
^eerns to have been the practice for every man, who 
possessed sufficient means, to keep his women guard- 
ed, in a state of sedusion. 

rattah states, I am induced to think that the exclosicm of wtmien from 
■iociety prevailed in India before the period of the Afgan, or Tartar in- 
vasions. Foster's Travels, i. SIO. 

1 Sec a translation of part of the Bhagavat by Mr. Halhed^ in Man- 
tlce's Hist, of Hindustan, ii. 438. 

« See Sacontala in Sir William Jones's Works, ti. The rajah of 
Beejaniiggur's harem was kept so close, that not even the nearest rela- 
tions of the women received in it were ever again permitted to see them. 
rorishta's Dcccan, by Scott, i. 83. Nor is this mentioned as any Uiing 
tinusual. 

"» Institutes of Menu, ch. viii. 3T4 to aB5. 



oftk$ Hindus. S95 

On the coast of Malabar, where thie manners differ BOOK It, 
considerd>Iy from those of the rest of the Hmdus, ^°^^'.t' 
and where the people have not reached a state of so- 
ciety altogether so perfect as that in some other parts 
of Hindustan, it would appear that the institution of 
marriage has never been regularly introduced. The 
peculiar mode in which the intercourse of the sexes 
is here carried on has not yet been satisfactorily ex- 
plained to US, and from the differences* which appeair 
in the accounts of different authors it probably ex- 
hibits considerable variety ; but in its general charac- 
ter it is pretty evidently a relict of the period in 
which there is no law for the association of the sexes, 
when their intercourse is casual, the father of the off- 
spring is by consequence uncertain, and the children 
of necessity belong to the mother. The nearest 
male relations of the female, her father being in this 
case unknown, are her brothers ; who, never having 
children whom they can recognize as their own, 
naturally contract an affection for those of their sister 
tehom they support, and with whom they live ; by 
consequence regard them as in some measure their 
own ; and vest them with the property which they 
leave at their death. In the family of a Nair there 
is no wife ; all the brothers and sisters live under thfe 
same roof; their mother, the only known pai'ent, 
during her life, and after her death the eldest sister, 
manage the domestic affairs ; the sisters cohabit with 
;the man o£ their choice, subject only to the sacred 
restriction of a class not inferior to their own ; the 
phildren are by the brothers regarded as their own^ 
0iid inherit the property of the family.^ This is the 

I Such'is the account which Dr. Bachanan received from a number -^ 

of die most respectable Nairs themselves, whom he assembled for the 
•|)urpose of inquiring into their manners. See his Journey through My- 
sore, &c. ii. 411} 412. It vas a practice, the continuance of which was 



896 Manners 

BOOK II. exact description of a people among whom the insti- 
'^^' tution of marriage is unknown, and the order into 
which things will run of their own accord, wherever 
the intercourse of the sexes h casual. The Nairs, 
however, are said to have added a kind of refinement 
to this established custom. They contract a mar- 
riage with a particular woman. But this is entirely 
nominal. The woman never leaves her mothers 
house; her intercourse with other men is not re- 
stricted ; her children belong to her brothers ; and the 
arrangement of society is the same as if no such mar- 
riage existed. If it really takes place, and the ab- 
, surdity of the thing may support a suspicion of aame 

mistake in our informants, it must be the effect of 
imitation, and of the reproaches which this people 
have sustained from other nations. These circum- 
stances move them to contrive a semblance of a mar- 
riage, though not in the least degree to alter the 
established system of manners, to which it adheres 
as a useless excrescence. The Nairs are only one of 
the castes ; and there appears to be some diversity in 
the mode of intercourse between the sexes in the 
several castes. The fashion among the Nairs is the 
standard to which they all approach. Our informa- 
tion, however, of these diversities, even if they 
merited a fuller elucidation, is too imperfect for mi- 
nute description.^ 

highly convenient for the Brahmens, whose power among the inhabitants 
of that coast was peculiarly great. Ibid. 495. 'See also Mr. Thackeray's 
Beport, Fifth Report of the Committee on India Afiairs, 1810, p. 809. 

1 The reader will find some observations, but evidently incorrect^ 
taken from an Arabian author, by Mr. Duncan, A&iat. Research, v. 19, 
13, 14. Dr. Buchanan too makes some remarks, on the modes of the 
Brahmens, Journey, ut supra, ii. 425; and mentions certain diversities 
between the manners of the Nairs themselves in the south, and in the 
north of Malabar, Ibid. 513. See too Bartolomeo's Travels, book ii. 
ch. ii. and Anquetil Duperron, Zendavesta, Discours Preliminairey 
p. cxcvi. Vestiges of the same order of affairs are very widely diffused. 



of the Hindus. $97 

It is not surprising, that grossness, in ideas and book u. 
language^ respecting the intercourse of the sexes, is a ^^^''7' 
uniform concomitant of the degraded state of the 
women. Superficial contemplators have, in general, 
contented themselves with remarking, that it was a 
diversity of manners ; or was the effect of a diversity 
of climate ; and that what in one place was gross^ 
bore a different interpretation in another. Inquiry 
discovers, that grossness in this respect is a regular 



Cecrops first instituted marriage among the Greeks; Menes among the 
Egyptians. Among the Lycians, and even among the ancient inh^it- 
ants of Attica, children took their names from their mother, and not 
from their father. Tlie domestic community of women among the Celtic 
inhalntants of Britain was a diversity, to which something ?ery similar 19 
said to exist among some of the castes on the coast of Malabar. '^ Tiiere 
is in the province of Madura,'' says the Abb^ Dubois, p. 3, <' a cast 
called the Totiyars, in which, brothers, uncles, and nephews, and other 
kindred, when married, enjoy the wives in common/' Indications of 
the same state are preserved by the Roman lawyers. In the island of 
Formosa, where the women contract a marriage for any stipulated 
period, the husband, during the time of the contract, passes into the fa- 
mily of the wife; a costom, likewise, (bund among the people called 
Moxos in Peru. In the Ladrone islands the wife is mistress of the fa* 
mily, turns off the husband when she chooses, and retains the children 
and property. In the ancient Median empire we are told that the wo- 
men had several husbands ; and the same is the case in some cantons of 
the Iroquois in North America. See the authorities quoted by Millar, 
Distinction of Ranks, ch. i. sect. 9. where this part of the subject is illus- 
trated with the usual sagacity of that eminent anthor. See too Goguet's 
Origin of Laws, book i. ch. i. art. 1. We are told by Herodotus, that 
the Massagetse had their women in common; and a man, when be 
desired to be private, hung up his quiver at the door of the waggon or 
travelling tent. Herodot. i. 216. A people in Africa, whom he calfs 
Nasamones, were in like manner without the rite of marriage, and a 
staff stuck in the ground before the tent was the signal of retirement. 
Ibid. iv. 172. The reader will probably not be surprised to hear, that 
the tradition of the casual intercourse of the sexes was preserved among 
the Indians of Peru. ** In short," (says Garcilasso de la Vega, Royal 
Commentaries, book i. ch. vii.) ^* they were altogether savage," (mean* 
ing the inhabitants in their ancient state) ** making use of their women 
as they accidentally met, understanding no property or single enjoyment 
of them." — A woman, not married to an individual, but common to all 
the brothers of a family, is described as the custom of Tibet. See Tur* 
net's Embassy. 



898 Manners 

BOOK IL ingredient iti the manners of a rude age ; and tbat 
'^•^' society, as it refines, deposits this, among its othcar im- 
purities. The ancient inhabitants of our owb 
country were as indelicate as those of the hottest re- 
gions of Asia.^ All European witnesses have been 
struck with the indelicacy of the Hindus. The gross 
emblems and practices of their religion are already 
known.^ To the indecent passages in the books of 
law, and the practices which they describe, exceed^ 
ingly numerous, and exceedingly gross, we can here 
only allude.^ Both the writings apd conversatioii 
of the Hindus abound with passages which are 
shocking to European ears. Even in the popular and 
moral work, entitled Hetopadesa, there are parts 
which Mr. Wilkins could not translate ; and he thus 
expresses himself on this characteristic of society 
among the Hindus : '^ The translator has carefully 
refined a great many indelicate expressions, whidi a 
Hindu lady, from grosser habits, might hear without 
a blush ; and even omitted whole passages when that 
could not be effected but by a total change of the 
author's meaning."^ Another Oriental scholar, as 



1 Dr. Henrys in his chapter on the manners of the Aoglo-Saxons, says, 
f< It would be easy to produce many eiamples of radeness and indelicacj, 
that were estabhshed by law» and practised, even in courts of ji^ce, (if 
they were not uabeconiing the purity which history ought to preserve) 
which would hardly be believed in the present age.'* lleary's Hist, of 
Great Britain, iv. 341. lie then quotes tlie fullowing specimen in a note : 
Si mulier stuprata t^e cum viro agere veliti et si vir factum pemeg«* 
verity mulier, membro virili sinistra prehenso, et dextrCL noUquiis sa0ct«>* 
rum imposild, juret super illas, quod is, per vim, se ieto nieiBbro vitia-* 
\erit. Leges Wallice, p. 85. 

ft Naked fakeers travel in pilgrimage about the country, and swann 
around the principal temples. It is customary fi>r the women to kiss, and 
as it were to adore, their secret, or rather, public parts. 

3 See the whole Section in Ilalfaed*s Gentoo Code, Dedigito in puden- 
dum muliebre inserendo, or the vartoos passage! de concohitu ▼irili, yel 
atiam concubitu besttaii. 

« Wilkins' Hetopadesa, note 8^. 



of the lUAdui. &99 

well as eje^witness of.tbe inaiiners he describes, af- BOOK IL 
foirds U3 a passa^ which at once pourtrays this part ^'^*^ 
of the Hindu character, and traces one of those re- 
markable resemblances, which run through the prin« 
cipal nations of Asia* *^ The Persian woman," sajs 
Mr. Scott Waring, '^ like the Indian, are totally de* 
void of delicacy ; their language is often gross aa4 
disgusting, nosr do they fed more hesitation in ex- 
pressing themselves be£3re men, then they would 
before their female associates. Thdr terms of abuse 
or reproach are indelicate to the utmost degree. I 
will not. disgust the reader by noticing any of them ; 
but I may safely aver that it is not possible for lan- 
guage to express, or the imagination to conoeive, 
more indecent or grosser images," * 

Much attention has been attracted to the gentle* 
ness of manners, in this people. They possess a 
feminine softness both in their persons and in their 
address. As the inhabitants of Europe were rough 
and impetuous, in their rude and early state, and 
jgrew mild only as they grew civilized, the gentleness 
of Hindu manners has usually impressed their 
European visitors, with a high conception of their 
progress in civilization. It is, perhaps, a ground of 
presumption ; but fallacious if taken as a proof. One 
of the circumstances which distinguish the state of 

1 A Tour to Sbeeraz, by Edwaid Scott Waring, Esq. p. 63. He fwr«- 
tber sajs ; << The same may be observed of the inhabitants of lodiiv 
nor will jtbe plea,, that the false delicacy of re&neinent, which disquaUr 
fies OB from judging of the language of nature, exempt them from cei^ 
aore. If the nakedness of a- prostitute be more disgusting than that of 
an Indian, it must be allowed that their language is infinitely chaste 
and more refined. There are certain images which must always create 
disgust and aversion ; and although they are famiUar in the East, it ifrby 
no means evident that they are the images of nature. There may be a 
refinement on grossness of vice as weU as aa excess of delicacy, and k 
does not follow that the one is natural, and the other unnatural." Ibid. 
See the Missionaries, Ward and Dubois, passim. 



400 Manners 

BOOK II. commencing civilization is, that it is compatible with 
5"^^; ^' great violence, as well as great gentleness of man- 
ners. Nothing is more common than examples of 
both. MUdness of address is not always separated 
even from the rudest condition of human life, as 
. the Otaheitans, and some other of the South-Sea 
islanders, abundantly testify.^ '' The savages of 
North America are affectionate in their carriage, and 
in their conversations pay a mutual attention and 
regard, says Charlevoix, more tender and more en- 
gaging, than what we profess in the ceremonial of 
polished societies." ^ 

> Dr. Forster» in a note to Father Pattlim's (Bartoloiaeo) Travels, re- 
marks a great similarity , in many respects, between the manners of the 
Hindus and those of the Otaheitans. 

* Ferguson's Essay on Civil Society, part ii. sect. 2. " The Rus- 
sians" (says Mr. Forster, Travels, ii. 296) ^^ observe to their superiors 
an extreme subuiissioD, and their deportment is blended with a suavity 
of address and language, which is not warranted by their appearance, or 
the opinions generally formed of thera,'' The common people in Russui, 
says Lord Macartney (Account of Russia by Lord Macartney, in Bar- 
row's Life of that Lord, ii. 30) *' are handsome in their persons, easy and 
nnaffected in their behaviour; and though free and manly in their carriage, 
are obedient and submissive to their superiors, and of a civility and polite^ 
ness to their equals, which is scarcely to be paralleled." llie following 
passage is from a work entitled ^* Travels into the Crimea, [and] a History 
of the Embassy from St. Petersburgh to Constantinople in 1793, by a Secre- 
tary of the Russian Embassy.^' ^* In the course of my rambles I have 
had frequent occasions of experiencing the politeness of the Turks, w)uch 
proves to me that this naUon is extremely well-disposed and inclined to 
oblige, and that the climate alone is the cause of the idleness sod indif- 
ference with which they are reproached. The Turk, when offended, or 
provoked to jealousy, b^mes terrible, and nothing but the blood of his 
adversary can calm \he passion which transports him. During my 
excursions in tlie environs of Constantinople I was frequently a witness of 
the obliging and hospitable propensities of this peofde. The first Tuik 
I applied to when I wanted directions in regard to the road I was to 
take, always offered himself as a guide^ and with the same readiness 
presented to me a part of his food or refreshment.'^ ** The mofe tha 
Turks are known, the more they are beloved for their cordiality, their 
frankness, and their excessive kindness to strangers. I am not afraid to 
assert, that, in many respects, they may serve as models to my country- 
men." Pp.201, 237. 

7 



of the liifkdus. 401 

Tlie causes which seem to account for these effects ncX)K il. 
^re partly physical, and partly moraL Where the ^^''' ; 
commodities of life, by a happy union of climate and 
fioil, are abundant, gentleness of manners, as appears 
by the traditions respecting the golden or pastoral 
age, is by no means unnatural to men in the earliest 
period of improvement : The savage, involved in a 
continual struggle with want, who sees himself and 
his children every day exposed to perish with hunger, 
is, by a sort of necessity, rapacious, harsh, unfeeling 
and cruel. The species of polity under which the 
national character is formed is perhaps to a still 
greater degree the cause of the diversity 'which we 
now contemplate. Where the mind is free, and may 
vent its passions with little fear, the nation, while 
Ignorant and rude, is also fierce and impetuous: 
Where slavery prevails, -and any departure from the 
most perfect obsequiousness is fdlowed with the most 
direful consequences, an insinuating and fawning be- 
haviour is the interest, and thence becomes the habit, 
of the people. 

With the same cau^s are connected other leading 
features in the character of the Hindus. They are 
remarkably prone to flattery ; the most prevailing 
mode of address from the weak to the strong, while 
men are still ignorant and unreflecting.^ The 

1 It would be easy to produce many testimonies to the propensity of the 
natives to adulation. Bernier, who speaks of it in the strongest terms, 
^es us the following amusing instance : <^ Un Pendet Brahmen que 
j'aTois fait roettre au service de roon Agab, se voulut meler, en entrant, 
de faire son panegyrique; et, apres I'avoir compart aux plus grands con- 
qaerans qui furent Jamais, et lui avoir ditcent grossiereset impertinentes 
flatteries, concluoit enfin serieusement par celle-cy : Lorsque Vous mettez 
]e pied dans I'estrier, Seigneur, et que vous marchez ^ cheval avec votre 
cavalerie, la terre tremble sous vos pas, Ics huit elephans qui la sup- 
portent sur leurs tetes ne pouvant soutenir ce grand effort. Je ne pus 
me tenir de rire la dessus, et je tachois de dire serieusement k mon 
Agab, qui ne pouroit anssi 8*en tenir, qu'il seroit done fort a-propos qu'il 
ne montat a cheval que fbrt rarement pour empescher les tremblemens 
VOL. I. 2d 



408 Mannefi 

BOOK n.Hiiidtts BtefyXlcf diisuiiulalion laid fidsehooAt the 
^°^^' ^' universal concomitants of oppression.^ The vices of 
falsehood, indeed, they carry to a heig^ht abnost ub- 
exam^ed among the other races of men. Judicial 
perjury is more than common ; it is almost universal. 
*' Perjury,'* said ^r William Jones, to the Grand Jury 
at Calcutta, ** seems to be committeid by the meanesly 
' 9ad encouraged by some of the better sort among' 
Ihe Itindus and Mussulmans, with as little remorse, 
OS if it were a proof erf* ingenuity, or even a merit*"^ 
•~^^ I have many reasons to believe, and none to 
doubt, that affidavits of every imaginable fact may as 
easily be procured in the streets and markets of Cal- 
cutta, especially from the nMives, as any other artide 
of traffic.**^ I^peaking of the forms of an oath 
among the Hindus, he says, ^ But such is the cor- 
rupt state even of their erroneous religion, that if the 
most binding form on the consciences of men could 
be known and established, there would be few con- 
sciences to be bound by it." * 

de terre qui caiuent souvent de si ^rsncls malhean; Anssi eat-ce pour 
cela roeme, me repondit-il sans hesiter, que je m!eD fais ordinwement 
porter en palekj." Bemiery Suite des Memoires sur l*£inpire de Grand 
Mogolyi. IS. 

t For a Strang testimony to the extent to vbich dissimulation per- 
vades the Hinda character, see Orme, on the Government and People 
of Hindustan, p. 428. " L'Indien qui vit sous ce goavemment en suit 
les impressions. Oblige de tamper il devient fonrbe." A«quetil Daper^ 
ron, Voy. aux Iiides Orieo. Zeudav. i. cccUii. 

• Sir Wro. Jones's Charge to the Grand Jury at Calcutta, June 10, 
1787. 

3 Id. June 10, 1785. 

* Id. 1787.—** La facility que le peuple de TOrient ont & mentir,*' is 
given by P. Paulini, as the cause of the trial by ordeal, so common in 
Hindustan. Voyage aux Indes Orient, par ie P. f^aulini, (the Fcencb 
edition of Burtolomco) ii. 109. Mr. Orroe says, *' The Geatooejue it»- 
famous for the want of generosity and gratitude in all the commerces of 
friendship; they arc a tricking, deceitful people, in all their deaiinga.^ 
(On the Government and People of Hindustan, p. 434.) 

Dr. Buchanan ridicules the expression of Sir William Jones^ when hm 



Xff ike Hindus. M$ 

t have not enumerated the reUginn of the Hhidus fioOE u. 

<' Chap 7 

as one among the Causes of that gentleness, whidi has ' ' 
been remarked in their deportment. This religion 
has produced a practice, which has stroagly «agaged 
the curiodty o( Europeans ; a superstitious care of the 
life of the inferior animals. A Hindu lires in perpe* 
tual terror of killing even an insect ; and hardly any 
crime can equal that of being unintentionally the 
cause of death to any animal of the more sacr^ spe^ 
cies. This feeble circumstance, however, is counter- 
acted by so many gloomy apd malignant principleSp 
that their religion, instead of humanizing the charac- 
ter, must hare had no inconsiderable effect in foster- 
ing that disposition to revenge^ that insensibility to 
the sufferings of others, and often that active cruelty, 
which lurks under the smiling exterior of the Hindu. 
*' Although the killing of an animal of the ox kiiid,*^ 
says Buchanan, ** is by aU Hindus considered as a 
kind of murder, I know no creature whose sufferings 
equal those of the labouring cattle of Hindustan." ^ 
No other race of men are perhaps so little friendly, 
and beneficent to one an other as the Hindus. '^ Dysen« 
teries,** says Dr. Tenant, speaking of the salt manu- 
facturers, *^ are at one season, peculiarly iatd. The 
unhappy victims of this disorder are avoided as infec* 



talks of the $imple Pandits ; a nice tvhose chief cbanicteristic is deceit 
and conning. (As. Res. Ti. 185.) 

** * What is a Brahman/ I was one daj asked, in a jocular way, bj 
one of that cast with whom I was intimately acqoamted : ^ He is an 
ant's nest of lies and impostures.* It is not possible to describe them 
better in so few words. All Htndos are expert in disguising the 
Crath ; but there is nothing in which the cast of Brahmans so mudi sur« 
passes them all as in the art of lying. It has taken so deep a root 
among them, that so far from Uushiog when detected in it, many of them 
make it their boast. Dubois* p. 177. On their propensity to aidulatioo, 
see the same author, p. I78. On the fraud and perjury of the Hindus^ 
consult Ward, utsapra, Introd. lix. and xdii. 

1 Buchanan's Journey through Mysore, &c. i. 167. 

2 D 2 



404 Manners 

:book II. tious by their companions, and suflfered to pine with' 
^^^^^2_^ out receiving either that aid or consolation, which 
compassion usually pays to the wretched." ^ " The 
Bengalese, says another travell^, ^^ will seldom assist 
each other, unless they happen to be friends or rela* 
tions, and then the service that they render only con- 
sists in carrying the suflFerer to the water of the 
Ganges, to let him die there, or be carried away by 
the stream."'^ Le Couteur remarks, that ^* men ac- 
customed from their infancy to abstain from every 
kind of cruelty towards brutes, ought naturally to be 
humane and benevolent towards their own species : 
and this would infallibly be the case, if the same reli- 
gion had not hardened the hearts of the superior 
casts ; for they hold those that are born their infe- 
riors, as beings below even the most worthless ani- 
mals : they take away the life of a man with less 
scruple than we kill a fowl. To strike a cow would 

1 Indian Kecreations, ii. 330. 

* Stavorinus' V^oyage, 1768 to 1771; Wilcock's Translation, London, 
1T98, p. 133. Dr. Tennant explains more fully, that only species of 
assistance which, according to Stavorinus, a Hindu receives even from 

, Ids relations. *' When a sick person's life is despaired of, be fs carried 
by his relations to the bank of the river; and there, exposed tu the 
storm, or the intense heat of the sun, he is permitted, or rather forced, 
to resign his breath. His mouth, nose, and ears, are closely stopped 
with the mud of the river ; large vessels of water are kept pouring upon 
him ; and it is amidst the agonies of disease, and the convulsive struggles 
of suffocation, that the miserable Hindoo bids adieu to his relations , 
and to his present existence/' (Indian Recreations, i. 108.) Describ- 
ing the apathy with which, during a fiamine, the Hindus beheld tine 
another perishing of hunger, Stavorinns says, <* In the town of Cbin- 
sorah itself, a poor sick Bengalese, who liad laid himself down in the 

' street, without any assistance being offered to bim by any body, was 
attacked in the night by the jackab, and though he had stncngth enough 
to cry out for help, no one would leave his own abode to deliver (be 
poor wretch, who was found in the morning halfkievoured and dead.*' 
Starorinus, ut supra, p. 153. It is highly worthy of attention, that the 
same inhumanity, hafd-heartedness, and the greatest insensibility to the 
feelings of others, is described, as the character of the Chinese. (See 
Barrow's China, p. 164.) 



of the Hindus, 405 

be saciilege ; but a Bramin may put a man to death book ii. 
when he lists." ^ ^"^^'^' 

It commonly happens that in a rude period of so- 
ciety, the virtue of hospitality, generously and cor- 
dially displayed, helps to cast into the shade the 
odious passions vrhich adhere to man in his un- 
cultivated state. The unhappy circumstances, reli-' 
gious and political, of the Hindu, have tended to 
eradicate even this, the virtue of a rude age, from 
his breast. After noticing, in various parts of his 
journey, the striking instances which he witnessed of 
the want of hospitality. Dr. Buchanan says in one 
passage, " I mention these difficulties, which are- 
very frequently met with by travellers in all parts 
of India where Europeans have not long resided, to 
show the inhospitable nature of its inhabitants." For 
one of his sepoys, who was seized with an acute dis- 
ease, and left in agony by the side of the road, he 
could not, except by force, in a large village, obtain a \ 
cot, though he was assured there was one in every 
house. ^ 



1 Le Couteur's Letters from IiKlia, London, 1790, p. 320. When the 
exactions of government press hard. Dr. Tennant says, '' the ryuts, (hus- 
bandmen) driven to despair, are forced to take up robbery for a sub- 
sistence; and when once accustomed to this wandering and irregular 
life, it becomes ever after impossible to reclaim them to industry, or to 
any sense of moral duty. We had yesterday a melancholy example of 
the daring profligacy of which they are capable: An officer who rode out 
only^ a mile beyond the piquets, was attacked by a party of fiv« horse- 
men ; in the midst of a friendly conversation, one stabbed him in the 
breast with a spear, which brought him to the ground; then the others 
robbed him of his watch, his horse, and every article of his cloathing. 
In this naked state he arrived at Hie piquet, covered with blood; and had 
he not been able to walk tims far, he must have fared worse than the 
man who, * between Jerusalem and Jericho fell among thieves,* since 
here there is no one * good SaraaritaiT to pity the unfortunate." (Indian 
Ilecreations, ii. 375.) 

« Buchanan, ut supra, i. 53; ii. 201, 202; iii. 300. Destitute per- 
sons, or persons in a famine, become tlie properly of those who feed 
them. (Tennant's Ind. Recr, i. 131.) 



406 Mamm 

BOOK IL The andept literature of the Hindus affords many 
Chaf. 7. pyQQfs lYivA. no inconsiderable degree of ferocity has at 
all times been mingled with the other ingredients of 
their character. The Yadavas, a sacred race, the 
kindred of Crishna, in a drupken fray, took arms and 
bntchertd one another, to the utter extinction of the 
race, ' One of the mo$t remarkable stories in the ce* 
lebrated book, call^ Hetopadew, is that of a man who 
cut off his wife's noae, because she would not speak 
to him.^ As the performance of that great religi- 
ijnas ceremony, called a Jug, is sufficient to extort 
^m the divinity whatever boon the %tue performer 
demands, the fidlowing law makes provision against 
the most cool, intense, 'and persevering malignity of 
which human nature appears to be susceptible, ** If 
a man peribrms a jugg to procure the death of any 
innocent person, the magistrate shall fine him 200 
puns of cowries." ^ If the gentleness, too, of the 
punishment, about ten shillings,^ be a sign, the indig- 
nation, which so atrocious a purpose excites, is far 
from remarkable. That murder, by the most odious 
means, by poison, is looked upon in the same venial 
light, the following law bears equal testimony ; '' If a 
man, to procure the death of any innocent person, by 
any contrivance, causes him to drink a potion, or 
otherwise meditates his death, the magistrate shall 
fine him 200 puns of cowries/** The cool reflection 

' See a celebrated passage of the Mahalwrat, translated by Mr. 
Halhed, in Manrioe's Ii^dian Hist. ii. 468. 

* Wilkins' Uetopadesa, p. 131. 

3 Geotoo Code, ch. xxL sect. 10. 

« Graot on the Hindus, p. 54. Printed by order of the Hoase of 
Commons, 1812. 

^ Gentoo Code, cb. xxi. sect. 10. A very intelligent servant of the 
East India Company, speaking of the Hindus in a situation ^'bere thej 
had hardly ever been exposed to the influence of strangers, Sumbholpoor, 
says, ** The men are low in stature, but well-made, lazy, treacherous, 
and cruel. But to these ill qualities of the tiger, the Ahnigbty bss 



of the Hindus. 407 

which attends the viBakiy of the Hindu, has often BOOK It. 
surprised the European. Mr. Holwell informs US| ^'^^' ^' 
that, when he sat as a judge at Calcutta, he had often 
heard the most atrocious murders avowed and de* 
fended by the criminab, on the ground of its being 
now the Cali age, when men are destined to be 
wicked.* 

. Notwithstanding the degree to which the furious 
passions enter into the character of the Hindu, all 
witnesses agree in representing him as a timid being. 
With more apparent capacity of sui^)orting pain than 
any other race of men ; and, on many occasions, a su* 
periority to the fear of death, which cannot be sur- 
passed, this people run from danger with more trepi- 
dation and eagerness than has been almost ever wit* 
nessed in any other part of the globe* ^ 

It is the mixture of this fearfulness, with their an- 
tisocial passions, which has given existence to that 
litigiousness of character which s^most aB witnessed 
have ascribed to this ancient race. As often as cou- 
rage f^s them in seeking a more darmg gratification 
to their hatred or revenge, their malignity find? a 

•bo, in. his men^, adcled the cowardice ef that aaimal ; for had tbej aft 
insensibility of danger, equal to their inclination for mischief, the rest of 
mankind would unite to hunt the*n down." (Motte'e Journey to Orissa, 
Asiat. An. Reg. i. 76.) ** Pestilence or beasts of prey," says Dr. Bu- 
dianan, *' are gentle in comparison with Hindu robbers, who, in order to 
discover concealed property, put to the torture all those who fall into 
their hands.*^ (Tr^ivels through Mysore, &c. iii. 206.) 

1 Remarquez que les terns les plus superstitieux onttoujours €t6 ceux 
des plus horribles crimes. (Voltaire, Diction. Philos. Article Super- 
stition.) 

< La lachet^ accompagne ordinairement la moUesse. Aussi Flndien 
est-il foible et timide. (Anquetil Duperron, Voyage aux Indes Orien, 
2endav. p. cxvii.) This timidity admits of degrees. It is in its greatest 
perfection in Bengal. In the upper provinces, both the corporeal and 
the mental frame are more hardy. Those of the race who are habituated 
to the dangers of war acquire, of course, more or less of insensibility to 
them. StUl the feature is not only real, but prominent. 



408 Mennerss 

BOOK II. v€Dt in the channel of litigation. '' That pusillani* 
^^^^y^' mity and sensibility of spirit/' says Mr. Orme, ** which 
renders the Gentoos incapable of supporting the con- 
tentions of danger, disposes them as much to prose- 
cute litigious contests. No people are of more inve- 
terate and steajiy resentments in civil disputes. The 
only instance in which they seem to have a contempt 
for money, is their profusion of it in procuring the re- 
dress and revenge of injuries at the bar of Justice. 
Although they can, with great resignation, see them- 
selves plundered to the utmost by their superiors, they 
become mad with impatience, when they think them- 
selves defrauded of any part of their projjerty by their 
equals. Nothing can be more adapted to the femi- 
nine spirit of a Gentoo, than the animosities of a law* 
suit/'' 

A modification of the same passions gives rise to 
another, and seemingly a strong ingredient in the 
Hindu characl;er, a propensity to the war of conten- 
tious tongues. The following picture, if not finely, is 
at least clearly drawn. " The timidity of the Hindu 
may, in general, prevent his fighting, boxing, or 
shedding of blood ; but it by no means restrains him 
from scolding and upbraiding his neighbours. In 

* Orme, on the Government and People of Indostao, p. 443.— In the 
committee of the; House of Commons, 1781, on the petition of Joho 
Touchet, &c., Charles W. Boughton Rouse, Esq. testified that " there 
cannot be a race of men upon- earth more litigious and clamorous than 
the inhabitants of Dacca.'' Mr. Park takes notice of the passion of the 
negroes in Africa, for law-suits, and adds; " If I may judge from their 
harangues, ivhich I frequently attended, I believe that in the forensic' 
qualifications of procrastination and cavil, and the arts of confuunding 
and perplexing a cause, they are not always surpassed by the ablest 
pleaders in Europe.*' Park's Travels in Africa, p. 20. Dr. liobertson 
was sadly mistaken, when he considered the litigious subtlety of the 
Hindus as a sign of high civilization. See Robertson's Historic. Disq. 
concerning India, p. 217. Travellers have remarked that no wherein 
this 6abtlety carried higher than among the wildest of the Irish. 



of the Hindus. 4(^ 

thij» respect they are the most litigious and quarrel- BOOK IT. 
some of all men. Have two persons a misunder- ^°^^' ^' 
standing ? Let them meet in the street ; and they """^^^ 
will upbraid each other 'for an hour together, with , 

every foul epithet of abuse which their imagination 
can suggest, or their language supply. A few natives 
engaged in one of these bickerings display a furious 
gesticulation; a volubility of words, and coarseness of 
expression, which leave the eloquence of Billingsgate 
for behind/'^ 

The physical temperament of the Hindus, while 
the effect of some of the circumstances which have 
operated to the formation of their minds, has reflected 
a strong influence on their character. Their make is 
slender and delicate. Their shapes are in general fine. 
The female form, in particular, frequently attains in 
India its most exquisite proportions ; and " their 
skins," says Mr. Orme, speaking of the Hindu wo- 
men, ^' are of a polish and softness beyond that of all 

» Tennant's Indian Kecrcations, i. 123. The following character 
drawn by a missionary, a. man who knew them well, unites most of the 
particulars which I have hitherto described of the character of this re- 
markable people. Les Indous soot agiles, adroits, d'un caractere doux, 
d'un esprit penetrant; ils aiment les phrases et les locutions pittoresques; 
ils parleqt avec elegance, font de longs discours, se decident, dans leurs 
affaires, avec une lenteur extrdme, examinentatteDtivement,etcoa^oiveot 
avec fac\lite ; ils sont modestes dans leurs discoucse, inconstant dans 
leurs paroles, faciles a promettre et difiiciles h tenir leurs promesses, im- 
portuns dans leurs demandes,et ingrats aprbs qu'ilsles ont obtenu ; humble 
et soumis quand ils craignent, orgueiUeux et hautains quand ils sont les 
plus forts ; paisibles et dissimules quand ils ne peuvent se venger, im* 
placables et vindicatifs des ({ue Toccasion s'en preseute. J*al vu beau- 
coup de families se ruiner par des proems devant les tribunaux, seulement 
par esprit de vengeance." (Voyage aux Indes Orientales, par le P. 
Paulini, i. 293.) " Their utmost feuds," says Fryer, " are determined 
by the dint of the tongue ; to scold lustily, and to pull one another's 
puckehesor turbats off, being proverbially termed a banyan fight. Never- 
theless they are implacable till a secret and sure revenge fall upon their 
^ adversary, either by maliciously plotting against their life, by clancuiar 
dealings^; or estate, by unlawful and unjust extortions." (Fryer's Travels, 
]fiU ill. ch. iii.) 
3 



410 Manners 

BOOK II. their rivals on the globe."* The muscular strength, 
CiiAA*. 7. i^^QY^y^ of the Hindus, is smaU ; even less, accord- 
ing to the same accurate observer, than the appear- 
ance of their bodies, though expressive of weakness 
would lead the spectator to infer. Their stature is in 
general considerably below the European standard; 
though such inferiority is more remarkable in the 
south, and diminishes as you advance toward the 
north.* 

The extreme simplicity and lightness of the 
aliments used by the Hindu, and the smallness of his 
consumption^ must, undoubtedly, have been among^ 
the causes of the lightness and feebleness observable 
in his frame. His food consists almost wholly of 
rice; and his drink is nothing but water : while his 
demands are satisfied with a pittance which appears 
extreme to the people of almost every other part of 
the world. The prohibition, by the Hindu religion, 
of the flesh <^ animals for food, has been suflSci^itly' 
remarked. It is not such as to have produced by any 
means a total abstinence, but the quantity consumed 
is, no doubt, small. The great luxury of the Hindu is 
butter, prepared in a manner peculiar to himself; and 
called by him, ghee*^ 



> Orme, on the Efieminacy of the Inhabitants of Indostan, p. 461 1» 
465. Stavorinus* Voyages, p. 407. There is however oonsiderabl« 
Tarietjy as in the stature, so in the strength of the Hindus ; and the cMie, 
^ might be expected, fuMows the other. The foilowing is a striking and 
important fact : *' In Industan, the oominon people of all sorts are a dinri- 
atttiYe race, in comparison with those of higher casts and better for- 
(nfiea; and yield still more to them in all the advantafEes of pbysiognooay. 
There is not a handsomer race in the universe, than the Baniam of 
Gozerat : the Haramcores whose business is to remove all kinds of filth; 
and the buryers and homers of dead bodies are as remarfcably ogly." 
Orme, ut supra, p. 463. There cannot be a more convincing proof, that 
a state of extreme oppression, even of stunted subsistence, has at all 
times been the wretched lot of the labouring classes in Hindustan. 

* Orme, on the Goverameut and People of Indostaii, p. 470. ForsterV 



of the Hindus. ' 411 

But though the body of the Hindu is feeble, it is BOOK IL 
agile, in an extraordinary degree. Not only in those ^^^' ^' 
surprising contortions and feats, winch constitute the 
art of the tumbler, do they excel almost aU the nations 
in the world ; but even in running and marching they 
equal, if not surpass, people of the most robost consti- 
tutions. "Their messengers will go fifty miles a 
day, for twenty or thirty days without intermis- 
sion.'* Their infantry, if totally unincurabered with 
burthens, which they could by no means support^ will 
iharch fastm*, and with less weariness, than Euro- 
pean.* 

The delicacy of their texture is accompanied with 
great acuteness and sensibility in all the organs of 
sense. This not only gives them great advantages in 
some of the finest of the manual arts, as weaving, for 
example, the pliant fingers and exquisite touch of 
the Hindu being so peculiarly adapted to the hand- 
ling of the finest threads ; but it communicates a re- 
markable susceptibility to the mental organs. The 
Hindu is a sort of a sensitive plant His imaginatioik 
and passions are easily inflamed ; and he has a sharp* 
ness^and quickness of intellect which seems strongly 
connected with the sensibility of his outward firame* 

Another remarkable circumstance in the character 
of the Hindus ; in part, too, no doubt, the effect of cor- 
poreal weakness, though an effect in some sort opposite 

Trarels, i. 40. The demand of the American tribee for food was very 
. like that of the Hindus, in point of qaantity. Roberson's Hist# ojf 
AmeriGa, ii. 63. The contrivances of the American Indians for food 
were far more ingenioasy and productive of more variety, than those 
of the Hindus. Ibid. p. 118. It would appear from Sacontala, that 
anciently much scrapie was not used in eating flesh. Madhavya, com* 
plaining of the hardships he sustained in the hunting party of the 
king, says, ** Are we hungry ? We must greedily devour lean venison, 
and that commonly roasted to a stick.'' 

1 Orme^ on the EfTemioacy of the Inhab. of lodostaoi ubi supra. 



412 ^ Manners 

BOOK II. to that excitability which we have immediately re- 
^"^^' ^' marked, is the inertness of disposition, with which all 
men have been so forcibly struck in observing the 
conduct of this peculiar race. The love of repose 
reigns in India with more powerful sway, than in any 
, other region probably of the globe. *' It is more 

happy to be seated than to walk; it is more happy to 
sleep than to be awake ; but the happiest pf all is 
death." Such is one of the favourite saying^, most fre- 
quently in the mouths of this listless tribe, and most 
descriptive of their halntual propensities. Phlejfmatic 
indolence pervades the nation. Few pains, to the 
mind of a Hindu, are equal to that of bpdily exertion ; 
the pleasure must be intense which he pilfers to that 
of its total cessation.^ 

This' listless apathy and corporeal weakness of the 
natives of Hindustan, have been ascribed to the cli- 
mate under which they Kve. But other nations, sub- 
ject to the influence of as warm a sun, are neither 
inddent nor weak; the Malays for example, the Ara^ 
bians, the Chinese.^ The ^vage is listless and indo- 

> Tennant's Indian Recreations, i. 15, 55, 102, 215. Forster's Tra- 
vels, i. 193. " Ulndien est natureliementdoux, mais d'une douceftr d^ 
nonchalance et de paresse/' Anq. Dupenron, Zendavesta, Disc. Pf^Ilm. 
p. cxvii. 

« The Rinnans, robust and active, present a striking contrast with th« 
feeble indolence of the Hindus. Vide Syme's Embassy to Ara. '^ Hav- 
ing witnessed," says Mr. Forster, " the robust activity of the people of 
this country (Northern Persia) and Afghanistan, I am induced to think, 
that the human body may sustain the most laborious services, without 
the aid of animal food. The Afghan, whose sole aliment is bread, 
curdled milk and water, inhabiting a climate which often produces in 
one day, extreme heat and cold, shall undergo as much fatigue, and exert 
as much strength, as the porter of London, who copiously feeds on flesh- 
meat, and ale; nor is he subject to the like acute and obstinate disorders. 
It is a well known fact, that tlie Arabs of the shore of the Red Sea, who 
live, with little exception, on dates and lemons, carry burthens of sucU 
an extraordinary weight, that its specific mention to an European ear 
would seem romance. *' Forster's Travels, ii. 142, H3, 



of the Hindus. 418 

lent under every clime. In general, this disposition BOOK II. 
must arise from the absence of the motives to work ; ' ^' 
because the pain of moderate labour is so very gentle, 
that even feeble pleasures suffice to overcome it; and 
the pleasures which spring from the fruits of labour 
are so many and great, that the prospect of them, 
•where allowed to operate, can seldom fail io produce 
'the exertions which they require. There is a state 
of barbarity arid rudeness which implies, perhaps, a 
weakness of mind too great to be capable of perceiv- 
ing, with a clearness sufficient to operate upon the 
will, the benefits of labour. This, however, is a state 
beyond which the Hindus have long since passed ; and 
there is but one cause, to which, among the Hindus, 
the absence of the motives for labour can be ascribed ; 
tbeir subjection to a wretched government, under 
which the finits of labour were never secure.^ 



1 There is a curioos passage, quoted by Volney, (Travels hi Syria, ch. 
\\.) from Hippocrates, in his Treatise de Aere, Locis, et Aqais. ** As to 
the efTeminacy and indolence of the Asiatics, says the ancient, if they 
are less warlike and more gentle in their manners than the Kuropeans, no 
doubt the nature of their climate, more temperate than oars, contributes 
greatly to this difference. But we must not forget their government^ 
which are all despotic, and subject every thing to the arbitrary will of 
then* kings. Men who are not permitted the enjoyment of their natural 
rights, but whose passions are p^Tsetualty under the guidance of their 
masters, will never be found courageous in battle. To them the risks and 
advantages of war are by no means equal. But let them combat in 
their own cause, and reap the reward of their victory, or feel the shame 
of their defeat, they will no longer be deficient in courage.'' Volney 
remarks that the sluggishness and apathy visible among"" the Hindus, 
negroes, &c. is approached, if not equalled, by what is witnessed in 
Russia, Poland, Hungary, .&c. Ibid. << The Iftwer classes of people in 
India, says Dr. Buchanan, are like children ; and except in the mofe 
considerable places, where they meet with uncommon encouragement to 
industry froni Europeans, are generally in such a state of apathy, that 
without the orders of Government, they will hardly do any thing." 
Buchanan*s Journey through Mysore, &c. i. d70. <Mf we contemplate 
a savage nation in any part of the globle, a supine indolence and « care^ 
lessness of futurity, wiii be ibund to constitute their general charao- 
tftr." Gibbon, i. 356. 



4L14 ^annefs 

BOOK II. Hie languid and stothful halnts of the Hindu ap« 
^^^*^''^' pear to have jN^^cribed even his amusements and di- 
versions* Thej are almost all of the sedentary and 
inactive kind. The game of paucheess, which bears a 
resCTibiaoce to chess and draughts, and is played by 
two natives, reclining on their sides, widi a smatt 
<:hequared carpet placed between them» is the fa- 
vourite amusement of this indolent race. Wonderful 
is the patience and interest vrith which, we are told, 
^ey watch and plan the evolutions of this languid 
gaine.^ The mind in vacuity drodps and pines ; even 
where the body is the most gratified by repose : and 
in the rude state of society, when interesting olyects 
seldom occur, the pa^on for play is a general re- 
source. The Hindus, accordingly, appear to have 
been at all times deeply infected with the vices of 
gaming* In that celebrated poem, the Mahabarat, 
Judishter, though celebrated as a model of kingly wis- 
dom, and his four brothers, all eminent men, aie re- 
presented as losing their fortunes, and their very king- 
doms, at dice. The laws, as usual, are ambiguous 
and contradictory. All gaming is pronounced un- 
lawful; yet, according to the Gentoo Code, parties 
may game before an agent of the magistrate, to whom 
in that case a half of the winnings belongs.^ 

A fondness for those surprising feats of bodily agility 
and dexterity which form the arts of the tumbler and 

1 T«DDant*8 Indian Recreatioos, i. 367. 

* Gentoo code, chap. i. sect. 1. ^* 6o relaxed are Uie principles even 
of the rich^ natives, that actions have been hron^t fay an opnleat 
Hindu for roooey advanced solely to support a oonunon gaming-hoiisei 
in the profits of which he had a considerable share; and the transactMn 
was avowed hy him with as mnch confidence, as if it had been perfectly 
justifiable by our laws and his own/' Charge to the Grand Jury of Cal- 
iwtu, Dec. 4, 1788. Gamiog is remarked as a strong characteristie of 
the Chinese. See Barrow's liie of Lord Macartney, ii. 415. Travels 
in China, p. 157. It is a remarkable passion among the M^ays. See 
Marsden's Sumatra. 

8 



of the Hindus. 41S 

the juggler, is a ftature in the character of the Hindu. BOOK n. 
It id a passive enjoyment which corresponds with tbe^^*^V^ 
passivenesB of his temper ; and it seems in general to 
he adapted to the taste of all men in a state of society 
-resembling his own. Oiar Saxon ancestors were much 
addicted to this species of amusement ; and their tum- 
blers and jugglers had arrived at great proficiency.' 
Hie passion of the Chinese for those diversions is 
known to be excessive, and the powers of their pav 
formers, almost incredible.^ This was one of the 
&yoimte entertainments of the ancient Mexicans; 
and their surprising dexterhy and skill seem hardly 
to have yield^ to that of the Hindus and Chinese. 
Clavigero concludes a minute and interesting account 
of the astonishing feats of the Mexican performers, by 
remarking, that, ** the first Spaniards, who were wit-* 
nesses of these and other exhibitions of the Mexicans, 
were so much astonished at tlieir agility, that they 
suspected some supernatural power assisted them, for*, 
getting to make a due allowance for the progress of 
the human genius when assisted by application and 
labour,"* 

A taste for buffoonery is very generally a part of 
the character cf a rude people ; as appears by the buf« 
foons, who, under the name of fools, were entertained 
by our Gk)thic ancestors in the courts of princes and 
the palaces of the great Among the Hindus, this 
source of amusement was an object of so much im^ 
pottance, as to become the subject of legislative 
enactment. *^ The magistrate," says the Gentoo 
code, " shall retain in his service a great number of 

• Tamer'd HUt. of the An^o Saxon^i book viii. ch. vii. 
e See Barrow, and other travellers. BeU's Trayels, ii. SO. 
A Clavigeroy Hist, of Mexico^ book vii. MCt. 4G. 



416 • Manners 

BOOK II. buffoons or parasites, jesters, an^ dancers^ and 
^°^''-^' athletics."^ 

Story- telling, which entirely harmonizes with the 
Hindu tone of mind, is said to be a favourite diver- 
sion.^ The recitations of the bards, with which the 
people of Europe were formerly so much delighted, 
afforded an entertainment of the same desciription. 
The stories of the Hindus consist of the wildest fic- 
tions ; and as almost all their written narratives are 
in verse, their spoken stories, it is probable, like the 
effusions of the bards, contained occasionally more or 
less of the measure and elevation of verse.^ Music 
and dancing form a part of their entertainments ; the 
latter, however, they enjoy as spectators chiefly, not 
performers. 

Notwithstanding the indolence and inactivity of 
the Hindus, hunting, which is in general so favourite 
a sport of man in his uncivilized state, is capable of 
calling forth their^most strenuous exertions. The 
different classes seem not only to forget their habitual 
languor and timidity, but their still more inveterate 
prejudices of caste, and join together in pursuing the 
tenants of the woods and mountains with an ardour, 
enterprise and patience^ which no other people can 
surpass.'^ 

It is curious that avarice, which seems but little 
consistent with sloth, or that insecurity with regard 

» Gentoo Code, p. 118. 

* Tennant's Indian Recreations, \\ 367. 

3 Story-telling is a common amusement among the negroes of Africa. 
'< These stories,*' says Mr. Park, bear some resemblance to those in the 
Arabian Nights* Entertainments; but, in general, are of a more ludicrous 
cast." Park's Travels in Africa, p. 31. 

"^ Tennant's Indian Recreations, i. 367, and other travellers. Hunting, 
vrhich delights other men chiefly in their ignorant and uncivilized state, 
teems to delight kings in all states. . 



of the Hindus. 417 

to property which so bad a government as theirs im- fiOOR II. 
plies forms a more remaricable ingredient in the na^ ^"^^'^* 
tional character of the Hindus, than in that of any 
other people. It is a passion congenial to a weak and 
timid mind, unwarmed by the social affections* They 
are almost universally penurious ;^ and where placed 
in situations in which their insatiable desire of gain 
can meet with its gratification, it is not easy to surpass 
their keenness i^nd assiduity in the arts of accumula- 
tion.^ " Slavery," says Mr. Orme, **has sharpened 
the natural fineness of all the spirits of Asia. From 
the difficulty of obtaining, and the greater difficulty 
of preserving, the Gentoos are indefatigable in busi- 
ness, and masters of the most exquisite dissimulatH>n 
in all affaii's of interest. They are the acutest buyers 
and sellers in the world, and preserve through all 
their bargains a degree of calmness, which baffles all 
the arts that can be opposed against it."^ The ava- 

< Dr. Buchanan, who bears strong testimony to the prevalence of this * 
disposition among the Uindus^.says, the Nairs are a sort of an excep- 
tion. He ascribes this peculiarity to the peculiar form given among 
them to the assodation of the sexes. Journey through Mysore, &a 
ii.411. 

• The following acute observation of Helvetius goes far to account for 
iu ** Ce que j'observe, c'est qu*il est des pays ou le desir d'immenses 
richesses devient raisonnable. Ce sont ceux ou les taxes sont arbi- 
traires, et par consequent les possessions incertaines, ou les reuversemens 
de fortune sont frequens; ou, comme en Orient, le prince pent im- 
pundment'S'emparer des propriet^s de ses sujets.-^Dans ce pays, si 
I'on desire les tresors de Ambouleasant, c'est que toujours expose k lea 
perdre, on espere au moins tirer des debris d'une grande fortune de quoi 
subsister soi et sa famille. Partout ou la loi sans force ne pent pro- 
teger le foible centre le puissant, on pent regarder Topulence comme on 
moyen de se soustraire aux injustices, aux vexations du fort^ an mepris 
enfin, compagnon de la foiblesse. On desire done une grande fortnne 
comme une protectrice et un bouciier contre les oppresseurs/' De 
I'Homme, sect. viii. chap. v. 

3 Orme, on the Government and People of Indostan, p. 431. — ** Lln- 
dien qui vit sous ce gouvemement en suit les impressions, Oblig^ de 
Tamper, il devient fburbe. * * * II se permet Fusure et la fraude dans 
VOL. I. 2 E 



418 Manners 

BOOK n. ridous disposition of the Hindus is deeply stamped in 
^°^^* ^' their maxims of prudence and morality. Thus, they 
say ; ** From poverty a man cometh to shame. Alas I 
the want of riches is the foundation of every misfor- 
tuna — It is better to dwell in a forest haunted by 
tigers and lions, than to live amongst relations after 
the loss of wealth."' 

The mode of transacting bai^ins among the Hin- 
dus is sufficiently peculiar to deserve description. By 
a refinement of the cunning and deceitful temper of a 
rude people, the business is performed secretly, by 
tangible signs. The buyer and seller seat themiselves 
opposite to one another, and covering their hands 
with a cloth, perform all the most subtile artifices of 
chaffering, without uttering a word, by means of car- 
tain touches and signals of the fingers, which they 
mutually understand.^ 

The simplicity of the houses, dress, and furniture 
of the Hindus corresponds with that of their diet. 
** The Indian houses," says Sonnerat, ** display 

le commerce.^ Anquet. Doperron, Zendayesta, Disc. Prelim, p. cxvii.-^ 
'^The chief pleasure of the Gentiles or Banyans is to cheat one another, 
conceiving therein the highest feUcity/' Frajer*s Travels, let. in. 
chap. iii. 

> Wilkins' Hetopadesa, p. 63. The last of these maxims is not less 
expressive of that want of generosity, which is so strong a feature of the 
Hindy character. In the ethics, however, of the Hindus, as well as their 
jurisprudence and theology, contradiction is endless. In the same page 
with the foregoing is the following maxim; " He who, in opposition to his 
own happiness, deHghteth in the accumulation of riches, carrieth bur- 
thens for others, and is the vehicle of trouble.'' Ibid. 

« Tennant's Indian Recreations, ii. 232. Lord's Banyan Religion, 
chap. xii. The same or a similar mode of transacting bargains is fol- 
lowed in Persia. Chardin, Voyage en Perse, iii. 122. " The merchants, 
besides being frequently very dexterous in the addition and subtractioa 
of large sums by memory, have a singular method of numeration, by put- 
ting their hands into each other's sleeve, and there, touching one another 
with this or that finger, or with such a particular joint of it, will transact 
affairs of the greatest value, without speaking to one another, or letting 
the standers by into the sect." Shaw's Travels in Barbary, p. 267. 



of the Hindus. «419 

nothing of oriental magnificence/** l%ose of the BOOK il. 
poor, eren in towns, are built of mud, sometimes of . °^''' 
brick, and thatched. ** Brahmens and religious - 
people plaster the pavement, and sometimes the waUs, 
with cow-dung ; and although this act proceeds from 
a spirit of religion, yet it is of use in keeping out in- 
sects."^ The furniture, which is almost ilothing in 
the houses of the poor, is in the highest degi'ee scanty 
and simple even in those of the rich. Mats or carpets 
for the floor, on which they are accustomed both to 
sit and to lie, with a few earthen and other vessels for 
the pi^eparation of their victuals and for their religious 
ceremonies, form the inventory in general of their 
household goods.® 

From the frequency and care with which the 'Hin- 
dus perform religious ablutions, the Europeans, prone 
from partial appearances to draw flattering conclu- 
sions, painted them, at first, as in the colours- of sd 
many other virtues, so likewise in those of cleanliness^ 
Few nations are surpassed by^e Hindus, in the total 
want of physical purity, in their streets, houses, and- 
persons. Mr. Forster, whose long residence in India, 
and knowledge of the country, render him an excel- 
lent witness, says of the narrow streets of Benares ; ' 
** In addition to the pernicious effect which must pro- 
ceed from a confined atmosphere, there is, in the hot 

I Sonnerat, Voyages, liv. iii. chap. i. 

« Sonnerat, iWd. ; Fryer's Travels, let. ir. chap. 6. 

3 P. Paalini, Voy. Indes Orient, liv. i; ch. 7. Fryer, who repr«senig 
the bouses of the Moors, or Mussalmen, at Surat, as not deficient even 
in a sort of magnificence, says, hnmoroiftly, that "the Banyans"' 
(Hindu merchants, often ettremely rich) ** for the most part live in ' 
humble cells or sheds, crowding three or. four families- together into an* 
hovel, with goats, cows, and calves, sill chaiAi^ber ^el)6ws, that they are 
almost poisoned with vennlii and nastmess'; so stupid, that, notwith- 
standing chints, fleas, and musketoes, torment them every minute, dare 
not presume to scratch when it itches, lest some relation should be un- 
tenanted from its miserable abode.'' Fryer's Travels, let. iii. chap. i. 

2 e2 



483 Manners 

B00& II. itself partially at an early period of society, and stiD 
^'^^' ^' wants much of its proper strength at a late one. The 
distinctions of giving way on the road are thus 
marked in the Gentoo code ; a man with sight, to a 
man blind ; a man with hearing to a man deaf; a 
man to a woman ; a man empty-handed to a man 
with a burthen ; an inferior person to a superior ; a 
man. in health to a sick person; and all persons to a 
Brahmen.^ Not a few of their rules bear curious 
testimony to the unpolished state of society in which 
they were prescribed, " If a man," says one of their 
la>v;s, ^f having accepted another's invitation, doth not 
eat at his house, then he shall be obliged to make 
good all the expense that was incurred in conse* 
quence of the invitation."^ When a Hindu gives an 
entertainment, he seats himself in the place of 
greatest distinction; and all the most delicate and 
costly of the viands are placed before him. The com« 
pany sit according to their quality, the inferior sort 
at the greatest distance from the master ; each eating 
of those dishes only which are placed before him, and 
t)iey continually decreasing in fineness, as they ap- 
proach the place of the lowest of the guests.® 

The attachment which the Hindus, in common with 
all ignorant nations, bear to astrology, is a part of 
their manners exerting a strong influence upon the 
train of their actions. " The Hindus of the present 
age," says a partial observer, ^^ do not undertake any 
affair of consequence without consulting their astro- 
logers, who are always Brahmens."* The belief of 



1 Geotoo Code, ch. xxi. sect. 10. « Ibid. 

3 TennaDt*s Indian Recreatioiw, i. 254. 

« Wiikin^' Hetopadesa, note, p. S69. Tha unceremcnious Fryer sajs, 
the principal sdence of tbe Brahmen is magic and astrology. IVaveis, 
let. IT. chap. vi. Of the astonishing degree to which the Indians of aU 
descriptions are devoted to astrology, see a lively description by fiernier. 



of the Hindus. \4S3 

witchcraft and sorcery continues universally prevalent; BOOK II. 
and is every day the cause of the greatest enormities. ^^^^' ^' 
It not unfrequently happens that Brahmens, tried for 
murder before the English judges, assign as their mo- 
tive to the crime, that the murdered individual had 
enchanted them. No fewer than five unhappy per- 
sons in one district were tried and executed for 
witchcraft, so late as the year 1792. The villagers 
themselves assume the right of sitting in judgment on 
this imaginary offence ; and their sole instruments of 
proof are the most wretched of all incantations. 
Branches of the Saul tree, for example, one for each 
of the suspected individuals, inscribed with her name, 
are planted in water. If any of them withers within a 
certain time, the devoted female, whose name it bears, 
suffers death as a witch.^ 



Suite des Memoires sar I'Empire de Gniud Mogol, j. 12 k 14. ^^ Les 
Tois, et les seigneurs/' says he, '' qui n'eDtreprendroient la raoindre chose 
quails n'eussent consultez les astrologues, leur donnent de grcuids appoint- 
ments pour lire ce qui est ecrit dans le ciel/' Ibid. '' The savages/' 
says Mallet, (Introd. to the Hist, of Denmark, i. ch. i.) " whom the 
Danes hate found on the coast of Greenland, live with great union and 
tranquillity. They are neither quarrelsome, nor mischievous, nor war- 
like ; being greatly afraid of those that are. Theft, blows, and murder, 
are almost unknown to them. They are chaste before marriage, and 
love their children tenderly. Their simplicity hath not been able to pre- 
serve them from having priests, who pass among them for enchanters ; 
and are in truth very great and dexterous cheats.'' 

1 See an account of this shocking part of the manners of the Hindus 
in the Asiat. An. R^st. for 1801, Miscellaneous Tracts, p. 9I, 



. • .1 -4 . 



NOTES. 



NOTE A. p. 286. 



** 5. This universe existed only in the first divine idea yet kh- 
expandedf as if involved in darkness^ imperceptible, undefinable, 
undiscoverable hi/ reason, and undiscovered iy revelatienf as if 
it were wholly immersed in sleep : 

** 6. Then the sole self-existmg power, himself midiscemed, 
but making this world discernible, with ^ve elements and other 
principles of nature^ appeared with undiminished glory, expand^ 
ing his idea^ or dispelling the gloom. 

' ** 7. He, whom the mind alone can perceive, whose essence 
eludes the external organs, who has no visible parts, who exists 
from eternity, even he, the soul of all beings, whom no being 
can comprehend, shone forth in person. 

** 8. He, having willed to produce various beings from his 
own divine substance, first with a thought created the waters, 
and placed in them a productive seed : 

** 9. The seed became an egg bright as gold, blazing like the 
luminary with a thousand beams : and in that egg he was bom 
himself, in the form of Brahma, the great forefiither of all 
jspirits. 

<^ 10. The waters are called nara^ because diey were the pro- 
duction of Nara, or the Spirit of God; and, since they were his 
. first ayana^ or place of motion, he thence is named Narayaka, 
,07* moving on the waters* 

" U. From that wHie^t is, the fint cause, not the objected 
sense, existing every where in substance^ not existing to ourper^ 
tcpticmy without begmning or end, was produced the divine tnale, 
famed in all worlds under the appellation of Brahma. 

** 12. In that eg^ the great power sat inactive a whole year 
of the Creator, at tfie clbse of which; by his thought alone; he 
caused the egg to divide itself; 

*< 19. Andfrom its two divbions he framed the heaven abcne 



426 



NOTE A* 

and the earth beneath : in the midst he placed the subtil ether, 
the eight regions, and the permanent receptacle of waters. 

"14. From the supreme soul he drew forth mind, existing 
substantially though unperceived by sense, immaterial; and 
before fnind, or the reasoning power, he produced consciousnesSy 
the internal monitor, the ruler ; 

** 15. And, before them both^ he produced the great principle 
of the soidy or first expansion of the divine idea ; and all vital forms 
endued with the three qualities of goodness^ passion, and dark- 
ness : and the^v^ perceptions of sense, and the five organs of 
sensation. 

*^ 16. Thus, having at once pervaded, with emanations firom 
the Supreme Spirit, the minutest portions of six principles im- 
mensely operative, consciousness and the five preceptions, he 
firamed ail creatures ; 

<< !?• And since the minutest particles of visible nature have 
a dependence on those six emanations from God, the wise have 
accordingly given the name oisarira or depending on six^ that if, 
the ten organs on consciousness, and the five elements on as mantf 
perceptions, to his image or aj^^rance in visible nature. 

'M8. Thence proceed the great elements endued with pe» 
culiar powers, and mind with operations infinitely subtil, the im- 
perishable cause of all apparent forms. 

** 19. This universe, therefore^ is compacted from the minute 
portions of those seven divine and active principles, the great 
soul, or first emanation, consciousness^ and five perceptions i a 
mutable universe from immutable ideas. 

** 20. Among them each succeeding element acquires the 
quality of the preceding; and, in as many degrees as each 
oC them is advaiH^ed, with so many properties is it said to be 
endued. 

" 21. He too first assigned to all creatures distinct names, dis* 
tinct acts, and distinct occupations ; as they had been revealed 
in the pre-existing Veda. 

, " 22. He, the supreme ruler, created an assemblage of inferior 
deities, with divine attributes and pure souls ; and a number of 
genii jexquisitely delicate > and he prescribed the. sacrifice ordained 
irom the beginning. 

. ** 2S. From fire, from air, and from the sun he milked out, as 
it were, the three primordial Vedas, named Richp Yajush, and 
Samahf for the due performance of the sacrifice. ^ 

** 24. He gave being to tiaaeaBd the divisions of time, to llie 
stars also, and to the planets, to riversy oceans, and mountains, to 
level plains, and uneven valleys. 

2 



NOTE A. 4ST 

« 25. To devotion, speech, complacency, desire, and wrath, 
and to the creation, which shall presently be mentioned ; for he 
willed the existence of all those created things. 

'< 26. For the sake of distinguishing actions, he made a total 
difference between right and wrong, and enured these sentient 
creatures to pleasure and pain, cold and keaty and other opposite 
pairs. 

** 27. With very minute transformable portions, called matraSf 
of the five elements, all this perceptible world wais composed in 
fit order ; 

*^ 28. And in whatever occupation the supreme lord first em* 
ployed any vital soul, to that occupation the same soul attaches 
itself spontaneously, when it receives a new body again and 
again: 

** 29. Whatever quality, noxious or innocent, harsh or mild, 
unjust or just, false or true, he conferred on any being at its 
creation, the same quality enters it of course on its Juture 
births ; 

** SO. As the six seasons of the year attain respectively their 
peculiar marks in due time, and of tiieir own accord, even so the 
several acts of each embodied spirit attend it naturaUy, 

'< 31 . That the human race might be multiplied, he caused 
ih^JSrahmeny the Cshatrij^, the Vau^ya, and the Sudra (so named 
from the scripture^ protection, toealth^ and labour) to proceed from 
his mouth, his arm, his thigh, and his foot. 

'< 32. Having divided his own substance, the mighty Power 
became half male, half femmie, or nature active and passive ; and 
from that female he produced Viraj : 

<< 33. Know me, O most excellent of Brahmens, to be that 
person, whom the malepotoer Viraj, having performed austere 
devotion, produced by himself; me, the secondary framer of all 
atns visible XL'orld: 

** 34. It was I, who, desirous of giving birth to a race of men, 
performed very difficult religious duties, and first produced ten 
lords of created being, eminent in holiness, 

" 35. Marichi, Atri, Angeras, Pulastya, Pulah'a, Cratu, Pra-r 
chetas, or Dacsha, Vasishtha, Bhrigu, and Narada : 

« 36. They, abundant in glory, produced seven other Menu9^ 
together with deities, and in the mansions of deities, and Ma^ 
harskisf or great Sages, unlimited in power. 

" 87. Benevolent genii, and fierce giants, blood-thirsty 
savages, heavenly quiristers, nymphs and demons, huge ser- 
pents, and snakes of smaller size, birds of mighty wing, and 
separate companies of Pitris, or progenitors of mankind; 



428 KOTE A. 

** 38. ' Lightnings and thunder-boltSy clouds and coloured 
bows of Indraf fiilling meteors, earth-rending vapours, comets, 
and luminaries of various degrees ; 

** 39. Horse-faced sylvans, apes, fish, and a variety of birds, 
tame cattle, deer, men, and ravenous beasts with two rows of 
teedi; 

'*' 40. Small and large reptiles, moths, lice, fleas, and com- 
mon flies, with every biting gnat, and immoveable substances of 
distinct sorts." (Instit. of Menu, ch. 1.) 

Such is the account of the creation which is contained in one 
of the principal standards of Hindu faith ; such is one of the 
diief documents from which we can draw precise ideas respect- 
ing the religious principles of the Hindus. The darkness, the 
vagueness, and the confusion, which reign in it, need not be re- 
marked ; for b^ these the Hindu mythology is throughout dis* 
tinguished. llie first of the propositions, as it now stands, can 
be adequately designated only by the familiar appellative, non- 
sense ; the ideas are heterogeneous, and imcompatible. ** This 
universe" it is said, ** existed only in thejirst divine idea^ 
When any thing is said to exist in idea, the meaning is, 
that it is conceived by the mind, or, in common language, 
that it is an idea in the mind. This universe then, according to 
the above passage, was conceived by the divme mind before it 
was actually produced, or, in other words, it was an idea in the 
divine mind. This idea existed in the divine mind, *' yet un- 
expanded." But what are we to understand by an idea in the 
divine mind ** unexpanded ? " in regard to human thought an 
idea may be said to be unexpanded, when something is conceived 
very generally and obscurely; and it may be said to* be ex- 
panded when the thing is conceived minutely, distinctly, and 
in all its parts. Are we then to understand by the idea of the uni- 
verse being unexpanded in the divine mind, that the universe 
was ccmceived by it only generally, obscurely, indistinctly, and 
that it was not till creation was actually performed, that the divine 
idea was clear, full, and precise ? How infinitely removed is this 
from the sublime conception which we entertain of the Divine 
Being; to whose thoughts all his works past, ^present, and to 
come, and every thing in the universe from eternity to eternity, 
are present always, essentially, perfectly, in all their parts, 
properties, and relations ! This 'divine idea js still &rther 
described : it existed <' as if involved in darkness." When 
an idea is involved in darkness, it is an idea not perfectly 
understood; an apprehension only compatible with the most 
imperfect notions of the divine nature. It existed <' imper- 



NOt£ A. 429 

ceptible/* If this means by the senses, all ideas are impercep- 
tible ; if it means by the mind, it is impossible, for the very es» 
sence of an idea consists in its being perceived by the mind. 
It existed *^ undefinable, undiscoverabie by reason, undi»- 
covered by revelation, as if it were wholly immersed in sleep.** 
What sort of an idea could that be in the divine mind which the '^ 

divine nund could not define^ that mind by which it was formed ? 
If the meaning be, that it could not be defined by any other 
mind ; neither can the idea, not yet expressed which exists in 
the mind of the most fooHsh of men. ** Not discoverable by 
reason ; ** does this mean that the divine reason did not discover 
the divine idea ; or does it mean that human reason could not 
discover it ? An idea in tlie mind of another being is not disco- 
verable to man by reason, but by enunciation* The last ex- 
pression is the most extraordinary ; *' as if immersed in sleep :*' 
*< an idea immersed in sleep ! " An idea too in the divine mind 
immersed in sleep ! What notion can be formed of this? 

But it must be explained that this incoherence and absurdity 
is not the work of Menu, or of the author, whoever he was, of 
the treatise which goes by his name. It is a common plan in 
India, for a commentator who is explaining a book, to insert be- 
tween the words of the text such expressions as to him appear 
necessary to render the sense of the author clear and distinct. 
This has been done by a commentator of the name of CuUuca, in 
regard to the ordinances of Menu ; and his gloss or commen? 
tary, interworded with the text. Sir William Jones has trans- 
lated along with his author. As he has, very judiciously, how- 
ever, printed the interwoven expressions of Uie commentator in 
italics, it is easy for the reader to separate them, and to behold 
the sense of the original unadulterated. According to this ex- 
pedient, the words of Menu appear thus: ** This existed only 
in darkness, inperceptible, undefinable, undiscoverabie, undis- 
covered, as if it were wholly immersed in sleep." It seems re- 
markably the genius of the ancient Sanscrit writings to be 
elliptical, and the adjective pronouns especially are very fre- 
quently used without a substantive. '< This," in the passage 
which we are now examining, is in that situation. The mind of > 
the reader is lefl to supply the word which the sense of the 
context demands. This— every thing; this— whole; this— 
universe ; siich is the manner in which the mind easily here 
suggests the requisite idea; and when this is done, the inco- 
herence and absurdity which the supplement of Culluca en- 
gendered, is ^tirely dispelled. The passage presents dearly, 
and unambiguously, a.description, a very vague and unmeaning 



430 KOTE A. 

description^ it must be owned, of that chaos of which the 
Greeks and Romans drew so striking and awful a ptcture, and 
of wh< h the belief appears to have been so widely and generally 
diffused. The notion which Culluca endeavoured to engraftyis re- 
markable. It is no other than the celebrated Platonic principle of 
the pre*existence of all things in the divine mind, which CuUuca, 
it is evident, neither understood nor could apply, and with which 
he made such havoc on the genuine sense of his author. It is 
probable that he borrowed the idea from some foreign source, 
that it pleased him as preferable to the more rude conception of 
a chaos, and that he resolved, according to the invariable rule of 
the Brahmens, to give his own order the credit of it, by incor- 
porating it with the doctrines of the sacred authors. 

There is a remarkable coincidence, and there is a remarkable 
discrepancy, between this passage in the Institutes of Menu, 
and the following at the beginning of the book of Genesis : ** In 
the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the 
earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the 
face of the deep." The coincidence appears in the chaotic de- 
scription here applied to the earth ; the discrepancy consists in 
this, that the Jewish legislator informs us of the previous crea- 
tion of the shapeless mass, the Hindu legislator describes it as 
antecedent to all creation. 

This chaos, this universe, then, in its dark, imperceptible, un- 
definable state, existed, according to Menu, antecedent to 
creation. This too was the idea of the Greeks and Romans, 
who thence believed in the eternity of matter. It is doubtful, 
from the extreme vagueness of the Hindu language, whether 
they had oarried their thoughts so far as to conceive the ques- 
tion respecting the origin of matter; but as its eternity is implied 
in several of their doctrines, IBO it appears to be recognized 
in some of their expressions. It appears, indeed, that tfaey 
were unable to make any clear distinction between matter and 
jtpirit, but rather considered the latter to be some extraordinary 
refinement of the former. Thus even the Divine Being, though 
they called him soul, and spirit, they certainly regarded as ma* 
terial. In the passage already quoted, it is said, <' that he 
willed to produce various beings from his wm divine substance^* 
Now what can be meant by substance, if not material substance ? 
Besides, from material substance alone can material beings be 
produced. But the first thing which we are told was produced 
from the divine substance, was water. It is worth remarking, at 
the same time, that in other places water appears to be spoken 
of as uncreated, and as the material out of which all other things 



KOTK B. 431 

were produced. A passage describing the creation, translated 
from the Yajur Veda ' by Mr. Colebrooke, commences thus : 
** Waters alone there were ; this world originally was water. In 
it the lord of creation moved, having become air." [ Asiat« Res. 
viii. 452.] 

NOTE B. p. 289. . . 

Another and a very remarkable account of the creation of liv- 
ing creatures is found in the Vedas, and translated by Mr. Cole- 
brooke. " This variety of forms was, before the production of 
body, souly bearing a human shape. Next, looking round, that 
primeval Being saw nothing butjiimself ; and he first said, I am I. 
Therefore his name was I : and thence even now, when 
called, a man first answers, it is I, and then declares any other 
name which appertains to him. — Since he, being anterior to all 
this which seeks supremacy, did consume by fire all sinful ob- 
stacles to his own supremacy, therefore does the man, who 
knows this truth, overcome him, who seeks to be before him.— 
He felt dread ; and, therefore, man fears, when alone. But he re- 
flected ' Since nothing exists besides myself, why should I fear?* 
Thus his terror departed from him ; for what should he dread, 
since fear must be of another ? — He felt not delight ; and, there- 
fore, man delights not when alone. He wished the existence of 
another ; and instantly he became such as is man and woman in 
mutual embrace. He caused this his own self to fall in twain ; 
and thus became a husband and a wife. Therefore was this body, 
so separated, as it were an imperfect moiety of himself: for so 
Yajnyawalcya has pronounced it. This blank, therefore, is com- 
pleted by woman. He approached her ; and thence were hu- 
man beings produced. — She reflected, doubtingly ; How can he, 
having produced me from himself, incestuously approach me ? I 
will now assume a disguise. She became a cow ; and the other 
became a bull and a{9)iroached her ; and the issue were kine. 
She was changed into a mare, and he into a stallion ; one was 
turned into a female ass, and the other into a mule one : thus did 
he again approach her, and the one-hoofed kind was the offspring. 
She became a female goat, and he a male one ; she was an ewe, 
and he a ram : thus he approached her, and goats and sheep 
were the progeny. In this manner, did he create every existing 
pair whatsoever, even to the ants and minutest insect.'' See a 
curious Discourse of Mr. Colebrooke on the Vedas, or Sacred 
Writings of the Hindus, Asiat. Research, viii. 440, 441. 



433 X NOTE 0. 



NOTE C.p.341. 

DAILY CEREMONIES OF THE BtlAHMENS* 

As he rises from sleep, a Brahmen must rub his teeth with a 
proper withe, or a twig of the racimeferous fig tree, repeating 
prayers. Should this sacred duty be omitted, so great a sin is 
incurred, that the benefit is lost of all religious rites performed 
by him. The next circumsttoce of importance is, the deposit of 
the withe after it has done its office. It must be carefully thrown 
away in a place firee from 'impurities ; that is, where none of 
those religious stains, which are so multiplied among the Hindus, 
and must infect so many places, have been imprinted. When the 
business of tire teeth and of the twig is accomplished, ablution 
next engages the attention of the Brahmen. The duty of the 
^bath, particularly in the months of Magha, Pholgima, and Car- 
tica, is no less efficacious than a rigid penance for the expiation 
of sin. Standing in a river, or in other water, the worshipper* 
sipping water, which is a requisite preliminary to all rites, and 
sprinkling it before him, recites inaudibly the gayatri, or holiest 
text of the Veda, with the names of the seven worlds. He next 
throws water eight times on his head, or towards the sky, and at 
last upon the ground, to destroy the demons who wage war with 
the gods, reciting prayers, of which the first may be received as 
a specimen : '' O waters, since ye afibrd us delight, grant us pre- 
sent happiness, and the rapturous sight of the supreme God."* 
When these ceremonies and prayers are performed, he plunges 
three times into the water, and each lime repeats the expiatory 
text which recites the creation, and having then washed his 
mantle, the mooiing ablution is finished. If he is an house- 
holder, it is his duty to bathe again at noon, and if he belongs to 
an order of devotion, both at noon and in the evening, with cere* 
monies, differing somewhat in the words and forms, but the same 
in spirit and substance.' 

An important part of the worship of the Brahmen then suc- 
ceeds. Coming out of the water, and putting on his mantle, he 
sits down to worship the rising sun. This great duty is performed 
by first tying the lock of hair on the crown of his head, while he 
holds much cusa grass in his left hand, and three blades of it in 
his right, or wears a ring of -it on the third finger of that hand, re- 

> Colebrooke oo the Religibus Gcremoaies of the Hiodm, Asiat. Re- 
search. V. S45, 346. 



KOTfi c. 43S 

cSting at the same time the gayairi. He then sips water three 
times, repeats the mysterious names of the seven worlds, recites 
again the gayatri, rubs his bands as if washing them, touches with 
his wet hand his feet« head, breast, eyes, ears, nose, and navel, 
and again three times sips water. If, however, he should sneeze, 
.or spit, he must obey the text which says^ ** after sneezing, spit* 
ting; blowing his nose, deeping, putting on apparel or dropping 
tears, a man should not iomiediately sip water, but first touch his 
right ear/' The sipping, however^ being at last performed, he 
passes his hand, filled with water, bridcly round his ne<ik, wKUe 
he prays : ** May the waters preserve me !" He then shuts his 
eyes and meditates in silence. Till we got better information, 
very wonderful ideas were formed of the sublimity of the Brah^ 
men's meditations. On this, one of the most sacred end solemn 
of all occasions, white he meditates in silence, with his eyes shut, 
and every mark of intense thought, we are informed, that he is 
only " figuring to himself, that Brahma, with five faces and a red 
complexion, resides in his navel ; Vishnu, With four arms and a 
black complexion, in his heart; and Siva, with five faces and a 
white complexion in his forehead." Nor is this the whole of his 
meditation. He poinders next on the holiest of texts ; and this 
sublime duty is performed in the following manner. Closing the 
kfl nostril with the two longest fingers of the right hand, he 
draws his breath through the right nostril, and then, closing it 
with his thumb, and suspending his breath, he repeats to* himself 
the gayatri, the mysterious names of the worlds, and the sacred 
text of Brahme; after which, raising his fingers from the left 
nostril,he emits the breath which he badsnppressed, and thus ends 
one part of his medtitatimu The same process is repeated three 
times, and the whole is then concluded. This meditation, says 
Yajnyawalcya, ** implies, Om, (aum,) earth, sky, heaven, middle 
region, place of births, mansion of the blessed, abode of truth. We 
meditate on the adorable light of the resplendent generator 
which govetns our intellects, which is Water, lustre, savour, im- 
mortal faculty of thought, Brahme^ earth, sky, and heaven." ' 
He then stands on one.fpot, resting the other against hm ancle or 
heel, and looking towards the east, while his hands are held open 
before him in a hollow finrm, and in that posture he recites 
prayers to the sun, of which the following is one of the most re- 
markable: ** ThoU art self«existent, thou art the most excellent 
cay ; thou givest efildgence ; grant it unto me." When all these 
ceremonies are performed, the oblation or offering is the next ~ 

^ Colebrooke on the Relfgious Ceremoniei of the Hindos, Asiat. Rei. v. 
348. 

VOL. I. 2 P 



434 VOTE c. 

part of the service. It consists of tila, flowers* barley, waler^ 
and red senders wood ; it is put into a vessel of copper in the 
shape of a boat, and placed on the head of the votary, who pre* 
sents it with fresh prayers, and holy texts* In the last place 
conies the invocation of the gayatri. It is first addressed in tbeae 
words : ^ Thou art light ; thou art seed; thou art immortal life; 
thou art effulgent; beloved by the gods, defiuned by none, thou 
art the hotiest sacrifice." It is then recited measure by measore ; 
next the two first measures are recited as one hemistidi ; and 
the third measure as the other; lastly, the three measures are 
repeated without interruption. It is addressed again in the fok" 
lowing words ; *' Divine text» who dost grant our best wishes* 
whose name is trisyllable, whose import is the power of the Sn* 
preme Being ; come, thou mother of the Vedas, vrho didst Bptiag 
from Brahme, be constant here." It is then, dong with the tri- 
literal monosyllable, and the names of the tlnree lower worlds, 
pronounced inaudibly a hundred^ or a thousand times, or as often 
as practicable, while the repetitions are counted upon a rosary 
of wild grains, or of gems set in gdd* Additional prayers are re- 
cited, and the morning worship of the sun is thus terminated. * 

The religious duties which fill up the remaining portion of the 
day are chiefly comprised in wha^ are denominated the five sa- 
cramenta. In a passage of the Insdtutes of Stf enu these are thus 
described ; << Teaching and studying the scripture is the sacra- 
ment of the Veda: Offering cakes and water, the sacrament of 
the manes; An oblation to fire, the sacrament of die deities; 
Giving ^rice or other food to living creatures, the sacrament of 
spirits ; Receiving guests with honour, the sacrament of men."* 
I shall endeavour by a very short illustration to convey an idea of 
each. 

Preparatory to the study of the Veda must ablation be per* 
formed. Of this some ceremonies not yet described may be here 
introduced. <' Let a Brahmen at all times perform the abhition/ 
says the law of Menu, ** with the pure part of his hand, deno- 
minated from the Veda, or with the part sacred to the Lord of 
creatures, or with that dedicated to the gods ; but never wi^ die 
part named from the Pitris : The pure part under the root of the 
thumb is qalled Brahma; that at the root of the little finger, 
Caya; thai* at the tips of the fingers, Daiva; and the part be- 
tween the thumb and index, Pitrya. Let him first sip water 
thrice ; then twice wipe his momh ; and lastly touch w9th water 

* Colebrooke on Um Relisious Ceremoniea of the Hiadus, Asiat, Res, 
n 347 to S6a 

• Institatci of Menu, ch, iii. 70. 



NOTB c: 485 

the m hollow p«rto of hif head, [or lii» ey6i> oiM> Ukd aoftriis J 
his breait md hi* head. He who knows tho law, and leeka ^a* 
• ritf, will ever peHbitai the abhiHoo with the pure part oThii 
hand, and with water aeitlier hot nor frothy, standing in a lonely 
place, and turning eo the east or the north* A Btahmen is pwi« 
fied by water that reachea hie hoeen ; a Csfaatriya^ by water de- 
scending to his throat; a Yaisya, by water barely taken into hia 
month ; a Sudra, by w«ter toached with the extremity of hii 
Hps/* ' Having concluded this part €ti the ceremony, uid wdked 
fn a circle beginning from the south, he proceeds.to the promni 
ciation of the syllable Aum» ** A Brahmen, beginning and end^^ 
ing a lecture on the Veda, must always proneunee to himself the 
sylli^le Aum ; for unless the syllable Aum preceded, his learaAig 
will slip away from him; and unless it follow, nothing wiH be 
long reuined. If he have sitten on culms of cusa grass, with their 
potats toward the eaM, and be porified by rubbing that holy gvas* 
on both his hands, and be further prepared by ticree sttppressiens 
of breath, each equal in time to ftve short vowels, he may then 
filly pronounce Aum, Brahma milked^ out, asfit were, from the 
three vedas, the letter A, tlie letter U, and the letter M, wtneh 
form by ^eir <:oaKtion Uie trihteral monosyllable, together with 
three mysterious words, earth, sky, heaven."^ 'turning hia face 
towards the east, with his right hand towards the south, and hie 
left hand towards the north, he then sits down, having the cusa 
grass befbre him, holdiiig two blades of it on the dps of hia left 
fingen, and plkdng on them his right hand wi^ the pakn tamed 
upwards, and in this sacred position he meditatee the gayatri* 
He then recites the due prayers and texts, and is thua prepared 
to begin the ^aily perusal of the Yeda.^ 

The sacrament of the manes, which occupies the second plaee 
in the above teoct of Menii, is described at great length in that 
sacred vokime* ** Let' the Bremen smear with cow«-dung a pu* 
rifled and sequestered piece of ground; and Itt him with great 
cara select a place with a declivity toward the ioodi. Having 
duly made an ablution with water, let him place with reverence 
^le invited Brahmens, who hmre also performed thdr ablurione^ 
one by one, on allotted seats purified with cusa grasa, honouring 
tJiem witii fragrant garlands and sweet odours, and bnnging for 
them water, witJi cusa grass and tila ; then let him pour the ob^ 
lati<m of clarified batter on the holy fire, and afterwards proceed 
to satiify the manes of his ancestors. Having waHeed in order 

' Institutes of Meuo, cb. ii. 58 to «£. • Ibid. ii. 74, 76, 76. 

' Golcbrooke aa dw RellfioiR CereiMDics of tbe Hioaes, Afftttic Res. 

V. sea. 

2 r 2 



436 VOTE c 

from east to south, and thrown into the fire all the ingredients of 
his oblation, let him sprinkle water on the fpround with his ri^t 
hand. From the remainder of the clarified batter having formed . 
three balls of rice, let him offisr them, with fixed attention, in the 
same manner as the water, his face being tuned to the south : 
Then having offered those balls, after due ceremonies, and with 
an attentive mind, to the manes of his father, his pateicnal grand- 
father, and great grandfather, let him wipe the same hand with 
the roots of cusa, which he had before used, for the sake of his 
paternal ancestors in the fourth, fifth, and sixth degrees, who are 
the partakers of the rice and clarified butter thus wiped off*. 
Having made an ablution, returning toward the north, and thrice 
siq>pres8ing his breath slowly, let him salute the gods of the six 
seasons, and the Pitris. Whatever water remains in his ewer, let 
him carry back deliberately near the cakes of rice ; and with 
fixed attention let him smdl those cakes, in order as they were 
ofiered, and give part of them to the Brahmens. Having poured 
water, with cusa grass and tila, into the hands H>f the Brahmens, 
let him give them the upper part of the cakea, saying Swadha to 
the manes. Next, having himself brought with both hands a 
vessel full of rice, let him, still meditating on the Pitris, place it 
before the Brahmens without precipitation. Broths, potherbs, 
and other eatables accompanyijftg the rice, together with tnilk 
and curds, clarified butter and honey, let him first place on the 
ground after he has made an aUution : let him add spiced pud- 
dings^ and milky messes of various sorts, roots of herbs and ripe 
fruits, savoury meats and sweet-snieUing drinks: then being 
duly purified, and with perfect presence of mind, let him take up 
all the dishes one by one, and present them in order to the Brah- 
mens, proclaiming their qualities. Himself being ddighted, let 
him give delight to the Brahmens, and invite them to eat of the 
provisions by little and littie ; attracting them often with the 
pressed rice and other eatables. Let ail the dressed food be very 
hot. Let not a chandala, a town boar, a cock, a dog, a woman 
in her courses, or an eunuch, see the Brahmens eating."> These, 
with a variety of prayers, and several other observances, are the 
obsequies to the manes of ancestors. 

The oblations to fire, which are a most important part of the 
duties of the Hindu, are dignified with the titie of the sadament 
of the gods. I shall here premise the ceremonies attending the 
consecration of the fire, and the sacramental implements, though 
to all religious rites these may be regarded as introductory. In 

> lottHnlM of MenUf.ch. \ih SOS to 264.— -Colebrooke on die Religiotts 
Cerenonict of the llindui, A«tat« Rn, ▼. 364. 



KOTE c. 487 

order to prepare the ground for the reception of the holy fire, 
the priest chooses a level spot *fWr cubits square, free from ail ce« 
remonial iroponties, covered with a shed, and this he smears with 
cow-dung. Next, having bathed and sipped water, he sits down 
with his face towards the east, and placing a vessel of water wkh 
cusa grass on his left, dropping his right knee, and restmg on the 
span of his left hand, he draws, after an established rule^ five 
consecrated lines, and gathering up the dust from the edges of 
them, throws it away toward the north-east, saying, <^ What was 
herein bad Is thrown away/' Having, also, sprinkled the lines 
with water, and the ground being now prepared, he takes a 
lighted ember out of the vessels wherein he preserved the fire, 
and throwing it away, cries, '* I dismiss far away carnivorous 
fire: May it go to the realm of Yama, bearing sin hence/* 
Then, placing the fire before him, he exclaims, '< Earth ! sky I 
heaven ! " and adds, ** This other harmless fire alone remaint^ 
here ; well knowing its office, may it convey my oblation to the 
gods." He now bestows upon it a name, conformable to the 
purpose for which he prefers it, and oonclodes this part of the oe* 
remony by silently burning a log of wood one span long, smeared 
with clarified butter. The plaping of the superintending priei^t _ 
is the next part of the duty. On yery solemn occasions this is « 
real Brahmen ;^but in general a substitute is made for him of « 
bundle of eosa grass. He by whom the sacrifice is performed 
takes up the vessel of water, and, keeping his right side towardg 
the fire, walks round it: then he pours water near it, in sdi 
eastern direction, and spreads on it cusa grass t then he crosses,' 
without sitting down, his right knee over his left; then takes up. 
a single blade of grass between the thumb and ring finger of hig 
left hand; next throws it away towards the south-west, saying, 
*< What was herein bad is cast away :** then he touches the water, 
resting the sole of his right foot on his left ankle, sprinkles the 
^rass with water, afler which he places on it his Brahmen made 
of'cusa, saying to it, << Sit on this seaf untH thy fee be paid 
thee ;" he then returns round the fire the same way by which he 
weht, and sitting down again with his face towards the east 
name$ the earth inaudibly. If no profane word should hitherto 
have been spoken, fbr which atonement is requisite, he must 
next spread leaves of cusa grass on three ^des of the fire; he 
begins with the eastern side, and lays three rows of leaves 
in such a msinner that the tip of the one shall cover 'the 
root of the other; after this he blesses the ten regions of 
space, and rising ^ little ppt» soiyie ivqo4 on the fire wi^ a 
ladleful of clarified butter^ while he meditates in silence on Bndi* 



4SS VMS a 

QM^ the lord of cretttures: next he tbkes up two leftves of fbe 
gmaiy fifid with another outtbg <tf the lebgdi of a apan, and aay- 
iiig» *< Pwe letYes be aacred to Viahhu " he throws them into a 
\mmA of coppar, or other metal ; he then takes up other two 
lea;ve% and tiolding the tipa of them between the thumb and ting 
finger of hpa lijght hand, the roels between the thnmb and rii^ 
.fii)0er q{ ^i^ lefty be takes np» havbg the one hand crossed over 
t^ <^bery c)ivrified .butter in thecurriture of the kaves, and 
tbreifs saine of it three severid thnes into the fire. He then 
^iltides the leavea with wateft and throws them awaj; next, 
ha?k^-9pritikfed the vessel containing the clarified butter, he puts 
it^oa tb^fire and takes it oiF again three several timem when, hav- 
ing reclt^ the proper prayen Widi cusa grass in both bis hands, 
tbe«M!enH)By of hallowing the butter is finished* That of hal- 
lowing Idbe wooden kdle is perfonned bjr describing three times 
with the tip of his fore fing«fr and thuaafci the figure 7 on the in- 
side of it, and the %ure 9 on the ouiatde, by spsinkling water, 
having fiivt dropped on one knee, firom the palms of his hands, on 
the wh<4e southern side of the fire, fren, west to east ; on the 
Western side firom sonlh to north, on the northern side, and 
' Aeti aU around the fire, reciting prayen and sacred texts. Hav- 
iBg next recited an expiatory prayer with cuaa.graas in both his 
kimds, and hnving thrown the gprass away, he has then finislied 
ihe consecration of the aacrificial implements. It is only after all 
dkia is accomplished that he ii prepared to begin Ae oblation to 
fire, of which the foUowing is one of thai variety of forms which 
it receives according to the rite intended to succeed* First, the 
priest bums silently a log of wood, smeared with clarified butter : 
next, he makes three oblations, by pouring each time a ladl^ul 
of clarified butter on the fire, m»d pnmouncing severally the fol- 
lowing prayers; ** Earth! be this oblation efficacious**' — f* Sky 1 
be this obbition eScacioua,"-*-*/ Heav^ | be this oblation eiBca- 
cioua." On some occasions the oblation is made a fourth time, 
mi he says, '< Earth ! aikj 1 Heaven 1 be this oblation efficacious." 
An offipring of rice, milk, ourds» and butter, is next performed, 
and the dMationB accompanied with the names of the three 
worlds are repeated.^ '< In his domestic fice, for dressing the 
food of all the gods," si^s the law of Menu, <Met a Brahmen 
make w oblation each day to these following divinities; first to 
Agn% god of firc^ and to the lunar god, severally; then, to both 
of them al once; next, to the assembled gods; and afterwards to 

> Colebroolce oo Ae RcHglons Ceremoirirs of tbc Hindus, A»la(» Res. ^ii. 
SfttoSSa. 



NOTE C. 43^ 

Dhanwantari god of medicine; to Cuhu^ goddeis of tbe da^' 
wbea the new moon is diacen^Ue ; to Anumati^ goddess of the 
day after the opposition ; to Frajapati, or the lord of creatures ) 
to Dyava and Piithivi, goddesses of sky and earth ; and kistly» to 
the fire of the good sacrifice. Having thus, with fixed attention, 
offered clarified buttef in all quarters, proceeding firom the east 
in a aoiitkem direction^ to Indray Yamiv Vanina, and the god 
Soma, let him effier his gift to aniouited creatures*" ' 

The fourth sacrament, or that of spirits, in the Institutes of 
Menu, is thus described : ** Let him, saying, I salute the marats 
er winds, throw dressed rice near the door : saying, I salute the 
water gods^ let him throw it in water ; and let him throw it on his 
pestle and mortar^ ttying^ I salute the gods of large trees. Let 
him do tbe like in the nortb-east, or near his pillow, to Sri, the 
goddess of abundance; in the south-west, or at the foot of his bed, 
to the propitious goddess Bhadracali ; in the centre of his man- 
aion, to Brahma, and his houaeiiold god ; to all the gods assembled, « 
let hira throw up his oUation in open air ; by day, to the spirits 
vho walk in light; and by night, to those who walk in daricness ; 
in the building on Ms housetop, or behind his back, let him cast 
his oblation for the wefikre of alT creatures ; ^and what remains let 
him- give to the Pitris with lus fiu^e toiward the south." * 

Of those dimteal sacraments, whidi constitute so great a 
part of the duty of the Hindus, recetviag guests with ho- 
nour, which is denominated the sacrament a£ men, is the fifth. 
This is eomtaionly, by English writen, interpreted ** hospita- 
lity." But- w^.shall form a very erroneous notion of this sacra- 
mental service, if we confound it with the merely human and 
profane duty of receiving strangers beneficently from motives of 
humanity. This is a duty purely religious, confined to the 
twie&ibom and conaectated classes ; and principally contrived 
for the benefit of the Brahnnens; d)at for them, in all places, 
and on aU oocasioos, every door < may be open, and every table 
spiiead. ^ A Bnihmien, comine as a guest, and not received with 
just honour, takes to himself all the reward of the housekeeper's 
former virtue, ev&i though he had been so temperate as to live 
on the gleaniAgA of harvests, and so pious as to make oblations 
in Aye distinct fires.**' A guett, in the Hindu sense, is not 
every man who may claim, or may stand in need of your hospi- 
talities: A guest, according to the commentator, whom Mr. 
CMebrooke follows as his guide, is ^< a spiritual preceptor, a 
prieet, an ascetick, a prince, a bridegroom, a friend.''^ ^ In 

* iDstitDtes of MeDti, cb. iii. 84 to 87. * Ibid. ch. hi. 88 to 91. 

* Ibid. cb. iii. 100. ■• *- Aftiat. Res. vii. 289. 



440 ^o^£ c;. 

die houise of a Brahmen^'* gayd the law of' Menu, '* a mttitary 
man is not denominated a guest ; aor a man of Uie commercial 
or servile cast;" ^ so that a Brahmen, to whom are devoted the 
hospitalities of all the classes, is bound to Jetum them to Brah- 
mens alone. Among the religious ceremonies witii which this 
sacrament is celebrated, a cow is tied on th^ northern side of the 
Iq^artment, and a stool^and other furaiture placed for the guest, 
when the householder, rising up to bid hini welcome^ recitea the 
prayer; '^ May she, who supplies 4>bligations forjreUgions wor- 
ship, who constantly follows her calf, and who was the milch 
cow when Yama was the votary, abound with nulk, and fulfil our 
wislies year after year." The guest then sits down on the stool 
or cushion prepared for him, reciting the text of the Yajurveda, 
which says ; " 1 step on this for the sake of food and other 
benefits, on this variously splendid footstool." His host next 
presents to him a cushion made of twenty leaves of cusa 
grass, holding it up with both handSf and exclaiming, ** The 
cushion! the cushion ! the^ cushion!" which the guest accepts 
and places it on the ground under his feet, reciting prayers. 
This done, a vessel of water is presented to him> the host thrice 
exclaitning, ** Water for ablutions I *' Of this the guest de- 
clares his acceptance, and looking inito the vessel cries, '' Ge- 
nerous water !. I view thee ; setum in the form of fbrtiliaing rain 
from him from whom thou dost proceed. He then takes some 
of it in the palms of both hands joined together, and throws it 
on his left foot, aaying, '^ I wash !my left foot, and fix prosperity 
in this realm;" in the same manner on the right foot, with a 
similar declaration ; and lastly, on both feet, saying, ^^ I wash 
first one and then the other; and lastly, both feet, that the 
realm may thrive, aiid intrepidity be gained." With similar for? 
malities is next presented and received, an arghya ; that is, a 
vessel shaped like a boat, or a conch, ^ledwith 'water, rice, and 
durva grass ; when the guest pouring the water on his head, 
says, *' Thou art the splendour of food ; through thee may I 
become glorious." The host, again presenting water, three tiines 
exclaims, " Take water to be sipped !" the guest, accepting it, 
says, *' Thou art glorioua, grabt me glory 1" These ceremonies 
being finished, the host fills a vessel with honey, curds, and 
clarified butter, and, covering it with another vessel, presents it 
to his guest, exclaiming three times^ <* Take the madhuparca!" 
lie, receiving, places it on the ground, and looking into it, says, 
<< Thou art glorious, may I become so:" he tastes it three times, 
saying, ** Thou art the sustenance of the glorious ; thou art the 

> Institutes of Meno, cb. ui. 110. 



NOTE C. 441 

Bourisbmenl of the splendid ; thou art the food of the fortunate ; 
grant me prosperity ;" and then silently eats until be be satisfied. 
Wbeii this is done, he sips water ; and toHchmg his mouth and 
other parts of his body with his hand, he says, " May there be 
speech in my mouth ; breath in my nostrils ; sight in my eye* 
bails ; hearing in my ears ; strength in my arms ; firmness in my 
tliighs: may my limbs. and members remain unhurt together 
with my soul/* Presents are then presented to him, suitable to 
the rank of the parties ; and a barber who attends for the pur- 
pose, now exclaims, " The cow, the cow." The guest then 
pronounces the following text: *' Release the cow from (Jie fet« 
ters of Varuna* May she subdue my foe. May she destroy 
the enemies bdili of my host and me. Dismiss the cow that she 
may efit grass and drink water;'' At this intercession she is 
released, and thus die guest addresses her; <* I have earnestly 
entreated this prudent person, saying, Kill not the innocent, 
faBrmle0s» cow, who is mother of Rudras, ^Eughter of Vasus, 
sister of adityas, and the source of wnbrosia." > Such is the 
modern which the ceremonial duty of entertaining guests is 
celebjrated, and such is an idea of the ceremonies which are in- 
cluded in the five daily sacram^ts of the Hindus. 

As the daily cerenu>nies> however, in their full detail,, are sul^ 
ficient to engross the whole time. of the votary; for those on ' 
whom the lections of society devolve, some alleviaston of the 
burthen, or rathe^r, in the, Hindu: notion, some restriction of the 
privilege, was necQssarily devised; and. while the sanctity of 
entire apcompliqhmeiit is reserved for the holy men who main* 
tain perpetual fires, those who are engaged in the affidrs of life 
^e obliged to content themselves with a rite^ c^led Vaiswadeya, 
in whi^h all the daily sacraments, excepting tliat of the lYeda, 
are comprised. It coosists of oblations to th& manes, to the 
gods, and spirits, and of donaftions to guests, all out of the food 
prepared. for the daily mei4 ; and is thus perfimned. Sitting 
down in a place free from impurities, and setting a vessel con« 
taining fire on his. right hand, the worshipper hallows the ground 
by throwing away a lighted piece of cusa grass, while he recites 
the appropriate text, ^ and then places his fire on the conse- 
crated spot, repeating tlie prayer which is used, when the house- 
hold and sacrificial fires are lighted by the attrition of wood. ». 

* Colebrooke on the Religious Ceremonies of the Hind ns, Asia!. K«9. vU. 
288toS93. 
« « I dismiss far away eamivorom fire/' itc. qaoted nboTe, p. 437. 
3 ** Fire! this wood is thjr origin, which is attainable in' all seasons 



He next layir ciua graae on die eistam tUk of the ite, iritli ito 
tips pointed towards the north, ezdaiming, ^* I pmse dtvine 
fire, primeTallj cooBecrated, the efficient perfomtr of a Bolemn 
ceremony, the chief agent of a sacnfioe, ^kit most liberal giver 
of gems." ^ He spreads it on the southern side, with its points 
towards the east, reciting the coBunencement of the Yajorreda. 
1. ** I gather thee for the sake of rain. % I pluck thee** (at 
this he is supposed to break off the branch of a tree) '* for tfie 
sake of strengUi. S. Ye are" (he touches calves with the 
branch he had pulled off) '' like unto air. -4. May the4ihevri 
geoerator of worlds make you " (here he touches, or is supposed 
te toudi, milch-cows witii the aame branch) ^* happily reach 
this moBt excellent sacrifice.'* * In like manner he Isjw grass od 
tlie two other sides of the fire, on the western side with the 
tips to the north, crying, ** Fire ! approadi to taste my offering; 
thou who art praised for the gift of oblations ; sit down en this 
grass, thou, who art the complete performer of the solemn sacri- 
fice ;" ' and on the northern iride with the tips pointed to the east, 
saying, ^' May dirine waters be aaspidoaB to us, ^c. ^ When 
all these oarenumies are completed, he stirs the ftre, and sprinkles 
water upon it, after whidi, baring his hands smeared with clari- 
fied butter, he oflim ftod throe several times, repeatiBg, 
*^ Earth! sky ! heaven { *\ Five siuilar oblations are next po^ 
formed : one to the regent of fire ; one to the god of medicine; 
one to the assembled deities; one to the lord of created beings; 
imd one to the creator of the univerae. Six more obladons are 
then ofered with six prayem* every oblation baring ifs separate 
prayer* !• ^* Fire! thou dost expiate a sin agrinst the gods; 
may this oblation be efficacious. S. Thou dost expiate a sm 
i^gainst man. 8. TIkmi dost expiate a sin against the manes. 
4. Thou dost expiate a sin against my own soul. 5* Thou dost 
-expiate repeated sins. 6. Thou dost expiate every rin I have 
ooBunitted, whether wilfully or unintentionally: may this obla- 
tion be efficacious.*' He next worships the fire, making an 
oblation with the following prayer; ** Hre! seven are thy fi^ls ; 
seven thy tongues; seven thy 1m^ sages; seven thy beloved 

whence, being prod need, tlioo dosl thine. Knowiog (his, seize on it, and 
affierwMdt aognient owr wealth." 

■ This U the first verse of the Rig Veda, with which it is cnstomary to 
becin Uie daily penisnl of that Veda, 

^ A lecture of the Yajosh is always began with this text 

) The text with which a lectore of the SaBaroda is hegnn. 

« The praycf which precedes a lecture of the Afherran. 

5 



NOTS c 44S 

abod«; teven wajw do MveD nutfificen . wonhip thee: ihy 
sMTces are ae^en: be eimleiitwitii thk clarified butter: nay 
thk oUation be efiicacMMU.'* As the aaerM lamp waa lighted 
fitr the npuluDa ef e?il spiritt, befbxe the aUatidDS to the godi 
and die maaea were preaeiiCedy it is now extinguidiedy iHiile 
lecitatioa b OBadeof'tliefDllowiDg text; " In soleBuci acte of rrin 
gion, iriiatdyer finis tihrovgh the aegligenoe o£ those who per* 
ferm die oeroDtioayy laay be perfected soldy duroogb ooMKtation 
on Yishna." The oblationi to spirits are neat offered: tbe>per« 
fimner deposhang portions of food ia the seveiid places pro* 
acribed for it, having pvofioiisly swept^each place inlli ha 
hand and sprinkled it with water. Near the spot whei-o the 
Tessel of water stands, he makes three oferings^ saying, ** Salii- 
tatiop to rain! to watcr.1 to «he eirtht^ He makes them at 
both doors of his honse to Dfaaliit and Vidhatri, or Brahma* the 
protector and creator. He pnesents them towards die eight 
points of the compass, addic|g salutation to them, and to the 
regents of them. To ^rahm, to the dcy, and to die sun, he 
makei oUadons with saiutadon, m the middle of the house. He 
then ofers similar oUataons to all the gods; toali beings; to twi« 
light; and to the lord of aU beingf. After the sacrament of 
spirits thus perlormed^ the WQiihipper, shifting the sacramental 
cord, and lookiilg towards the solidly drops opoo one knee^ and 
presents an obhition to die maosB of anosatbis, safiag, ^ Salu- 
tad(Ai to progenitors: maydus ancestnd food be acoeptabie/' 
Hawg peiibnned a lnstraido% he diould Chen present food to 
hia guests. '< When he has dms,'* says Mr. Colebrooke^ 
^ allotted out of the food pro pi w edfir his own repast, one pom 
tian to the godi, a seeend to progenitors, a third to all bebigs, 
and a fourth to his guests, he and his fiunily may then, and not 
befiare, consume the asmaining portion of the food." This 
ceremony nmst bo regidarly perfenned in the forenoon, by those 
to whom die fidl celebration of the five saeramentt is imprae* 
dcafcle; and by some persons it b repealed again in the even* 

After this tedious, though greed y abridged account, of the 
daily ceremonies of the Hindus, we oome to those which are 
performed at certain great and diosen epochs. On these, how- 
ever, I shall content mysdf with some very general notices. . 

The Brahmens wait not for the period of birth to commence 
die ceremonies which pertain to each individuaL ^ With aus- 



* C*lclirMke ea the RelaglMi CerenMiict of IIm Hiodai, Asiat. Rcf^ 
Vn»871 U215. 



444 NOTE c; 

picious acts/' says tlie holy text,** prescribed by the Veda, 
must ceremonies on conception, and no forth, be duty performed, 
which purify the bodies of die three classes in this life, and qua* 
lify them for the next.^ Oblations to fire are required during 
the mother's pregnancy, and holy rites are commanded on the- 
. birth of the child. ** Before the section of the navel striagv a 
oeremony is ordamed on the birth of a male child : be most be 
made, while sacred texts are pronounced, to taste a little honey 
and darified butter from a golden spoon." > The ceremony of 
giving a name is ordained^o be performed on the tenth or twelfUi 
day after the birth : << or on some fortunate day of themomi, at a 
lucky hour, and under the inihience of a star widi good qua- 
lities*"* The ceremony of the tonsuie, whtdi is one of the 
distinguishing marks of the first three classes, is a rite of great 
solemnity, commanded to be performed in the first or third year 
after birth.' But of all the ritual ordinances of tlie Hindus none 
are reckoned more essential or important than those relating to 
the investiture. '* In the' eighth year from the conception of a 
Brahmen," says the law of Menu, ^ in the eleventh from that of 
a Cshatriya, and in the twelfth from diat of a Vaisya, let the 
father invest the ^ild with the mark of his cUiss: Should a 
Brahmen, or his fSEither for him, be desirous of his advancement 
in sacred knowledge^ a Cshatriya of extending his power, or a 
Vaisya of engaging in mercantile business, the investiture may 
benuide in the fifth,, sixth, or eighth .years respectively. Hie 
oeremony of investiture, liallowed by the gayatri, imust net be 
delayed, in the case of a priest, beyond the sixteenth year; xmsr 
in that of a soldier, beybnd the twenty-second; nor in that of a 
merchant, beyond . the. twenty-founh. After that all youths «f 
these three classes, /who have not been invested, at the proper 
time, become vratyas or outcasts, degraded from the gayatri, 
and .contemned by the virtuous. With such limpme mea tot no 
Bcahmen, even in distress for subsisteaee, ever form a'conaexion 
in Um, either by the study of the Veda, or by affikilty."* The 
investiture, or institution, is usually denominated the second 
bijcth; and. it is frwa -ibis ceremony .that., the tht^e highest 
classcis are denomiqat^ the^wicerbom.^. ' Jc i;Qi»$ists. chiefiy in 
bestowing upon the object of the ritei amaDtjl^». 4 ginUe, a sacri^ 
ficial cprd; and a «taf, with numerous cereippniesi piUyiartt and 

-* Inslttutfs i>f Meady.cb* iu 90, 27, at . : * Il>« .30, 

3 lb. 35. 4 lb. 36 to 40. 

i ^* The first birth is from a natural mother ; the s^ond, from th« ligation 
of the 20De; the third, from the dite performance of ilie vacriflee ; sSsb stm 
the births of him who is nsually called twice-born.*' Ibid. 10OL . 



KOT£ c 445 

liolj texU. *^ Let studeots of the Veda,*' says the law of 
Maitt> * ** wear for their mantles, the hides of black antelopes, of 
common deer, or of goats, with lower vests of woren sana, of 
cshuma, and of wool, in the direct order of their classes. The 
ginfle of a priest most be made of munja, in a triple cord, smootib, 
and fioftr that of a warrior must be a bow-string of miirva; that 
of a merchant, a triple thread of sana. The sacrificial thread of 
a Brahmen must be made of cotton, so as to he put on over hia 
head in three strings; that of a Cshatriya, of sana thread only; 
that of a Vaisja, of woollen diread.* A priest ought by 1q[w to 
carry a staff of Bilva or Palasa: a soldier, of Beta or C'hadirai 
a merchant, of Venn, or Udumbara. Tlie staff of a priest most 
be of such a length as to reach his hair; that of a sddier to reach 
his fordiead ; and that of a merchant to reach his nose* Let all 
the staves be straight, without fracture, of a handsome appear* 
ance, not likely to terrify men, with their bark perfect, unhurt by 
fire. Hia girdle, his leathern mantle, his staff, his sacrificial 
cord, and his ewer, he must throw into the water, when they aie 
worn out or broken, and receive others hallowed by mystical 
texts. The ceremony of cesanta, or cutting off the hair, is 
ordained for a priest in the sixteenth year from conception; lor a - 
soldier,- in the twenty second; for a.merchant, two ytors later* 
Such is the revealed law of institution for the twice*bom^ >aA 
institution in which their second birth cleariy consists, and 
which causes thiir advancement in holiness." 

The ceremonies of marriage, which next call for oiur atten- 
tion, are extremely numerous. - Ihe bridiegtoom is first of all 
' received by the fieither of the bride with all the ceremonies of 
hospitality which' we have already described;. and during tibia 
time the bride is bathed.^ When these rules are finished^ the 

^ InftitDlct of Menu, ch. ii. 41 to 48, aiMl 64, 65, 66. u. 

* The PeniaatiaUo bad a cincture which was given (hem as a grasd re* 
ligious emblem, about the period of manhood. See the Sadda in Hyde, 
p. 441. 

3 Three vessels of water are poured severally upon her head, and at each 
time one of the followinf prayers is in order pronouRcedt 1. ** Lore I I 
know thy oane. Thoa art called aa mtoxicatioi? bererage. Bring tfew 
bridegi'oom happily. For theo was framed the inebriating draught. Fire! 
thy best origin is here. Through devotion wert ihou created. May this 
oblation be efficacious.* **-S. '* Damsel, I anoint this thy generative organ 
with honey, becanse it is the second month of the Creator: .by that ibou 
rabdnrtt all males, though onsubdned ; by that thon art lively, and dost 
hold dominion.' May this oblation be efficacious.*'— 3» ^* May the primeval 
ruling sages, who framed the female organ, as a fire that consumeth flesh, 
and lliereby framed a procreating juice, grant the prolific power that pro^ 
cecds from the three horned bull, and from the sun." 



44(r ^ NOTE a 

hand of the biide is placed in thitt of the bridegracMn, both 
liavkig heetk pceTioinlf nibbed with some aiiapicioiie dnig» and 
a matnm bind* them with cam gnm aaud the sound ef cheerftd 
music. The teher ef the bride then biddiBg the attendani 
priests begin their acdamations^ pours water frem a -vessel con- 
Caiaii]^ dhi and com grass, upon the- hands of the united pair, 
and uttering the words^ ** God the existenc," and pioaouncing 
the names and designations of the brideffroom^ the bride, and 
himself sa^, ^ I give unto thee this danael, adorned with jewels, 
and protected by the lord of creatures*" The bridegroom le- 
piiea, ** Well be it." The bridegroom then having received 
from the &ther of the bride a piece of gold» and recited an 
apfffopriate text, the parties are affianced, and walk forth, while 
the bridegroom thus addresses the bride; ** May the regents of 
^ spoee, may air, the sun, and fire, dnpel timt anaduaty which thoo 

feelest in thy mind ; and turn thy heart to me. Be gentle in tiqr 
aapect, and loyal to thy husband; be fbrtunaCe in cattle^ amiabie 
in thy mind, and beautiful in thy person : be mother of vafiant 
sons; be fond of delights ; be cheedul;. and bring prosperity to 
our bipeds and quiMirupeda.'' ' A libation of water is lAerwarda 
made ; and the &ther of the bride, having meditated the gayatri, 
ties a knot with the sldrts.of tiie mantles of the bridegroom and 
bride, saymg, ** Te must be inseparalAy united in matters of 
duty, wealth, and love." The brid^iroom next attires, the bride 
with a variety of ceremonies of which the foUowlhg are the most 
remarkable. Gomg to the principal apartment of die house, 
he prepares a sacrificial fire, and hallows the iufdements; when 
one friend of his bearing a jar of water waUu round the fire, and 
stops on the south ride of it; and another, perfimniag the same 
ceremony, places himself on the right of the first. The bride- 
groom then casts four double handfuls of rice, mixed with leaves 
of Sami, into a flat badcet ; and placing near it a stone and mullar, 
which with formality he had previously touched, he causes the 
bride to be clothed with a new waistcloth and scarf, while he 
himself recites a variety of prayers. This being done, the bride 
goes to the western ride of the fire, and recites a prayer, while 
she steps on a mat made of viraae grass, and covered with silk. 



. > Tl» lalter part of (his addreit Mr. Colebrookc thinks proper to veil in 
a Latin dreis, nod certainly with good reason } for, if it be consideied that 
(his is a speech of a bridegroom to bit virgin bride,- whUe the marriage ce» 
■ ranoay is >jct in the act of perfbrmanoe, it is an instance 4if grosaness to 
which there is probably no pamllel : The speech is as follows* UIa red»- 
maas aeeipito ftucioam menm, qaod ego prnnnant introniit(a« ia cam, 
mulls qui illecebrse sistant 



HOTS c 447 

She then siii down on the edge of the viat, and the bridegroom 
makes six oblatioiis of clarified butter, reciting a prayer with 
each. ' After this he names the. three worlds separate j and con- 
jointljy presenting oUations ; and makes four or five epilations to 
fire and to the moon. After these he rises up with the bride, 
and passing ficom her left to her right makes her join her hands in 
a hollow form. The rice, which was previously put in the 
basket, being then taken up, and the stone which was laid near 
being placed before the bride, she treads on it with the point of 
her right foot, while the bridegroom recites this prayer, ** Ascend 
this stone; be firm like this stone; distress my foe, and be not 
subservient to my enemiea.'' He then poura on her hands a 
ladleful of clarified butter; another person gvres her the rice; 
two ladlefuls of butter are poured over it; when she separates 
her hands, and lets fall the rice on the fire, while a holy text is 
recited. She treads again od the stone^ agam makes an oblation 
of ricCf again a prayer is recited, again walking is performed 
round the fire, again four ot five oblations are made with similar 
ceremonies and prayers, when the bridegroom poura two ladleftds' 
of butter on the edge of the basket, and then rice out of it into 
the fire, saying, '* May this oUatioa to fire be efficacious." 
After the ceremony of ascending, the stone and throwing the 
rice into the fire, the bride is conducted to the bridegroom, and 
by him directed to step successively into seven circles, while 
seven texts are repeated. This is the most emphatical part of 
die ritual; for no sooner is the. seventh step of. the bride per* 
fiDrmed, than the nuptjal bond ia complete and irrevocable. 
The bridegroom then in appropriate texta addresses the bride and 
the spectatOBS, diamissiag thera; after whidi his friend, who 
stood near the sacrificial fiie, bearing a jar o£ water, advances to 
the spot where the seventh step was completed, and, while a 
prayer is recited, pours water on the head, first of the bride- 
groom, and then of the bride. < Upon this, the bridegroom, 
putting his left hand under the hands of the bride, which are 
joined in a hoUow posture, takes her right hand in his, and 
recites six holy texts; after which he aits down with her near 
the fire, and makes oblatioas, while severally and conjointly he 
names the three worlds. On the evening of the same day, 
when the stars begin to appear, the bride sits down on a bull's 

< Of tbese the first may be taken as a specioien: ** May fire come first 
amon^ the gods $ may it rescue her ofispring from the fetters of death $ may 
Varuna king of waters grant that this womao should never bemoan a cala- 
mity befallen her cWWren." 



448 NOTE Ci 

hide, of a red colour, placed with the neck towards Ae east« and 
the hair upwards ; and the bridegroom, sitting down bestde her, 
makes oblations, naming the three worlds t» usual; then six 
other oblations, pouring each time the remainder of the clarified 
butter on her head, and reciting prayers/ After rising np, and 
contemplating the polar star as an emblem of stalMlity, miHirona 
pour upon them water mixed with leaves, which liad been placed 
upon an altar prepared for that purpose, and the bridegroom 
again makes oblations with the names of the worlds. He then 
eats food, prepared without fecdtieus salt, reciting prayers daring 
the meal ; and when he has finished, the remainder is given to the 
bride. During the three subsequent days the married couple 
must remain in the house of the father of the bride, must abstain 
from factitious salt, must live chastely and austerely, sleeping on 
the ground. On the fourth day the bridegroom carries her to 
his house, reciting texts when he ascends the carriage, and when 
they come to cross roada. Leading her into hia own house he 
chants a hymn, when matrons hail, and seat her on a bulPs hide as 
before, and tlie bridegroom recites a prayer. They place next a 
young child in her lap, patting roots of lotua^ or fruits, into his 
hand; when the bridegroom takes him up, and, preparing a sacri- 
ficial fire witli all the usual cereimonies, makes eight diiflhrent 
oblations, with as many prayers. The bride then salutea her 
&ther in law, and the other relations of her husband. The bride- 
groom prepares another sacrificial fire, and sits down with the 
bride on his right hand; when, with the usual prdiminarj and 
concluding oblations to the three worlds, he makes twenty obla- 
tions, with as many prayers, throwing the remainder of each 
portion of the consecrated butter into a jar of water, which is 
af^wards poured on the head of the bride* 

If the ceremonies prescribed for marriage are thvs multiplied, 
trivial, and tiresome, those allotted to funerals are in point of 
number still more exorbitant and oppressive. After a specimen, 

> As these prayers have somethio^ tn then ebaracterifltic, they hiid better 
here be presented? 1. *' 1 obviate by this faUobtaitioa all iU nMrks«othellDci 
of thy hand^, 'm thy eye-lashes, and in |he spots ofihy bo4y. 9. I ebfiate 
by thhs full oblation all the ill marks in thy hair ; and whatever is sinful in 
thy laolLiog or in thy crying. 3. I obviate by this fuU oblation all that may 
be sinful In thy temper. In thy speaklo^:, and in thy laughing. 4. 1 obviate 
by this full oblation all the ill marks in thy teeth, and in the dark intervals 
, between them ; in thy hands aod in thy feet. 5. I obviate by this full ob- 
lation all the 111 marks on thy thighs, on thy privy part, on thy haunches, 
and on the lineaments of thy 6gure. 6. Whatever natural or accidental 
evil marks were on all thy limbu, I have obviated allsoch marks by ( 
full oblations of clarified butter. Mav this oblation be efficacious.*' 
3 



NOTc c. 449 

however^ of the Hindu ceremonies, there is something exceed- 
ingly monotonous io the detail of the rest ; and hardly any thing 
is more ungrateful than to be obliged to go through them. The 
reader is, therefore, spared the task of studying the funeral rites 
of the Hindus* of which, notwithstanding, he may form a suffi- 
cient oooeeption, as, in point of character, they exactly resemble 
those which have absady been described.^ 

Of the monthly ceremonies, one may suffice to afford an idea 
of the whole. ** From month to month," says the law of Menu, 
*^on the dark day of the moon, let a twice-born man, having 
finished the daily sacrament of the Pitris, and his fire being still 
blasiog, perform the solemn sraddha." ^ Of the sraddhas, which 
ase aomeroiis, but very similar, the following is exhibited as a 
specimen. The person whe Is to perform the ceremony having 
purified the place by smearing it with cow-dung, raises on it an 
akar of sand of certain dknensioas and form« washes his hand^ 
aaid fieet, sips water, and puts a ring of cusa grass on the ring 
finger of esch hand. He then sits down on a cushion of cusa 
grass, and lights a lamp, reciting a prayer. He next places the 
utensik and materials in order, sprinkles water on himself and all 
around, meditates on Vishnu, sumamed the Lot6s-eyed, medi- 
tates the gofnttiy and after some ceremonies proceeds to invite 
and to welcome the assembled gods and the manes. Two little 
cushions, of dirae blades of cusa grass, he places en one side of 
tha ailar fov the Viswadevasi and six in front of it for the Pitris, 
and strewing on them cusa grass, he asks, ** Shall I invoke the 
assembled gods?'' Do so; is the answer: upon which he ex- 
claims, ** Assembled gods ! hear my invocation : come and sit 
down on this holy grass*'' After scattering barley, and meditat- 
ing a prayer to the gods, he invites the manes of ancestors with 
similar invocations ; and welcomes the gods and manes with ob- 
lations of water, &c. in vessels made of leaves. He puts cusa 
grass into the vessels, and sprinkles them with water, while he re- 
cites the prayer^ beginning, " May divine waters be auspicious 
to us ;" he next throws barley into the Vessels intended for the 
gods, and tila into those intended for the manes, with a prayer 
appropriate to each. The vessels are then taken up in succes- 
sion, a prayer being repeated for each ; the cusa grass placed on 
the vessels is put into the hand of a Brahmen ; that which was 
under them is held in the hand of the person by whom the sraddha 

• See a very full delineation of these funeral rites in Mr. Colebrooke*s 
Second Essay on the Religious Ceremonies of the Hindos, Asfat. Res. vii. 
839 (o S64. 

* Institutes of Menu, ch. iii. \ti. 

VOL. I, 2 G 



450 NOTE c. 

u performed ; and he pours through it, on the hand of the Brah- 
men, the water which the Teasela contained, then piles up the 
empty vessels in three sets, and overturns them, saying, while he 
reverses the first, " Thou art a mansion for ancestors." Taking 
up food smeared with clarified butter, he next makes two oblsp 
tions to fire, with two corresponding prayers. The residue of 
the oblation, the performer having consecrated it by prayers and 
other ceremonies, having sweetened it with honey and sugar, 
and having meditated the gayatri with the names of worlds, is 
distributed among the Brahmens ; and when they have eaten tiU 
they have acknowledged that they are satisfied, he gives tbem 
water to rinse their mouths. He dien offers the cakes, consist- 
ing of balls or lumps of food, mixed with clarified butter, obsen- 
ing the requisite ceremonies. In ^ next place he makes six 
libations of water from the palms of his hands, with the saluta- 
tion to the seasons ; then places, with due ceremonies and texts, 
a thread on each funeral cake, to serve as apparel for the manes. 
After this he takes up the middle cake and smells it, or his wife, 
if they are desirous of male offipring, eats it, while they recite a 
correspondent prayer. He takes up the rest of the cakes, and 
smelling them one after another, throws them into a vessel; 
which done, they are given to a mendicant priest, or a cow, or 
else cast into the water. He then dismisses the manes, reciting a 
holy text, and having walked round the spot, and recited a 
prayer, departs.* ** Formal obsequies,'' sap Mr. Colebrook^ 
** are performed no less than ninety-six times in every year.** ' 

> Colebrooke on the Religiom Ceremonies of the Hiadns, Asiat Rn. 
vii. 264 to 270. 
• lb. 210. 



£NO OF VOL. I. 



C BaUvIo, Printer, 
N«w BfUne-Stract, London 



^ T 

i'X 

rars. 
TJor 

124 r 



IV7 



• • V 



i / 



• i- 



^^si -»! 



^^^i•^ta» 



' »• •••.,' > 



> , 



•t-v**^- 



mmmm 



THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED 
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS 
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON 
OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED 
BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OP OVERDUE 
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE 
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES. 



VV 1 L i 



.L { 



:6iaa. 



bOOK! 



LwiiTil 



xJ/tNCELLEDl 






Wifl 



mi 





